An Anarchist FAQ after ten years
================================

It is now ten years since ["An Anarchist FAQ"](index.html) (AFAQ) was
officially released. A lot has happened over that time, unfortunately
finishing it has not been one of them!

Over that decade, AFAQ has changed considerably. It was initially
conceived as a energy-saving device to stop anarchists having to
continually make the same points against claims that
"anarcho"-capitalism was a form of anarchism. As would be expected, the
quality of the initial versions and sections were pretty mixed. Most of
it was extremely good (even if we do say so ourselves!) and has required
little change over the decade (mostly we have built upon and expanded
the original material). A few bits were less good and have been
researched more and rewritten. We have also, of course, made mistakes
and corrected them when we have been informed about them or have
discovered them ourselves. In general, though, our initial work has
stood up well and while we were occasionally wrong on a few details, the
general thrust of even these areas has been proven correct. Overall, our
aim to produce an FAQ which reflected the majority of anarchist thought,
both currently and historically from an international perspective, has
been a success as shown by the number of mirrors, links and translations
AFAQ has seen (being published by AK Press confirms this).

Since the official release, AFAQ has changed. When we released it back
in 1996, we had already decided to make it a FAQ about anarchism rather
than an FAQ on why anarchism is anti-capitalist. However, the first
versions still bore the marks of its origins. We realised that this
limited it somewhat and we have slowly revised the AFAQ so that it has
become a resource about anarchism (indeed, if it were to be started
again the section on "anarcho"-capitalism would be placed into an
appendix, where it belongs). This means that the aim of AFAQ has
changed. I would say that it has two related goals:

> 1. To present the case for anarchism, to convince people they should
> become anarchists.
> 2. To be a resource for existing anarchists, to use to bolster their
> activism and activities by presenting facts and arguments to allow
> them to defend anarchism against those opposed to it (Marxists,
> capitalists, etc.).

Te second goal explains why, for example, we spend a lot of time
refuting capitalist economics and Marxism/Leninism (partly, because many
of the facts and arguments are in academic books which are unavailable
to the general public). We hope that AFAQ has proved useful to our
comrades as much as we hope we have convinced non-anarchists, at best,
to become anarchists, or, at worse, to take our ideas seriously.
Hopefully, the two aims are mutually complementary.

Not only has AFAQ changed over the last ten years, so has the anarchist
and general political landscape on the internet. When AFAQ was being
initially created, the number of anarchists on-line was small. There
were not that many anarchist webpages and, relatively speaking,
right-wing "libertarians" were un-opposed in arguing that
"anarcho"-capitalism was a form of anarchism (the only FAQ was Caplan's
biased and inaccurate "Anarchist Theory FAQ"). As a non-American, I was
surprised that this oxymoron even existed (I still am, as are all the
anarchists I mention it to). Anarchism has always been a **socialist**
theory and the concept of an "anarchism" which supported the economic
system anarchism was born opposing is nonsense. Arguing with its
supporters and reading up on it convinced me that the only real link it
has with anarchism is simply its attempted appropriation of the name.
[1] Hence the pressing need for a **real** anarchist FAQ, a need AFAQ
successfully met.

Luckily, over the 1990s things changed. More anarchists went online,
anarchist organisations created a web presence and the balance of forces
changed to reflect reality (i.e. there are far more anarchists than
"anarcho"-capitalists). The anti-capitalist movement helped, putting
anarchists back in the news (the BBC even linked to AFAQ for those
interested in finding out what anarchists wanted!) Even in the USA,
things got better and after Seattle genuine anarchism could no longer be
ignored. This produced some articles by "anarcho"-capitalists,
explaining how there are two forms of anarchism and that the two have
nothing or little in common (if that is the case, why call your ideology
anarchism?). Anarchist organisations and activism increased and the
awareness that anarchism was anti-hierarchy, anti-state **and**
anti-capitalist increased. As an added bonus, some genuine individualist
anarchists appeared, refuting the claim that "anarcho"-capitalism was
merely a form of "updated" individualist anarchism. All these
developments were welcomed, as were the words of praise and
encouragement we received for our work on AFAQ from many anarchists
(including, it must be stressed, individualist ones). Today, genuine
anarchism in all its forms has a much greater profile, as is anarchist
opposition to "anarcho"-capitalism and its claims. We hope AFAQ played a
role, however small, in that process.

Of course, the battle is not over. On Wikipedia, for example,
right-"libertarians" are busy trying to rewrite the history of
anarchism. Some anarchists have tried to counteract this attempt, and
have meant with differing degrees of success. We urge you to get
involved, if you have the time and energy as numbers, sadly, do seem to
count. This is because we anarchists are up against people who,
apparently, do not have a life and so can wage a war of attrition
against those who try and include relevant facts to the entries (such as
the obvious anti-capitalism of "traditional" anarchism, that anarchism
is **not** compatible with government or hierarchy -- hence
an-**archy**! -- or that calling yourself an anarchist does not
necessarily make it so). It is a shame that such a promising project has
been derailed by ideologues whose ignorance of the subject matter is
matched only by their hatred of AFAQ which they deny is a "credible" or
valid reference on anarchism.

I am not surprised that AFAQ is hated by the "libertarian" right (nor
will I be surprised if it is equally hated by the authoritarian left).
After all, it presents the case for genuine anarchism, exposes the
claims of a capitalist "anarchism" for the nonsense they are and shows
how deeply authoritarian right-wing "libertarianism" actually is. That
the FAQ can be called "biased" by these people goes without saying (it
is, after all, a FAQ about anarchism written by anarchists). What seems
funny is that they just do not comprehend that anarchists take offence
to their pretensions of labelling their ideology "anarchism," that we
would seek to refute such claims and that their notion that
"anarcho"-capitalism is anarchist is far more biased. Let us hope that
more academics will pay attention to this and the obvious fact that
there is a very long list of anarchists, famous and not-so-famous, who
consider the whole concept an oxymoron.

Equally unsurprising is the attempt to deny that AFAQ is a valid
reference on Wikipedia. This boils down to the claim that the authors
are "nobodies." Given that Kropotkin always stressed that anarchism was
born from the people, I take that intended insult as a badge of pride. I
have always taken the position that it is not who says something that
counts, but what they say. In other words, I would far sooner quote a
"nobody" who knows what they are talking about than a "somebody" who
does not. As AFAQ indicates with its many refutations of straw man
arguments against anarchism, there are plenty of the latter. Ultimately,
the logical conclusion of such an argument is that anarchists are not
qualified to discuss anarchism, an inherently silly position but useful
if you are seeking to turn anarchism into something it is not.

Given that even such an usually reliable expert as the late, great, Paul
Avrich made mistakes, this position is by far the most sensible. Between
what a suitably qualified "expert" writes and what actual anarchists say
and do, I always go for the latter. Any serious scientist would do so,
but sadly many do not -- instead, we get ideology. A classic example is
Eric Hobsbawm's thesis on **"Primitive Rebels"** which he decided to
illustrate, in part, with the example of Spanish anarchism. As we
recount as part of our appendix on "Marxism and Spanish Anarchism" while
being undoubtedly a "somebody" and immensely qualified to write on the
subject, his account was utter nonsense. This was proven beyond doubt
when an anthologist interviewed the survivors of the Casas Viejas
massacre. Their account of the event had only appeared previously in
anarchist papers at the time and both, needless to say, refuted
Hobsbawm.

So, to be called a "nobody" is quite a complement, given how many of the
"somebodies" have not stopped being ignorant of anarchism from putting
pen to paper and exposing that ignorance to the world (the worse recent
example of this, outside of Marxism, must be George Monbiot's terrible
comments in his **"Age of Consent"**). So, when it comes to saying what
anarchism is, I turn to anarchists. This is what the "experts" should be
doing anyway if they were doing their job.

Are we "qualified" to write about anarchism? Well, the the collective
has always been made up of anarchists, so we have an anarchist FAQ
written by anarchists. It has always been a popular site, given the
number of mirrors, translations and links it has been given (one mirror
called it "world famous"). It is being published by AK Press, one of the
leading anarchist publishers in the world.

I am the main editor and contributor to AFAQ. While one contributor to
Wikipedia claimed I as an American academic, this is not the case. I
have a "real" job and work on AFAQ in my spare time (I do despair when
people, particularly leftists, assume that wage slaves are incapable of
producing works like AFAQ). I have been always been an anarchist since
becoming politically aware which means I have been an anarchist activist
for approximately 20 years (time flies when you are having fun!). I have
been a member of numerous anarchist groups and have contributed to many
anarchist publications and websites. As can be seen from my personal
webpage [2], I regularly contribute articles to **Freedom** (the leading
English-language anarchist newspaper). Rarely does an issue come out
without something by me it in. Moreover, some of the longer articles
have appeared in **Black Flag** (before and after I joined its editorial
committee). My works have also been published in **Scottish Anarchist**,
**Anarcho-Syndicalist Review** and **Free Voices** and some have been
translated into other languages. I am also an invited columnist for the
[www.infoshop.org](http://www.infoshop.org) and
[www.anarkismo.net](http://www.anarkismo.net) webpages (neither of which
I am otherwise involved with). In addition, I have been invited to speak
at anarchist conferences in Scotland and Ireland, as well as by Marxist
parties to debate the merits of anarchism. Due to family commitments, my
specifically anarchist activities are pretty much limited to writing
these days, but I remain a reasonably active trade unionist.

I will leave it up to the reader to decide whether we are "qualified" to
write about anarchism or not!

But as I said, I always consider what is said more important than who
says it. The fact that AFAQ is so popular with anarchists is what counts
and I hope that we continue to be. We are always looking for help and
suggestions, so if you want to get involved or want something added or
changed, please contact us -- we consider AFAQ as a resource for
anarchists and we want it to reflect what anarchists think and do. [3]
However, if you do want something changed or added be prepared to do
some or all of the work yourself as we have our own plans on future
developments and may not be able to provide the time or energy for other
changes. Also, if you spot a mistake or a typo, please inform us as no
matter how often we check errors do creep in. We take our task seriously
and correct all errors when informed of them (differences in
interpretation or terminology are not, of course, errors). [4]

Speaking personally, I have enjoyed being part of this project. I have
learned a lot and have gained a better understanding of many anarchist
thinkers and historical events. For example, I can now understand why
Daniel Guerin was so interested in Proudhon and why it has been a crying
shame that Voltairine de Cleyre's works have been unavailable for 8
decades. As such, my understanding and appreciation of anarchism has
been enriched by working on AFAQ and I hope that others have had a
similar experience reading it. On the negative side, I've had to read
some terrible books and articles but very few, if any, of those were
anarchist. But this is minor. The work has been worth it and while it
has taken longer than any of us had imagined at the start, I'm glad that
we are still working on it ten years later as AFAQ is much improved for
all that time and energy. If nothing else, this work has reinforced my
belief in the positive ideas and ideals of anarchism and confirmed why I
became an anarchist so long ago. And, let me be honest, I would not do
it unless I enjoyed it!

What of the future? Obviously, we know that AFAQ is not the final word
on anarchism (we have always stressed that this is **An** Anarchist FAQ
and not "The Anarchist FAQ," although some do call it that). The
immediate aim is to revise the existing main sections of AFAQ for
publication, which we are slowly doing. In the process some previous
work is being added to and, in some cases, totally revised. After ten
years, our knowledge of many subjects has expanded considerably. We have
also asked a couple of individualist anarchist comrades to have a look
over section G and hopefully their input will flesh out that section
when it comes to be revised (for all its flaws, individualist anarchism
deserves far more than to be appropriated by the right and social
anarchists should be helping its modern supporters attempts to reclaim
their radical tradition). [5] Once the revision of the main body of AFAQ
is complete, the appendix on the Russian Revolution will be finished and
then all the appendices will be revised.

After that, AFAQ will be added to once new information becomes available
and new anarchist social movements and ideas develop. We have not
covered everything nor does AFAQ discussed all developments within
anarchism in all countries. If you think we have missed something, then
contact us and we can arrange to include the subject and issues missing.
As noted above, though, do **not** expect us to do all the work for you.
This is a resource for the movement and, as such, we expect fellow
anarchists to help out beyond merely suggesting things they expect
**others** to do!

Hopefully, after summarising 19th and 20th century anarchism, the
anarchists of the 21st century will use that to build and develop new
ideas and movements and create both viable anarchist alternatives under
statism and capitalism and, eventually, a free society. Whether we do so
or not is, ultimately, up to us. Let us hope we can rise to the
challenge! I do hope that anarchists can rise above the often silly
arguments that we often inflict on each other and concentrate on the
90%+ that unites us rather than the often insignificant differences some
consider so important. One thing is sure, if we do not then the worse
will happen.

Finally, another personal note. On the way to work, I go past a little
park. This little oasis of green in the city is a joy to behold, more so
since someone has added this piece of graffiti to one of its walls:

*"Resistance is **never** futile! Have a nice day, y'all. Love Friday,
XXX"*

With that in mind, we dedicate the ten year anniversary release of "An
Anarchist FAQ" to all those "nobodies," all those anarchists who are not
famous or have the appropriate "qualifications", but whose activity,
thoughts, ideas, ideals, dreams and hopes give the "somebodies"
something to write about (even if they fail to get some, or even all of
it, right).

Iain McKay

**Notes**

​1. While "anarcho"-capitalism has some overlap with individualist
anarchism, it lacks the radical and socialist sensibility and aims of
the likes of Tucker which makes the latter anarchist, albeit a flawed
and inconsistent form. Unlike the former, individualist anarchism
**can** become consistent anarchism by simply applying its own
principles in a logical manner.

​2. Under my pseudonym "Anarcho" (given what's on it, I'm surprised I
bother using "Anarcho" these days as it is obvious who writes the
articles). It is available here:
[http://anarchism.ws/writers/anarcho.html](http://anarchism.ws/writers/anarcho.html)

​3. Apologies for those who sent emails over the years and never
received a reply -- some were lost and, given how much busy we are,
emails are always the first to suffer.

​4. For a discussion of one early incident, mentioned in the Wikipedia
entry on AFAQ, see my article (*"An Anarchist FAQ, David Friedman and
Medieval Iceland"* on my webpage). Suffice to say, once we became aware
of his new criticism this year (Friedman did not bother to inform us
directly), we sped up our planned revision and expansion of that section
and corrected the few mistakes that had remained. In summary, it can be
said our original critique remained valid in spite of some serious
errors in details caused by a failure to check sources in a rush to
officially release it. We learned our lesson and try not to make the
same mistake again (and have not, as far as I am aware).

​5. A few people have said that AFAQ does not give equal billing to
individualist anarchism. However, in terms of numbers and influence it
has always been very much a minority trend in anarchism outside of
America. By the 1880s, this was probably the case in America as well and
by the turn of the 20th century it was definitely the case (as noted by,
among others, Paul Avrich). As such, it is hardly a flaw that AFAQ has
presented the majority position on anarchism (social anarchism),
particularly as this is the position of the people involved.
