9 Is Medieval Iceland an example of "anarcho"-capitalism working in practice?
=============================================================================

Ironically, medieval Iceland is a good example of why
"anarcho"-capitalism will **not** work, degenerating into de facto rule
by the rich. It should be pointed out first that Iceland, nearly 1,000
years ago, was not a capitalistic system. In fact, like most cultures
claimed by "anarcho"-capitalists as examples of their "utopia," it was a
communal, not individualistic, society, based on artisan production,
with extensive communal institutions as well as individual "ownership"
(i.e. use) and a form of social self-administration, the **thing** --
both local and Iceland-wide -- which can be considered a "primitive"
form of the anarchist communal assembly.

As William Ian Miller points out *"[p]eople of a communitarian nature. .
. have reason to be attracted [to Medieval Iceland]. . . the limited
role of lordship, the active participation of large numbers of free
people . . . in decision making within and without the homestead. The
economy barely knew the existence of markets. Social relations preceded
economic relations. The nexus of household, kin, Thing, even enmity,
more than the nexus of cash, bound people to each other. The lack of
extensive economic differentiation supported a weakly differentiated
class system . . . [and material] deprivations were more evenly
distributed than they would be once state institutions also had to be
maintained."* [**Bloodtaking and Peacemaking: Feud, Law and Society in
Saga Iceland**, p. 306]

At this time Iceland *"remained entirely rural. There were no towns, not
even villages, and early Iceland participated only marginally in the
active trade of Viking Age Scandinavia."* There was a *"diminished level
of stratification, which emerged from the first phase of social and
economic development, lent an appearance of egalitarianism - social
stratification was restrained and political hierarchy limited."* [Jesse
Byock, **Viking Age Iceland**, p. 2] That such a society could be
classed as "capitalist" or even considered a model for an advanced
industrial society is staggering.

Kropotkin in **Mutual Aid** indicates that Norse society, from which the
settlers in Iceland came, had various "mutual aid" institutions,
including communal land ownership (based around what he called the
*"village community"*) and the **thing** (see also Kropotkin's **The
State: Its Historic Role** for a discussion of the "village community").
It is reasonable to think that the first settlers in Iceland would have
brought such institutions with them and Iceland did indeed have its
equivalent of the commune or "village community," the **Hreppar**, which
developed early in the country's history. Like the early local
assemblies, it is not much discussed in the Sagas but is mentioned in
the law book, the Grágás, and was composed of a minimum of twenty farms
and had a five member commission. The Hreppar was self-governing and,
among other things, was responsible for seeing that orphans and the poor
within the area were fed and housed. The Hreppar also served as a
property insurance agency and assisted in case of fire and losses due to
diseased livestock.

In addition, as in most pre-capitalist societies, there were "commons",
common land available for use by all. During the summer, *"common lands
and pastures in the highlands, often called **almenning**, were used by
the region's farmers for grazing."* This increased the independence of
the population from the wealthy as these *"public lands offered
opportunities for enterprising individuals to increase their store of
provisions and to find saleable merchandise."* [Jesse Byock, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 47 and p. 48]

Thus Icelandic society had a network of solidarity, based upon communal
life:

> *"The status of farmers as free agents was reinforced by the presence
> of communal units called **hreppar** (sing. **hreppr**) . . . these
> [were] geographically defined associations of landowners. . . the
> **hreppr** were self-governing . . . .[and] guided by a five-member
> steering committee . . . As early as the 900s, the whole country seems
> to have been divided into **hreppar** . . . **Hreppar** provided a
> blanket of local security, allowing the landowning farmers a measure
> of independence to participate in the choices of political life . . .*
>
> "Through copoperation among their members, **hreppar** organised and
> controlled summer grazing lands, organised communal labour, and
> provided an immediate local forum for settling disputes. Crucially,
> they provided fire and livestock insurance for local farmers. . .
> [They also] saw to the feeding and housing of local orphans, and
> administered poor relief to people who were recognised as inhabitants
> of their area. People who could not provide for themselves were
> assigned to member farms, which took turns in providing for them."
> [Byock, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 137-8]

In practice this meant that *"each commune was a mutual insurance
company, or a miniature welfare state. And membership in the commune was
not voluntary. Each farmer had to belong to the commune in which his
farm was located and to contribute to its needs."* [Gissurarson quoted
by Birgit T. Runolfsson Solvason, **Ordered Anarchy, State and
Rent-Seeking: The Icelandic Commonwealth, 930-1262**] The Icelandic
Commonwealth did not allow farmers **not** to join its communes and
*"[o]nce attached to the local **hreppr**, a farm's affliation could not
be changed."* However, they did play a key role in keeping the society
free as the **hreppr** *"was essentially non-political and addressed
subsistence and economic security needs. Its presence freed farmers from
depending on an overclass to provide comparable services or
corresponding security measures."* [Byock, **Op. Cit.**, p. 138]

Therefore, the Icelandic Commonwealth can hardly be claimed in any
significant way as an example of "anarcho"-capitalism in practice. This
can also be seen from the early economy, where prices were subject to
popular judgement at the **skuldaping** (*"payment-thing"*) **not**
supply and demand. [Kirsten Hastrup, **Culture and History in Medieval
Iceland**, p. 125] Indeed, with its communal price setting system in
local assemblies, the early Icelandic commonwealth was more similar to
Guild Socialism (which was based upon guild's negotiating "just prices"
for goods and services) than capitalism. Therefore Miller correctly
argues that it would be wrong to impose capitalist ideas and assumptions
onto Icelandic society:

> *"Inevitably the attempt was made to add early Iceland to the number
> of regions that socialised people in nuclear families within simple
> households. . . what the sources tell us about the shape of Icelandic
> householding must compel a different conclusion."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
> 112]

In other words, Kropotkin's analysis of communal society is far closer
to the reality of Medieval Iceland than "anarcho"-capitalist attempts to
turn it into a some kind of capitalist utopia.

However, the communal nature of Icelandic society also co-existed (as in
most such cultures) with hierarchical institutions, including some with
capitalistic elements, namely private property and "private states"
around the local **godar.** The godar were local chiefs who also took
the role of religious leaders. As the **Encyclopaedia Britannica**
explains, *"a kind of local government was evolved [in Iceland] by which
the people of a district who had most dealings together formed groups
under the leadership of the most important or influential man in the
district"* (the godi). The godi *"acted as judge and mediator"* and
*"took a lead in communal activities"* such as building places of
worship. These *"local assemblies. . . are heard of before the
establishment of the althing"* (the national thing). This althing led to
co-operation between the local assemblies.

Thus Icelandic society had different elements, one based on the local
chiefs and communal organisations. Society was marked by inequalities as
*"[a]mong the landed there were differences in wealth and prominence.
Distinct cleavages existed between landowners and landless people and
between free men and slaves."* This meant it was *"marked by aspects of
statelessness and egalitarianism as well as elements of social hierarchy
. . . Although Iceland was not a democratic system, proto-democratic
tendencies existed."* [Byock, **Op. Cit.**, p. 64 and p. 65] The
Icelandic social system was designed to reduce the power of the wealthy
by enhancing communal institutions:

> *"The society . . . was based on a system of decentralised
> self-government . . . The Viking Age settlers began by establishing
> local things, or assemblies, which had been the major forum for
> meetings of freemen and aristocrats in the old Scandinavian and
> Germanic social order. . . They [the Icelanders] excluded overlords
> with coercive power and expended the mandate of the assembly to fill
> the full spectrum of the interests of the landed free farmers. The
> changes transformed a Scandinavian decision-making body that mediated
> between freemen and overlords into an Icelandic self-contained
> governmental system without overlords. At the core of Icelandic
> government was the Althing, a national assembly of freemen."* [Byock,
> **Op. Cit.**, p. 75]

Therefore we see communal self-management in a basic form, **plus**
co-operation between communities as well. These communistic, mutual-aid
features exist in many non-capitalist cultures and are often essential
for ensuring the people's continued freedom within those cultures (
[section B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25) on why the wealthy undermine these
popular *"folk-motes"* in favour of centralisation). Usually, the
existence of private property (and so inequality) soon led to the
destruction of communal forms of self-management (with participation by
all male members of the community as in Iceland), which are replaced by
the rule of the rich.

While such developments are a commonplace in most "primitive" cultures,
the Icelandic case has an unusual feature which explains the interest it
provokes in "anarcho"-capitalist circles. This feature was that
individuals could seek protection from any godi. As the **Encyclopaedia
Britannica** puts it, *"the extent of the godord [chieftancy] was not
fixed by territorial boundaries. Those who were dissatisfied with their
chief could attach themselves to another godi. . . As a result rivalry
arose between the godar [chiefs]; as may be seen from the Icelandic
Sagas."* This was because, while there were *"a central legislature and
uniform, country-wide judicial and legal systems,"* people would seek
the protection of any godi, providing payment in return. [Byock, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 2] These godi, in effect, would be subject to "market
forces," as dissatisfied individuals could affiliate themselves to other
godi. This system, however, had an obvious (and fatal) flaw. As the
**Encyclopaedia Britannica** points out:

> *"The position of the godi could be bought and sold, as well as
> inherited; consequently, with the passing of time, the godord for
> large areas of the country became concentrated in the hands of one man
> or a few men. This was the principal weakness of the old form of
> government: it led to a struggle of power and was the chief reason for
> the ending of the commonwealth and for the country's submission to the
> King of Norway."*

It was the existence of these hierarchical elements in Icelandic society
that explain its fall from anarchistic to statist society. As Kropotkin
argued *"from chieftainship sprang on the one hand the State and on the
other **private** property."* [**Act for Yourselves**, p. 85]
Kropotkin's insight that chieftainship is a transitional system has been
confirmed by anthropologists studying "primitive" societies. They have
come to the conclusion that societies made up of chieftainships or
chiefdoms are not states: *"Chiefdoms are neither stateless nor state
societies in the fullest sense of either term: they are on the
borderline between the two. Having emerged out of stateless systems,
they give the impression of being on their way to centralised states and
exhibit characteristics of both."* [Y. Cohen quoted by Birgit T.
Runolfsson Solvason, **Op. Cit.**] Since the Commonwealth was made up of
chiefdoms, this explains the contradictory nature of the society - it
was in the process of transition, from anarchy to statism, from a
communal economy to one based on private property.

The **political** transition within Icelandic society went hand in hand
with an **economic** transition (both tendencies being mutually
reinforcing). Initially, when Iceland was settled, large-scale farming
based on extended households with kinsmen was the dominant economic
mode. This semi-communal mode of production changed as the land was
divided up (mostly through inheritance claims) between the 10th and 11th
centuries. This new economic system based upon individual **possession**
and artisan production was then slowly displaced by tenant farming, in
which the farmer worked for a landlord, starting in the late 11th
century. This economic system (based on tenant farming, i.e.
capitalistic production) ensured that *"great variants of property and
power emerged."* [Kirsten Hastrup, **Culture and History in Medieval
Iceland**, pp. 172-173]

So significant changes in society started to occur in the eleventh
century, as *"slavery all but ceased. Tenant farming . . . took [its]
place."* Iceland was moving from an economy based on **possession** to
one based on **private property** and so *"the renting of land was a
widely established practice by the late eleventh century . . . the
status of the **godar** must have been connected with landownership and
rents."* This lead to increasing oligarchy and so the mid- to
late-twelfth century was *"characterised by the appearance of a new
elite, the big chieftains who are called storgodar . . . [who] struggled
from the 1220s to the 1260s to win what had earlier been unobtainable
for Icelandic leaders, the prize of overlordship or centralised
executive authority."* [Byock, **Op. Cit.**, p. 269 and pp. 3-4]

During this evolution in ownership patterns and the concentration of
wealth and power into the hands of a few, we should note that the godi's
and wealthy landowners' attitude to profit making also changed, with
market values starting to replace those associated with honour, kin, and
so on. Social relations became replaced by economic relations and the
nexus of household, kin and Thing was replaced by the nexus of cash and
profit. The rise of capitalistic social relationships in production and
values within society was also reflected in exchange, with the local
marketplace, with its pricing *"subject to popular judgement"* being
*"subsumed under central markets."* [Hastrup, **Op. Cit.**, p. 225]

With a form of wage labour (tenant farming) being dominant within
society, it is not surprising that great differences in wealth started
to appear. Also, as protection did not come free, it is not surprising
that a godi tended to become rich also (in Kropotkin's words, *"the
individual accumulation of wealth and power"*). Powerful godi would be
useful for wealthy landowners when disputes over land and rent appeared,
and wealthy landowners would be useful for a godi looking for income.
Concentrations of wealth, in other words, produce concentrations of
social and political power (and vice versa) -- *"power always follows
wealth."* [Kropotkin, **Mutual Aid**, p. 131]

The transformation of **possession** into **property** and the resulting
rise of hired labour was a **key** element in the accumulation of wealth
and power, and the corresponding decline in liberty among the farmers.
Moreover, with hired labour springs dependency -- the worker is now
dependent on good relations with their landlord in order to have access
to the land they need. With such reductions in the independence of part
of Icelandic society, the undermining of self-management in the various
Things was also likely as labourers could not vote freely as they could
be subject to sanctions from their landlord for voting the "wrong" way
(*"The courts were less likely to base judgements on the evidence than
to adjust decisions to satisfy the honour and resources of powerful
individuals."* [Byock, **Op. Cit.**, p. 185]).. Thus hierarchy within
the economy would spread into the rest of society, and in particular its
social institutions, reinforcing the effects of the accumulation of
wealth and power.

The resulting classification of Icelandic society played a key role in
its move from relative equality and anarchy to a class society and
statism. As Millar points out:

> *"as long as the social organisation of the economy did not allow for
> people to maintain retinues, the basic egalitarian assumptions of the
> honour system. . . were reflected reasonably well in reality. . . the
> mentality of hierarchy never fully extricated itself from the
> egalitarian ethos of a frontier society created and recreated by
> juridically equal farmers. Much of the egalitarian ethic maintained
> itself even though it accorded less and less with economic realities.
> . . by the end of the commonwealth period certain assumptions about
> class privilege and expectations of deference were already well enough
> established to have become part of the lexicon of self-congratulation
> and self-justification."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 33-4]

This process in turn accelerated the destruction of communal life and
the emergence of statism, focused around the godord. In effect, the godi
and wealthy farmers became rulers of the country. Political changes
simply reflected economic changes from a communalistic, anarchistic
society to a statist, propertarian one. Ironically, this process was a
natural aspect of the system of competing chiefs recommended by
"anarcho"-capitalists:

> *"In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries Icelandic society
> experienced changes in the balance of power. As part of the evolution
> to a more stratified social order, the number of chieftains diminished
> and the power of the remaining leaders grew. By the thirteenth century
> six large families had come to monopolise the control and ownership of
> many of the original chieftaincies."* [Byock, **Op. Cit.**, p. 341]

These families were called **storgodar** and they *"gained control over
whole regions."* This process was not imposed, as *"the rise in social
complexity was evolutionary rather than revolutionary . . . they simply
moved up the ladder."* This political change reflected economic
processes, for *"[a]t the same time other social transformations were at
work. In conjunction with the development of the **storgadar** elite,
the most successful among the **baendr** [farmers] also moved up a rung
on the social ladder, being 'big farmers' or **Storbaendr**"* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 342] Unsurprisingly, it was the rich farmers who initiated
the final step towards normal statism and by the 1250s the
**storbaendr** and their followers had grown weary of the **storgodar**
and their quarrels. In the end they accepted the King of Norway's offer
to become part if his kingdom.

The obvious conclusion is that as long as Iceland was not capitalistic,
it was anarchic and as it became more capitalistic, it became more
statist.

This process, wherein the concentration of wealth leads to the
destruction of communal life and so the anarchistic aspects of a given
society, can be seen elsewhere, for example, in the history of the
United States after the Revolution or in the degeneration of the free
cities of Medieval Europe. Peter Kropotkin, in his classic work **Mutual
Aid**, documents this process in some detail, in many cultures and time
periods. However, that this process occurred in a society which is used
by "anarcho"-capitalists as an example of their system in action
reinforces the anarchist analysis of the statist nature of
"anarcho"-capitalism and the deep flaws in its theory, as discussed in
[section 6](append136.html).

As Miller argues, *"[i]t is not the have-nots, after all, who invented
the state. The first steps toward state formation in Iceland were made
by churchmen. . . and by the big men content with imitating Norwegian
royal style. Early state formation, I would guess, tended to involve
redistributions, not from rich to poor, but from poor to rich, from weak
to strong."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 306]

The "anarcho"-capitalist argument that Iceland was an example of their
ideology working in practice is derived from the work of David Friedman.
Friedman is less gun-ho than many of his followers, arguing in **The
Machinery of Freedom**, that Iceland only had some features of an
"anarcho"-capitalist society and these provide some evidence in support
of his ideology. How a pre-capitalist society can provide any evidence
to support an ideology aimed at an advanced industrial and urban economy
is hard to say as the institutions of that society cannot be
artificially separated from its social base. Ironically, though, it does
present some evidence against "anarcho"-capitalism precisely because of
the rise of capitalistic elements within it.

Friedman is aware of how the Icelandic Republic degenerated and its
causes. He states in a footnote in his 1979 essay *"Private Creation and
Enforcement of Law: A Historical Case"* that the *"question of why the
system eventually broke down is both interesting and difficult. I
believe that two of the proximate causes were increased concentration of
wealth, and hence power, and the introduction into Iceland of a foreign
ideology -- kingship. The former meant that in many areas all or most of
the godord were held by one family and the latter that by the end of the
Sturlung period the chieftains were no longer fighting over the
traditional quarrels of who owed what to whom, but over who should
eventually rule Iceland. The ultimate reasons for those changes are
beyond the scope of this paper."*

However, from an anarchist point of view, the "foreign" ideology of
kingship would be the **product** of changing socio-economic conditions
that were expressed in the increasing concentration of wealth and not
its cause. After all, the settlers of Iceland were well aware of the
"ideology" of kingship for the 300 years during which the Republic
existed. As Byock notes, Iceland *"inherited the tradition and the
vocabulary of statehood from its European origins . . . On the mainland,
kings were enlarging their authority at the expense of the traditional
rights of free farmers. The emigrants to Iceland were well aware of this
process . . . available evidence does suggest that the early Icelanders
knew quite well what they did not want. In particular they were
collectively opposed to the centralising aspects of a state."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 64-6] Unless some kind of collective and cultural amnesia
occurred, the notion of a "foreign ideology" causing the degeneration is
hard to accept. Moreover, only the concentration of wealth allowed
would-be Kings the opportunity to develop and act and the creation of
boss-worker social relationships on the land made the poor subject to,
and familiar with, the concept of authority. Such familiarity would
spread into all aspects of life and, combined with the existence of
"prosperous" (and so powerful) godi to enforce the appropriate servile
responses, ensured the end of the relative equality that fostered
Iceland's anarchistic tendencies in the first place.

In addition, as private property is a monopoly of rulership over a given
area, the conflict between chieftains for power was, at its most basic,
a conflict of who would **own** Iceland, and so rule it. The attempt to
ignore the facts that private property creates rulership (i.e. a
monopoly of government over a given area) and that monarchies are
privately owned states does Friedman's case no good. In other words, the
system of private property has a built in tendency to produce both the
ideology and fact of Kingship - the power structures implied by Kingship
are reflected in the social relations which are produced by private
property.

Friedman is also aware that an *"objection [to his system] is that the
rich (or powerful) could commit crimes with impunity, since nobody would
be able to enforce judgement against them. Where power is sufficiently
concentrated this might be true; this was one of the problems which led
to the eventual breakdown of the Icelandic legal system in the
thirteenth century. But so long as power was reasonably dispersed, as it
seem to have been for the first two centuries after the system was
established, this was a less serious problem."* [**Op. Cit.**]

Which is quite ironic. Firstly, because the first two centuries of
Icelandic society was marked by **non-capitalist** economic relations
(communal pricing and family/individual possession of land). Only when
capitalistic social relationships developed (hired labour and property
replacing possession and market values replacing social ones) in the
12th century did power become concentrated, leading to the breakdown of
the system in the 13th century. Secondly, because Friedman is claiming
that "anarcho"-capitalism will only work if there is an approximate
equality within society! But this state of affairs is one most
"anarcho"-capitalists claim is impossible and undesirable!

They claim there will **always** be rich and poor. But inequality in
wealth will also become inequality of power. When "actually existing"
capitalism has become more free market the rich have got richer and the
poor poorer. Apparently, according to the "anarcho"-capitalists, in an
even "purer" capitalism this process will be reversed! It is ironic that
an ideology that denounces egalitarianism as a revolt against nature
implicitly requires an egalitarian society in order to work.

In reality, wealth concentration is a fact of life in **any** system
based upon hierarchy and private property. Friedman is aware of the
reasons why "anarcho"-capitalism will become rule by the rich but
prefers to believe that "pure" capitalism will produce an egalitarian
society! In the case of the commonwealth of Iceland this did not happen
- the rise in private property was accompanied by a rise in inequality
and this lead to the breakdown of the Republic into statism.

In short, Medieval Iceland nicely illustrates David Weick's comments (as
quoted in [section 6.3](append136.html#secf63)) that *"when private
wealth is uncontrolled, then a police-judicial complex enjoying a
clientele of wealthy corporations whose motto is self-interest is hardly
an innocuous social force controllable by the possibility of forming or
affiliating with competing 'companies.'"* This is to say that "free
market" justice soon results in rule by the rich, and being able to
affiliate with "competing" "defence companies" is insufficient to stop
or change that process.

This is simply because any defence-judicial system does not exist in a
social vacuum. The concentration of wealth -- a natural process under
the "free market" (particularly one marked by private property and wage
labour) -- has an impact on the surrounding society. Private property,
i.e. monopolisation of the means of production, allows the monopolists
to become a ruling elite by exploiting, and so accumulating vastly more
wealth than, the workers. This elite then uses its wealth to control the
coercive mechanisms of society (military, police, "private security
forces," etc.), which it employs to protect its monopoly and thus its
ability to accumulate ever more wealth and power. Thus, private
property, far from increasing the freedom of the individual, has always
been the necessary precondition for the rise of the state and rule by
the rich. Medieval Iceland is a classic example of this process at work.
