Were any of the Bolshevik oppositions a real alternative?
=========================================================

The real limitations in Bolshevism can best be seen by the various
oppositions to the mainstream of that party. That Bolshevik politics
were not a suitable instrument for working class self-liberation can be
seen by the limited way which opposition groups questioned Bolshevik
orthodoxy -- even, in the case of the opposition to the rising Stalinist
bureaucracy. Each opposition was fundamentally in favour of the
Bolshevik monopoly of power, basically seeking reforms on areas which
did not question it (such as economic policy). This does not mean that
the various oppositions did not have valid points, just that they shared
most of the key assumptions of Bolshevism which undermined the Russian
revolution either by their application or their use to justify specific
(usually highly authoritarian) practice.

We will not cover all the various oppositions with the Bolshevik party
here (Robert V. Daniels' **The Conscience of the Revolution** discusses
all of them in some detail, as does Leonard Schapiro's **The Origin of
the Communist Autocracy**). We will concentrate on the *"Left
Communists"* of 1918, the *"Workers' Opposition"* of 1920/1 and the
Trotsky-led "Left Opposition" of 1923-7. It can be said that each
opposition is a pale reflection of the one before it and each had clear
limitations in their politics which fatally undermined any liberatory
potential they had. Indeed, by the time of the *"Left Opposition"* we
are reduced to simply the more radical sounding faction of the state and
party bureaucracy fighting it out with the dominant faction.

To contrast these fake "oppositions" with a genuine opposition, we will
discuss (in [section 4](append45.html#app4)) the *"Workers' Group"* of
1923 which was expelled from the Communist Party and repressed because
it stood for (at least until the Bolshevik party seized power)
traditional socialist values. This repression occurred, significantly,
under Lenin and Trotsky in 1922/3. The limited nature of the previous
oppositions and the repression of a **genuine** dissident working class
group within the Communist Party shows how deeply unlibertarian the real
Bolshevik tradition is. In fact, it could be argued that the fate of all
the non-Trotskyist oppositions shows what will inevitably happen when
someone takes the more democratic sounding rhetoric of Lenin at face
value and compares it to his authoritarian practice, namely Lenin will
turn round and say unambiguously that he had already mentioned his
practice before hand and the reader simply had not been paying
attention.

1 Were the *"Left Communists"* of 1918 an alternative?
------------------------------------------------------

The first opposition of note to Lenin's state capitalist politics was
the *"Left Communists"* in early 1918. This was clustered around the
Bolshevik leader Bukharin. This grouping was focused around opposition
to the Brest-Litovsk peace treaty with Germany and Lenin's advocacy of
*"state capitalism"* and *"one-man management"* as the means of both
achieving socialism and getting Russia out of its problems. It is the
latter issue that concerns us here.

The first issue of their theoretical journal **Kommunist** was published
in April 1920 and it argued vigorously against Lenin's advocacy of
*"one-man management"* and state capitalism for "socialist" Russia. They
correctly argued *"for the construction of the proletarian society by
the class creativity of the workers themselves, not by the Ukases of the
captains of industry . . . If the proletariat itself does not know how
to create the necessary prerequisites for the socialist organisation of
labour, no one can do this for it and no one can compel it to do this.
The stick, if raised against the workers, will find itself in the hands
of a social force which is either under the influence of another social
class or is in the hands of the soviet power; but the soviet power will
then be forced to seek support against the proletariat from another
class (e.g. the peasantry) and by this it will destroy itself as the
dictatorship of the proletariat. Socialism and socialist organisation
will be set up by the proletariat itself, or they will not be set up at
all: something else will be set up -- state capitalism."* [Osinsky,
quoted by Brinton, **The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control**, p. 39]

Lenin reacted sharply, heaping insult upon insult on the Left Communists
and arguing against their ideas on workers' self-management. Rather than
see self-management (or even workers' control) as the key, he argued
forcefully in favour of one-man management and state capitalism as both
the means of solving Russia's immediate problems **and** building
socialism. Moreover, he linked this with his previous writings,
correctly noting his *"'high' appreciation of state"* had been given
*"**before** the Bolsheviks seized power."* For Lenin, *"Socialism [was]
inconceivable without large scale capitalist engineering . . . [and]
without planned state organisation, which keeps tens of millions of
people to the strictest observance of a unified standard in production
and distribution."* Thus *"our task is to study the state capitalism of
the Germans, to spare **no effort** in copying it and not shrink from
adopting **dictatorial** methods to hasten the copying of it."*
[**Selected Works**, vol. 2, p. 636 and p. 635] This required appointing
capitalists to management positions, from which the vanguard could
learn.

So, as long as a workers' party held power, the working class need not
fear *"state capitalism"* and the lack of economic power at the point of
production. Of course, without economic power, working class political
power would be fatally undermined. In practice, Lenin simply handed over
the workplaces to the state bureaucracy and created the social
relationships which Stalinism thrived upon. Unfortunately, Lenin's
arguments carried the day (see see [section 9](append41.html#app9) of
the appendix ["What happened during the Russian
Revolution?"](append41.html)). How this conflict was resolved is
significant, given that the banning of factions (which is generally seen
as a key cause in the rise of Stalinism) occurred in 1921 (a ban,
incidentally, Trotsky defended throughout the 1920s). As one historian
notes:

> *"The resolution of the party controversy in the spring of 1918 set a
> pattern that was to be followed throughout the history of the
> Communist Opposition in Russia. This was the settlement of the issues
> not by discussion, persuasion, or compromise, but by a high-pressure
> campaign in the party organisations, backed by a barrage of violent
> invective in the party press and in the pronouncements of the party
> leaders. Lenin's polemics set the tone, and his organisational
> lieutenants brought the membership into line."* [Daniels, **Op.
> Cit.**, p. 87]

Indeed, *"[s]oon after the party congress had approved the peace [in the
spring of 1918], a Petrograd city party conference produced a majority
for Lenin. It ordered the suspension of the newspaper **Kommunist**
which had been serving as a Left Communist organ . . . The fourth and
final issue of the Moscow **Kommunist** had to be published as a private
factional paper rather than as the official organ of a party
organisation."* Ultimately, *"[u]nder the conditions of party life
established by Lenin, defence of the Opposition position became
impossible within the terms of Bolshevik discipline."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
88 and p. 89] So much for faction rights -- three years **before** they
were officially prohibited in the 10th Party Congress!

However, the *"Left Communists,"* while correct on socialism needing
workers' economic self-management, were limited in other ways. The major
problems with the *"Left Communists"* were two-fold.

Firstly, by basing themselves on Bolshevik orthodoxy they allowed Lenin
to dominate the debate. This meant that their more *"libertarian"*
reading of Lenin's work could be nullified by Lenin himself pointing to
the authoritarian and state capitalist aspects of those very same works.
Which is ironic, as today most Leninists tend to point to these very
same democratic sounding aspects of Lenin's ideas while downplaying the
more blatant anti-socialist ones. Given that Lenin had dismissed such
approaches himself during the debate against the Left Communists in
1918, it seems dishonest for his latter day followers to do this.

Secondly, their perspective on the role of the party undermined their
commitment to true workers' power and freedom. This can be seen from the
comments of Sorin, a leading Left Communist. He argued that the Left
Communists were *"the most passionate proponents of soviet power, but .
. . only so far as this power does not degenerate . . . in a
petty-bourgeois direction."* [quoted by Ronald I. Kowalski, **The
Bolshevik Party in Conflict**, p. 135] For them, like any Bolshevik, the
party played the key role. The only true bastion of the interests of the
proletariat was the party which *"is in every case and everywhere
superior to the soviets . . . The soviets represent labouring democracy
in general; and its interest, and in particular the interests of the
petty bourgeois peasantry, do not always coincide with the interests of
the proletariat."* [quoted by Richard Sakwa, **Soviet Communists in
Power**, p. 182] This support for party power can also be seen in
Osinsky's comment that *"soviet power"* and the "dictatorship of the
proletariat" could *"seek support"* from other social classes, so
showing that the class did not govern directly.

Thus soviet power was limited to approval of the party line and any
deviation from that line would be denounced as *"petty bourgeois"* and,
therefore, ignored. *"Ironically,"* the historian Kowalski notes,
*"Sorin's call for a revived soviet democracy was becoming vitiated by
the dominant role assigned, in the final analysis, to the party."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 136] Thus their politics were just as authoritarian as
the mainstream Bolshevism they attacked on other issues:

> *"Ultimately, the only criterion that they appeared able to offer was
> to define 'proletarian' in terms of adherence to their own policy
> prescriptions and 'non-proletarian' by non-adherence to them. In
> consequence, all who dared to oppose them could be accused either of
> being non-proletarian, or at the very least suffering from some form
> of 'false consciousness' -- and in the interests of building socialism
> must recant or be purged from the party. Rather ironically, beneath
> the surface of their fine rhetoric in defence of the soviets, and of
> the party as 'a forum for all of proletarian democracy,' there lay a
> political philosophy that was arguably as authoritarian as that of
> which they accused Lenin and his faction."* [Kowalski, **Op. Cit.**,
> pp. 136-7]

This position can be traced back to the fundamentals of Bolshevism (see
[section H.5](secH5.html) on vanguardism). *"According to the Left
Communists, therefore,"* notes Richard Sakwa, "the party was the
custodian of an interest higher than that of the soviets. Earlier
theoretical considerations on the vanguard role of the party, developed
in response to this problem, were confirmed by the circumstances of
Bolshevism in power. The political dominance of the party over the
soviets encouraged an administrative one as well. Such a development was
further encouraged by the emergence of a massive and unwieldy
bureaucratic apparatus in 1918 . . . The Left Communists and the party
leadership were therefore in agreement that . . . the party should play
a tutelary role over the soviets." Furthermore, *"[w]ith such a
formulation it proved difficult to maintain the vitality of the soviet
plenum as the soviet was controlled by a party fraction, itself
controlled by a party committee outside the soviet."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
182 and p. 182-3]

With this ideological preference for party power and the ideological
justification for ignoring soviet democracy, it is doubtful that their
(correct) commitment to workers' economic self-management would have
been successful. An economic democracy combined with what amounts to a
party dictatorship would be an impossibility that could never work in
practice (as Lenin in 1921 argued against the "Workers' Opposition").

As such, the fact that Bukharin (one time *"Left Communist") "continued
to eulogise the party's dictatorship, sometimes quite unabashedly"*
during and after the civil war becomes understandable. In this, he was
not being extreme: *"Bolsheviks no longer bothered to disclaim that the
dictatorship of the proletariat as the 'dictatorship of the party.'"*
[Stephen F. Cohen, **Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution**, p. 145 and
p. 142] All the leading Bolsheviks had argued this position for some
time (see [section H.1.2](secH1.html#sech12), for example). Bukharin
even went so far as to argue that *"the watchword"* taken up by some
workers ("even metal workers"!) of *"For class dictatorship, but against
party dictatorship!"* showed that the proletariat "was declassed." This
also indicated that a *"misunderstanding arose which threatened the
whole system of the proletarian dictatorship."* [contained in Al
Richardson (ed.), **In Defence of the Russian Revolution**, p. 192] The
echoes of the positions argued before the civil war can be seen in
Bukharin's glib comment that proletarian management of the revolution
meant the end of the *"proletarian"* dictatorship!

Lastly, the arguments of the Left Communists against "one-man
management" were echoed by the Democratic Centralists at the Ninth Party
Congress. One member of this grouping (which included such *"Left
Communists"* as Osinsky) argued against Lenin's dominate position in
favour of appointed managers inside and outside the party as follows:

> *"The Central Committee finds that the [local] party committee is a
> bourgeois prejudice, is conservatism bordering on the province of
> treason, and that the new form is the replacement of party committees
> by political departments, the heads of which by themselves replace the
> elected committees . . . You transform the members of the party into
> an obedient gramophone, with leaders who order: go and agitate; but
> they haven't the right to elect their own committee, their own
> organs.*
>
> "I then put the question to comrade Lenin: Who will appoint the
> Central Committee? You see, there can be individual authority here as
> well. Here also a single commander can be appointed." [Sapronov,
> quoted by Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 114]

Obviously a man before his time. As Stalin proved, if one-man management
was such a good idea then why wasn't it being practised in the Council
of People's Commissars. However, we should not be surprised by this
party regime. After all, Trotsky had imposed a similar regime in the
Army in 1918, as had Lenin in industry in the same year. As discussed in
[section 3](append43.html#app3) of the appendix ["What caused the
degeneration of the Russian Revolution?"](append43.html), the Bolshevik
preference for centralised "democracy" effectively hollowed out the real
democracy at the base which makes democracy more than just picking
masters.

2 What were the limitations of the *"Workers' Opposition"* of 1920?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The next major opposition group were the *"Workers' Opposition"* of 1920
and early 1921. Significantly, the name "Workers' Opposition" was the
label used by the party leadership to describe what latter became a
proper grouping within the party. This group was more than happy to use
the label given to it. This group is generally better known than other
oppositions simply because it was the focus for much debate at the tenth
party congress and its existence was a precipitating factor in the
banning of factions within the Communist Party.

However, like the *"Left Communists,"* the *"Workers' Opposition"* did
not extend their economic demands to political issues. Unlike the
previous opposition, however, their support for party dictatorship was
more than logically implied, it was taken for granted. Alexandra
Kollontai's pamphlet, for example, expounding the position of the
*"Workers' Opposition"* fails to mention political democracy at all,
instead discussing exclusively economic and party democracy. Thus it was
a case of the *"Workers' Opposition"* expressing the *"basis on which,
in its opinions, the dictatorship of the proletariat must rest in the
sphere of industrial reconstruction."* Indeed, the *"whole controversy
boils down to one basic question: who shall build the communist economy,
and how shall it be build?"* [**Selected Writings of Alexandra
Kollontai**, p. 161 and p. 173]

Kollontai was right to state that the working class *"can alone by the
creator of communism"* and to ask the question of *"shall we achieve
communist through the workers or over their heads, by the hands of
Soviet officials."* As she argued, *"**it is impossible to decree
communism.**"* However, her list of demand were purely economic in
nature and she wondered *"[w]hat shall we do then in order to destroy
bureaucracy in the party and replace it by workers' democracy?"* She
stressed that the *"Workers' Opposition"* struggle was *"for
establishing democracy in the party, and for the elimination of all
bureaucracy."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 176, p. 174, p. 187, p. 192 and p. 197]
Thus her demands were about the internal regime of the party, **not** a
call for wider democratic reforms in the state or society as a whole.

As one historian notes, the *"arguments of Kollontai were . . . strictly
limited in their appeal to the communist party . . . Nor did they in any
form criticise the domination of the communist minority over the
majority of the proletariat. The fundamental weakness of the case of the
Workers' Opposition was that, while demanding more freedom of initiative
for the workers, it was quite content to leave untouched the state of
affairs in which a few hundred thousand imposed their will on many
millions. 'And since when have we [the Workers' Opposition] been enemies
of **komitetchina** [manipulation and control by communist party
committees], I should like to know?' Shlyapnikov asked at the Tenth
Party Congress. He went on to explain that the trade union congress in
which, as he and his followers proposed, all control of industry should
be vested would 'of course' be composed of delegates nominated and
elected 'through the party cells, as we always do.' But he argued that
the local trade union cells would ensure the election of men qualified
by experience and ability in pace of those who are 'imposed on us at
present' by the centre. Kollontai and her supporters had no wish to
disturb the communist party's monopoly of political power."* [Leonard
Schapiro, **The Origin of the Communist Autocracy**, p. 294]

Even this extremely limited demand for more economic democracy were too
much for Lenin. In January, 1921, Lenin was arguing that the Bolsheviks
had to *"add to our platform the following: we must combat the
ideological confusion of those unsound elements of the opposition who go
to the lengths of repudiating all 'militarisation of economy,' of
repudiating not only the 'method of appointing' which has been the
prevailing method up to now, but **all** appointments. In the last
analysis this means repudiating the leading role of the Party in
relation to the non-Party masses. We must combat the syndicalist
deviation which will kill the Party if it is not completely cured of
it."* Indeed, *"the syndicate deviation leads to the fall of the
dictatorship of the proletariat."* [quoted by Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, pp.
75-6] Maurice Brinton correctly notes that by this Lenin meant that
*"working class power ('the dictatorship of the proletariat') is
impossible if there are militants in the Party who think the working
class should exert more power in production ('the syndicalist
deviation')."* Moreover, *"Lenin here poses quite clearly the question
of 'power of the Party' or 'power of the class.' He unambiguously opts
for the former -- no doubt rationalising his choice by equating the two.
But he goes even further. He not only equates 'workers power' with the
rule of the Party. He equates it with acceptance of the ideas of the
Party leaders!"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 76]

At the tenth party congress, the *"Workers' Opposition"* were labelled
*"petty-bourgeois,"* *"syndicalist"* and even *"anarchist"* simply
because they called for limited participation by workers in the
rebuilding of Russia. The group was *"caused in part by the entry into
the ranks of the Party of elements which had still not completely
adopted the communist world view."* Significantly, those who **had** the
*"communist world view"* did not really debate the issues raised and
instead called the opposition "genuinely counter-revolutionary,"
*"objectively counter-revolutionary"* as well as *"too revolutionary."*
[quoted by Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 79]

For Lenin, the idea of industrial democracy was a nonsense. In this he
was simply repeating the perspective he had held from spring 1918. As he
put it, it was *"a term that lends itself to misinterpretations. It may
be read as a repudiation of dictatorship and individual authority."*
Industry, he argued, *"is indispensable, democracy is not"* and *"on no
account must we renounce dictatorship either."* Indeed, *"[i]ndustry is
indispensable, democracy is a category proper only to the political
sphere"."* He did admit *"[t]hat [the opposition] has been penetrating
into the broad masses is evident"* however it was the duty of the party
to ignore the masses. The *"bidding for or flirtation with the non-Party
masses"* was a *"radical departure from Marxism."* *"Marxism teaches,"*
Lenin said, *"and this tenet has not only been formally endorsed by the
whole Communist International in the decisions of the Second (1920)
Congress of the Comintern on the role of the political party of the
proletariat, but has also been confirmed in practice by our revolution
-- that only the political party of the working class, i.e. the
Communist Party, is capable of uniting, training and organising a
vanguard of the proletariat . . . . that alone will be capable of
withstanding the inevitable petty-bourgeois vacillation of this mass . .
. Without this the dictatorship of the proletariat is impossible."*
[**Collected Works**, vol. 31, p. 82, p. 27, p. 26, p. 197 and p. 246]
In other words, *"Marxism"* teaches that workers' democracy and protest
(the only means by which *"vacillation"* can be expressed) is a danger
to the *"dictatorship of the proletariat"*! (see also [section
H.5.3](secH5.html#sech53) on why this position is the inevitable outcome
of vanguardism).

It should be stresses that this opposition and the debate it provoked
occurred after the end of the Civil War in the west. The Whites under
Wrangel had been crushed in November, 1920, and the Russian revolution
was no longer in immediate danger. As such, there was an opportunity for
constructive activity and mass participation in the rebuilding of
Russia. The leading Bolsheviks rejected such demands, even in the
limited form advocated by the *"Workers' Opposition."* Lenin and Trotsky
clearly saw **any** working class participation as a danger to their
power. Against the idea of economic participation under Communist
control raised by the *"Workers' Opposition,"* the leading Bolsheviks
favoured the NEP. This was a return to the same kind of market-based
*"state capitalist"* strategy Lenin had advocated against the "Left
Communists" **before** the outbreak of the civil war in May 1918 (and,
as noted, he had argued for in 1917). This suggests a remarkable
consistency in Lenin's thoughts, suggesting that claims his policies he
advocated and implemented in power were somehow the opposite of what he
*"really"* wanted are weak.

As with the "Left Communists" of 1918, Lenin saw his opposition to the
"Workers' Opposition" as reflecting the basic ideas of his politics.
*"If we perish,"* he said privately at the time according to Trotsky,
*"it is all the more important to preserve our ideological line and give
a lesson to our continuators. This should **never** be forgotten, even
in **hopeless** circumstances."* [quoted by Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p.
147]

In summary, like the *"Left Communists"*, the *"Workers' Opposition"*
presented a platform of economic demands rooted in the assumption of
Bolshevik party domination. It is, therefore, unsurprising that leading
members of the *"Workers' Opposition"* took part in the attack on
Kronstadt and that they wholeheartedly rejected the consistent demands
for political **and** economic that the Kronstadt rebels had raised (see
appendix ["What was the Kronstadt Rebellion?"](append42.html) for more
information). Such a policy would be too contradictory to be applied.
Either the economic reforms would remain a dead letter under party
control or the economic reforms would provoke demands for political
change. This last possibility may explain Lenin's vitriolic attacks on
the *"Workers' Opposition."*

This opposition, like the *"Left Communists"* of 1918, was ultimately
defeated by organisational pressures within the party and state. Victor
Serge *"was horrified to see the voting rigged for Lenin's and
Zinoviev's 'majority'"* in late 1920. [**Memoirs of a Revolutionary**,
p. 123] Kollantai complained that while officially one and a half
million copies of the *"Workers' Opposition"* manifesto was published,
in fact only 1500 were *"and that with difficulty."* [quoted by
Schaprio, **Op. Cit.**, p. 291] This applied even more after the banning
of factions, when the party machine used state power to break up the
base of the opposition in the trade unions as well as its influence in
the party.

*"Victimisation of supporters of the Workers' Opposition,"* notes
Schapiro, *"began immediately after the Tenth Party Congress. 'The
struggle,' as Shlyapnikov later recounted, 'took place not along
ideological lines but by means . . . of edging out from appointments, of
systematic transfers from one district to another, and even expulsion
from the party.' . . . the attack was levelled not for heretical
opinions, but for criticism of any kind of party shortcomings. 'Every
member of the party who spoke in defence of the resolution on workers'
democracy [in the party -- see next section] was declared a supporter of
the Workers' Opposition and guilty of disintegrating the party,' and was
accordingly victimised."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 325-6] Thus *"the party
Secretariat was perfecting its technique of dealing with recalcitrant
individuals by the power of removal and transfer, directed primarily at
the adherents of the Workers' Opposition. (Of the 37 Workers' Opposition
delegates to the Tenth Congress whom Lenin consulted when he was
persuading Shlyapnikov and Kutuzov to enter the Central Committee, only
four managed to return as voting delegates to the next congress.)"*
[Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 161]

A similar process was at work in the trade unions. For example, *"[w]hen
the metalworkers' union held its congress in May 1921, the Central
Committee of the party handed it a list of recommended candidates for
the union leadership. The metalworkers' delegates voted down the
party-backed list, but this gesture proved futile: the party leadership
boldly appointed their own men to the union offices."* This was *"a show
of political force"* as the union was a centre of the Workers'
Opposition. [Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 157]

This repression was practised under Lenin and Trotsky, using techniques
which were later used by the Stalinists against Trotsky and his
followers. Lenin himself was not above removing his opponents from the
central committee by undemocratic methods. At the Tenth Party Congress
he had persuaded Shlyapnikov to be elected to the Central Committee in
an attempt to undermine the opposition. A mere *"five months later,
Lenin was demanding his expulsion for a few sharp words of criticism of
the bureaucracy, uttered at a private meeting of a local party cell. If
he was looking for a pretext, he could scarcely have picked a weaker
one."* [Schapiro, **Op. Cit.**, p. 327] Lenin failed by only one vote
short of the necessary two thirds majority of the Committee.

In summary, the *"Workers' Opposition"* vision was limited. Politically,
it merely wanted democracy within the party. It did not question the
party's monopoly of power. As such, it definitely did not deserve the
labels *"anarchist"* and *"syndicalist"* which their opponents called
them. As far as its economic policy goes, it, too, was limited. Its
demands for economic democracy were circumscribed by placing it under
the control of the communist cells within the trade unions.

However, Kollontai was right to state that only the working class *"can
alone by the creator of communism,"* that it was impossible to *"achieve
communist . . . over [the workers'] heads, by the hands of Soviet
officials"* and that *"**it is impossible to decree communism.**"* As
Kropotkin put it decades before:

> *"Communist organisation cannot be left to be constructed by
> legislative bodies called parliaments, municipal or communal council.
> It must be the work of all, a natural growth, a product of the
> constructive genius of the great mass. Communism cannot be imposed
> from above."* [**Kropotkin's Revolutionary Pamphlets**, p. 140]

3 What about Trotsky's *"Left Opposition"* in the 1920s?
--------------------------------------------------------

Finally, there is Trotsky's opposition between 1923 and 1927. Since 1918
Trotsky had been wholeheartedly in favour of the party dictatorship and
its economic regime. This position started to change once his own power
came under threat and he suddenly became aware of the necessity for
reform. Unsurprisingly, his opposition was the last and by far the
weakest politically. As Cornelius Castoriadis points out:

> *"From the beginning of 1918 until the banning of factions in March
> 1921, tendencies within the Bolshevik party were formed that, with
> farsightedness and sometimes an astonishing clarity, expressed
> opposition to the Party's bureaucratic line and to its very rapid
> bureaucratisation. These were the 'Left Communists' (at the beginning
> of 1918), then the 'Democratic Centralist' tendency (1919), and
> finally the 'Workers' Opposition' (1920-21). . . these oppositions
> were defeated one by one . . . The very feeble echoes of their
> critique of the bureaucracy that can be found later in the
> (Trotskyist) 'Left Opposition' after 1923 do not have the same
> signification. Trotsky was opposed to the **bad policies** of the
> bureaucracy and to the excesses of its power. He never put into
> question its essential nature. Until practically the end of his life,
> he never brought up the questions raised by the various oppositions of
> the period from 1918 to 1921 (in essence: 'Who manages production?'
> and 'What is the proletariat supposed to do during the 'dictatorship
> of the proletariat,' other than work and follow the orders of 'its'
> party?')."* [**Political and Social Writings**, vol. 3, p. 98]

While the *"Left Communists"* and *"Workers' Opposition"* had challenged
Lenin's state capitalist economic regime while upholding the Bolshevik
monopoly of power (implicitly or explicitly), Trotsky did not even
manage that. His opposition was firmly limited to internal reforms to
the party which he hoped would result in wider participation in the
soviets and trade unions (he did not bother to explain why continuing
party dictatorship would reinvigorate the soviets or unions).

Politically, Trotsky was unashamedly in favour of party dictatorship.
Indeed, his basic opposition to Stalinism was because he considered it
as the end of that dictatorship by the rule of the bureaucracy. He held
this position consistently during the civil war and into the 1920s (and
beyond -- see [section H.3.8](secH3.html#sech38)). For example, in April
1923, he asserted quite clearly that *"[i]f there is one question which
basically not only does not require revision but does not so much as
admit the thought of revision, it is the question of the dictatorship of
the Party."* [**Leon Trotsky Speaks**, p. 158] And was true to his word.
In *"The New Course"* (generally accepted as being the first public
expression of his opposition), he stated that *"[w]e are the only party
in the country, and in the period of the dictatorship it could not be
otherwise."* Moreover, it was *"incontestable that factions [within the
party] are a scourge in the present situation"* and so the party *"does
not want factions and will not tolerate them."* [**The Challenge of the
Left Opposition (1923-25)**, p. 78, p. 80 and p. 86] In May 1924, he
even went so far as to proclaim that:

> *"Comrades, none of us wishes or is able to be right against his
> party. The party in the last analysis is always right, because the
> party is the sole historical instrument given to the proletariat for
> the solution of its basic problems . . . I know that one cannot be
> right against the party. It is only possible to be right with the
> party and through the party, for history has not created other ways
> for the realisation of what is right."* [quoted by Daniels, **The
> Conscience of the Revolution**, p. 240]

However, confusion creeps into the politics of the Left Opposition
simply because they used the term *"workers' democracy"* a lot. However,
a close reading of Trotsky's argument soon clarifies this issue.
Trotsky, following the Communist Party itself, had simply redefined what
*"workers' democracy"* meant. Rather than mean what you would expect it
would mean, the Bolsheviks had changed its meaning to become *"party
democracy."* Thus Trotsky could talk about *"party dictatorship"* and
*"workers' democracy"* without contradiction. As his support Max Eastman
noted in the mid-1920s, Trotsky supported the *"programme of democracy
within the party -- called 'Workers' Democracy' by Lenin."* This *"was
not something new or especially devised . . . It was part of the
essential policy of Lenin for going forward toward the creation of a
Communist society -- a principle adopted under his leadership at the
Tenth Congress of the party, immediately after the cessation of the
civil war."* [**Since Lenin Died**, p. 35] In the words of historian
Robert V. Daniels:

> *"The Opposition's political ideal was summed up in the slogan
> 'workers' democracy,' which referred particularly to two documents
> [from 1920 and 1923] . . . Both these statements concerned the need to
> combat 'bureaucratism' and implement party democracy."* [**Op. Cit.**,
> p. 300]

That this was the case can be seen from the Fourth All-Russian Congress
of Trade Unions in 1921:

> *"At the meeting of delegates who were party members, Tomsky submitted
> for routine approval a set of these on the tasks of trade unions. The
> approval was a matter of form, but an omission was noted, The theses
> made no reference to the formula of 'proletarian democracy' with which
> the Tenth Congress had tried to assuage the rank and file. Riazanov .
> . . offered an amendment to fill the breach, in language almost
> identical with the Tenth Congress resolution: 'The party must observe
> with special care the normal methods of proletarian democracy,
> particularly in the trade unions, where most of all the selection of
> leaders should be done by the organised party masses themselves.' . .
> . The party leadership reacted instantaneously to this miscarriage of
> their plans for curtailing the idea of union autonomy. Tomksy was
> summarily ejected from the trade union congress. Lenin put in
> appearance together with Bukharin and Stalin to rectify the unionists'
> action."* [Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 157]

The *"New Course Resolution"* passed in December, 1923, stresses this,
stating that *"Workers' democracy means the liberty of frank discussion
of the most important questions of party life by all members, and the
election of all leading party functionaries and commissions . . . It
does not . . . imply the freedom to form factional groupings, which are
extremely dangerous for the ruling party."* [Trotsky, **Op. Cit.**, p.
408] It made it clear that *"workers' democracy"* was no such thing:

> *"Worker's democracy signifies freedom of open discussion by all
> members of the party of the most important questions of party life,
> freedom of controversy about them, and also electiveness of the
> leading official individuals and collegia from below upwards. However,
> it does not at all suggest freedom of factional groupings . . . It is
> self-evident that within the party . . . it is impossible to tolerate
> groupings, the ideological contents of which are directed against the
> party as a whole and against the dictatorship of the proletariat (such
> as, for example, the 'Workers' Truth' and the 'Workers' Group')."*
> [quoted by Robert V. Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 222]

As "Left Oppositionist" Victor Serge himself pointed out, *"the greatest
reach of boldness of the Left Opposition in the Bolshevik Party was to
demand the restoration of inner-Party democracy, and it never dared
dispute the theory of single-party government -- by this time, it was
too late."* Trotsky had *"ever since 1923 [been] for the renovation of
the party through inner party democracy and the struggle against
bureaucracy."* [**The Serge-Trotsky Papers**, p. 181 and p. 201]

Thus Trotsky's opposition was hardly democratic. In 1926, for example,
he took aim at Stalin's dismissal of the idea of *"the dictatorship of
the party"* as *"nonsense"* the previous year. If he were the heroic
defender of genuine workers democracy modern day Trotskyists assert, he
would have agreed with Stalin while exposing his hypocrisy. Instead he
defended the concept of *"the dictatorship of the party"* and linked it
to Lenin (and so Leninist orthodoxy):

> *"Of course, the foundation of our regime is the dictatorship of a
> class. But this in turn . . . assumes it is class that has come to
> self-consciousness through its vanguard, which is to say, through the
> party. Without this, the dictatorship could not exist . . .
> Dictatorship is the most highly concentrated function of function of a
> class, and therefore the basic instrument of a dictatorship is a
> party. In the most fundamental aspects a class realises its
> dictatorship through a party. That is why Lenin spoke not only of the
> dictatorship of the class but also the dictatorship of the party and,
> **in a certain sense**, made them identical."* [Trotsky, **The
> Challenge of the Left Opposition (1926-27)**, pp. 75-6]

Trotsky argued that Stalin's repudiation of the "dictatorship of the
party" was, in fact, a ploy to substitute the dictatorship of the party
*"apparatus"* for the dictatorship of the party (a theme which would be
raised in the following year's **Platform of the Opposition**). Such a
substitution, he argued, had its roots in a *"disproportion"* between
workers' democracy and peasants' democracy (or *"the private sector of
the economy"* in general). As long as there was a *"proper
'proportion'"* between the two and *"the advance of democratic methods
in the party and working class organisations,"* then *"the
identification of the dictatorship of the class with that of the party
is fully and completely justified historically and politically."*
Needless to say, Trotsky did not bother to ask how much democracy (of
**any** kind) was possible under a party dictatorship nor how a class
could run society or have *"democratic"* organisations if subjected to
such a dictatorship. For him it was a truism that the *"dictatorship of
a party does not contradict the dictatorship of the class either
theoretically or practically, but is an expression of it."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 76] Needless to say, the obvious conclusion to draw from
Trotsky's argument is that if a revolution occurred in a country without
a peasantry then the *"dictatorship of the party"* would be of no real
concern!

This was no temporary (7 year!) aberration. As indicated in [section
H.3.8](secH3.html#sech38), Trotsky repeated this support for party
dictatorship ten years later (and after). Furthermore, Trotsky's defence
of party dictatorship against Stalin was included in the 1927 **Platform
of the Opposition**. This included the same contradictory demands for
workers' democracy and the revitalising of the soviets and trade unions
with deeply rooted ideological support for party dictatorship. This
document made his opposition clear, attacking Stalin for **weakening**
the party's dictatorship. In its words, the *"growing replacement of the
party by its own apparatus is promoted by a 'theory' of Stalin's which
denies the Leninist principle, inviolable for every Bolshevik, that the
dictatorship of the proletariat is and can be realised only through the
dictatorship of the party."* It repeats this principle by arguing that
*"the dictatorship of the proletariat demands a single and united
proletarian party as the leader of the working masses and the poor
peasantry."* As such, *"[w]e will fight with all our power against the
idea of two parties, because the dictatorship of the proletariat demands
as its very core a single proletarian party. It demands a single
party."* [**The Platform of the Opposition**] Even in the prison camps
in the late 1920s and early 1930s, *"almost all the Trotskyists
continued to consider that 'freedom of party' would be 'the end of the
revolution.' 'Freedom to choose one's party -- that is Menshevism,' was
the Trotskyists' final verdict."* [Ante Ciliga, **The Russian Enigma**,
p. 280]

Once we understand that *"workers' democracy"* had a very specific
meaning to the Communist Party, we can start to understand such
apparently contradictory demands as the *"consistent development of a
workers' democracy in the party, the trade unions, and the soviets."*
Simply put, this call for *"workers' democracy"* was purely within the
respective party cells and **not** a call for **genuine** democracy in
the unions or soviets. Such a position in no way undermines the
dictatorship of the party.

Economically, Trotsky's opposition was far more backward than previous
oppositions. For Trotsky, economic democracy was not an issue. It played
no role in determining the socialist nature of a society. Rather state
ownership did. Thus he did not question one-man management in the
workplace nor the capitalist social relationships it generated. For
Trotsky, it was *"necessary for each state-owned factory, with its
technical director and with its commercial director, to be subjected not
only to control from the top -- by the state organs -- but also from
below, by the market which will remain the regulator of the state
economy for a long time to come."* In spite of the obvious fact that the
workers did not control their labour or its product, Trotsky asserted
that *"[n]o class exploitation exists here, and consequently neither
does capitalism exist."* Moreover, *"socialist industry . . . utilises
methods of development which were invented by capitalist economy."*
Ultimately, it was not self-management that mattered, it was *"the
growth of Soviet state industry [which] signifies the growth of
socialism itself, a direct strengthening of the power of the
proletariat"*! [**The First 5 Years of the Communist International**,
vol. 2, p. 237 and p. 245]

Writing in 1923, he argued that the *"system of actual one-man
management must be applied in the organisation of industry from top to
bottom. For leading economic organs of industry to really direct
industry and to bear responsibility for its fate, it is essential for
them to have authority over the selection of functionaries and their
transfer and removal."* These economic organs must *"in actual practice
have full freedom of selection and appointment."* He also tied payment
to performance (just as he did during the civil war), arguing that *"the
payment of the directors of enterprises must be made to depend on their
balance sheets, like wages depend on output."* [quoted by Robert V.
Daniels, **A Documentary History of Communism**, vol. 1, p. 237]

Moreover, Trotsky's key idea during the 1920s was to industrialise
Russia. As the 1927 Platform argued, it was a case that the *"present
tempo of industrialisation and the tempo indicated for the coming years
are obviously inadequate"* and so the *"necessary acceleration of
industrialisation"* was required. In fact, the *"Soviet Union must nor
fall further behind the capitalist countries, but in the near future
must overtake them."* Thus industrialisation *"must be sufficient to
guarantee the defence of the country and in particular an adequate
growth of war industries."* [**The Platform of the Opposition**]

In summary, Trotsky's "opposition" in no way presented any real
alternative to Stalinism. Indeed, Stalinism simply took over and applied
Trotsky's demands for increased industrialisation. At no time did
Trotsky question the fundamental social relationships within Soviet
society. He simply wished the ruling elite to apply different policies
while allowing him and his followers more space and freedom within the
party structures. Essentially, as the 1927 Platform noted, he saw
Stalinism as the victory of the state bureaucracy over the party and its
dictatorship. Writing ten years after the Platform, Trotsky reiterated
this: *"The bureaucracy won the upper hand. It cowed the revolutionary
vanguard, trampled upon Marxism, prostituted the Bolshevik party . . .
To the extent that the political centre of gravity has shifted form the
proletarian vanguard to the bureaucracy, the party has changed its
social structure as well as its ideology."* [**Stalinism and
Bolshevism**] He simply wanted to shift the *"political centre of
gravity"* back towards the party, as it had been in the early 1920s when
he and Lenin were in power. He in no significant way questioned the
nature of the regime or the social relationships it was rooted in.

This explains his continual self-imposed role after his exile of loyal
opposition to Stalinism in spite of the violence applied to him and his
followers by the Stalinists. It also explains the lack of excitement by
the working class over the *"Left Opposition."* There was really not
that much to choose between the two factions within the ruling
party/elite. As Serge acknowledged: *"Outraged by the Opposition, they
[the bureaucrats] saw it as treason against them; which in a sense it
was, since the Opposition itself belonged to the ruling bureaucracy."*
[**Memoirs of a Revolutionary**, p. 225]

This may come as a shock to many readers. This is because Trotskyists
are notorious for their rewriting of the policies of Trotsky's
opposition to the rise of what became known as Stalinism. This
revisionism can take extreme forms. For example, Chris Harman (of the
UK's SWP) in his summary of the rise Stalinism asserted that after
*"Lenin's illness and subsequent death"* the *"principles of October
were abandoned one by one."* [**Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern
Europe**, p. 14] Presumably, in that case, the *"principles of October"*
included the practice of, and ideological commitment to, party
dictatorship, one-man management, banning opposition groups/parties (as
well as factions within the Communist Party), censorship, state
repression of working class strikes and protests, piece-work, Taylorism,
the end of independent trade unions and a host of other crimes against
socialism implemented under Lenin and normal practice at the time of his
death.

Harman is correct to say that *"there was always an alternative to
Stalinism. It meant, in the late 1920s, returning to genuine workers'
democracy and consciously linking the fate of Russia to the fate of
world revolution."* Yet this alternative was not Trotsky's. Harman even
goes so far as to assert that the *"historical merit of the Left
Opposition"* was that it *"did link the question of the expansion of
industry with that of working-class democracy and internationalism."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 19]

However, in reality, this was **not** the case. Trotsky, nor the Left
Opposition, supported *"genuine"* working-class democracy, unless by
*"genuine"* Harman means *"party dictatorship presiding over."* This is
clear from Trotsky's writings for the period in question. The Left
Opposition did **not** question the Bolshevik's monopoly of power and
explicitly supported the idea of party dictatorship. This fact helps
explains what Harman seems puzzled by, namely that Trotsky *"continued
to his death to harbour the illusion that somehow, despite the lack of
workers' democracy, Russia was a 'workers' state.'"* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
20] Strangely, Harman does not explain why Russia was a *"workers'
state"* under Lenin and Trotsky, given its *"lack of workers'
democracy."* But illusions are hard to dispel, sometimes.

So, for Trotsky, like all leading members of the Communist Party and its
*"Left Opposition"*, *"workers' democracy"* was **not** considered
important and, in fact, was (at best) applicable only within the party.
Thus the capitulation of many of the Left Opposition to Stalin once he
started a policy of forced industrialisation comes as less of a surprise
than Harman seems to think it was. As Ante Ciliga saw first hand in the
prison camps, *"the majority of the Opposition were . . . looking for a
road to reconciliation; whilst criticising the Five Year Plan, they put
stress not on the part of exploited class played by the proletariat, but
on the technical errors made by the Government **qua** employer in the
matter of insufficient harmony within the system and inferior quality of
production. This criticism did not lead to an appeal to the workers
against the Central Committee and against bureaucratic authority; it
restricted itself to proposing amendments in a programme of which the
essentials were approved. The socialist nature of State industry was
taken for granted. They denied the fact that the proletariat was
exploited; for 'we were in a period of proletarian dictatorship.'"*
[**The Russian Enigma**, p. 213]

As Victor Serge noted, *"[f]rom 1928-9 onwards, the Politbureau turned
to its own use the great fundamental ideas of the now expelled
Opposition (excepting, of course, that of working-class democracy) and
implemented them with ruthless violence."* While acknowledging that the
Stalinists had applied these ideas in a more extreme form than the
Opposition planned, he also acknowledged that *"[b]eginning in those
years, a good many Oppositionists rallied to the 'general line' and
renounced their errors since, as they put it, 'After all, it is our
programme that is being applied.'"* Nor did it help that at *"the end of
1928, Trotsky wrote to [the Opposition] from his exile . . . to the
effect that, since the Right represented the danger of a slide towards
capitalism, we had to support the 'Centre' -- Stalin -- against it."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 252 and p. 253]

However, Serge's comments on *"working-class democracy"* are somewhat
incredulous, given that he knew fine well that the Opposition did not
stand for it. His summary of the 1927 Platform was restricted to it
aiming *"to restore life to the Soviets . . . and above all to
revitalise the Party and the trade unions. . . In conclusion, the
Opposition openly demanded a Congress for the reform of the Party, and
the implementation of the excellent resolutions on internal democracy
that had been adopted in 1921 and 1923."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 224-5]
Which is essentially correct. The Platform was based on redefining
"workers' democracy" to mean "party democracy" within the context of its
dictatorship.

We can hardly blame Harman, as it was Trotsky himself who started the
process of revising history to exclude his own role in creating the
evils he (sometimes) denounced his opponents within the party for. For
example, the 1927 Platform states that *"[n]ever before have the trade
unions and the working mass stood so far from the management of
socialist industry as now"* and that *"[p]re-revolutionary relations
between foremen and workmen are frequently found."* Which is hardly
surprising, given that Lenin had argued for, and implemented, appointed
one-man management armed with "dictatorial powers" from April 1918 and
that Trotsky himself also supported one-man management (see [section
10](append41.html#app10) of the appendix ["What happened during the
Russian Revolution?"](append41.html)).

Even more ironically, Harman argues that the Stalinist bureaucracy
became a ruling class in 1928 when it implemented the first five year
plan. This industrialisation was provoked by military competition with
the west, which forced the *"drive to accumulate"* which caused the
bureaucracy to attack *"the living standards of peasants and workers."*
He quotes Stalin: *"to slacken the pace (of industrialisation) would
mean to lag behind; and those who lag behind are beaten . . . We must
make good this lag in ten years. Either we do so or they crush us."*
Moreover, the *"environment in which we are placed . . . at home and
abroad . . . compels us to adopt a rapid rate of industrialisation."*
[Harman, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 15-6] Given that this was exactly the same
argument as Trotsky in 1927, it seems far from clear that the *"Left
Opposition"* presented any sort of alternative to Stalinism. After all,
the *"Left Opposition took the stand that large-scale new investment was
imperative, especially in heavy industry, and that comprehensive
planning and new sources of capital accumulation should be employed
immediately to effect a high rate of industrial expansion . . . They
also stressed the necessity of rapidly overtaking the capitalist powers
in economic strength, both as a guarantee of military security and as a
demonstration of the superiority of the socialist system."* [Robert V.
Daniels, **The Conscience of the Revolution**, p. 290]

Would the Left Opposition's idea of *"primitive socialist accumulation"*
been obtained by any means other than politically enforced exploitation
and the repression of working class and peasant protest? Of course not.
Faced with the same objective pressures and goals, would it have been
any different if that faction had become dominant in the party
dictatorship? It is doubtful, unless you argue that who is in charge
rather than social relationships that determine the "socialist" nature
of a regime. But, then again, that is precisely what Trotskyists like
Harman do do when they look at Lenin's Russia.

As for Harman's assertion that the Left Opposition stood for
*"internationalism,"* that is less straight forward than he would like.
As noted, it favoured the industrialisation of Russia to defend the
regime against its foreign competitors. As such, the Left Opposition
were as committed to building "socialism" in the USSR as were the
Stalinist promoters of *"socialism in one country."* The difference was
that the Left Opposition also argued for spreading revolution externally
as well. For them, this was the **only** means of assuring the lasting
victory of "socialism" (i.e. statised industry) in Russia. So, for the
Left Opposition, building Russia's industrial base was part and parcel
of supporting revolution internationally rather, as in the case of the
Stalinists, an alternative to it.

The contradictions in Trotsky's position may best be seen from the
relations between Lenin's Russia and the German military. Negotiations
between the two states started as early as 1920 with an important aide
of Trotsky's. The fruit of the German military's negotiations were
*"secret military understandings."* By September 1922 German officers
and pilots were training in Russia. An organisation of German military
and industrial enterprises in Russia was established and under it's
auspices shells, tanks and aircraft were manufactured in Russia for the
German army (an attempt to produce poison gas failed). [E.H. Carr, **The
Bolshevik Revolution**, vol. 3, p. 327 and pp. 431-2] In April, 1923,
the German High Command ordered 35 million gold marks worth of war
material. [Aberdeen Solidarity, **Spartakism to National Bolshevism**,
p. 24]

These relations had their impact on the politics of the German Communist
Party who enforced its so-called *"Schlageter Line"* of co-operation
with nationalist and fascist groups. This policy was first promoted in
the Comintern by leading Communist Radek and inspired by Zinoviev.
According to Radek, *"national Bolshevism"* was required as the *"strong
emphasis on the nation in Germany is a revolutionary act."* [quoted in
E.H. Carr, **The Interregnum 1923-1924**, p. 177] During the summer of
1923, joint meetings with them were held and both communist and fascist
speakers urged an alliance with Soviet Russia against the Entente
powers. So, for several months, the German Communists worked with the
Nazis, going so as far as to stage rallies and share podiums together.
The Communist leader Ruth Fischer even argued that *"he who denounces
Jewish capital . . . is already a warrior in the class war, even though
he does not know it"* (she latter said her remarks had been distorted).
[quoted in E.H. Carr, **Op. Cit.**, p. 182f] This continued until *"the
Nazis leadership placed a ban on further co-operation."* [E.H. Carr,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 183] Thus the activities of the German communists were
tailored to fit into the needs of Lenin's regime and Trotsky played a
key role in the negotiations which started the process.

How *"internationalist"* was it to arm and train the very forces which
had crushed the German revolutionary workers between 1919 and 1921? How
sensible was it, when pressing for world revolution, to enhance the
power of the army which would be used to attack any revolution in
Germany? Which, of course, was what happened in 1923, when the army
repressed the Comintern inspired revolt in November that year. Trotsky
was one of the staunchest in favour of this insurrection, insisting that
it be fixed for the 7th of that month, the anniversary of the Bolshevik
seizure of power. [E.H. Carr, **Op. Cit.**, p. 205] The attempted revolt
was a dismal failure. Rather than a revolution in Berlin on the 7th of
November, there was a diner at the Russian embassy for German officers,
industrialists and officials to celebrate the anniversary of the Russian
revolution. [Carr, **Op. Cit.**, p. 226] The big question is how many
Communists and workers killed in the revolt had been at the receiving
end of weapons and training supplied to the German army by Trotsky's Red
Army?

Moreover, the **nature** of any such revolution is what counts. The Left
Opposition would have encourage revolutions which followed (to re-quote
the **Platform of the Opposition**) the *"Leninist principle"*
(*"inviolable for every Bolshevik"*) that *"the dictatorship of the
proletariat is and can be realised only through the dictatorship of the
party."* It would have opposed workers' self-management in favour of
nationalisation and one-man management. In other words, the influence of
the Left Opposition would have been as detrimental to the global
workers' movement and other revolutions as Stalin's was (or, for that
matter, Lenin's) although, of course, in a different way. Generalising
Lenin's state capitalism would not have resulted in socialism, no matter
how many revolutions in the west the Left Opposition encouraged.

Finally, the fate of the *"Left Opposition"* should be noted. As befell
the previous oppositions, the party machine was used against it.
Ironically, the Stalinists began by using the very techniques the
Trotskyists had used against their opponents years before. For example,
the Eighth Party Congress in December 1919 agreed that *"[a]ll decisions
of the higher jurisdiction are absolutely binding for the lower."*
Moreover, *"[e]ach decision must above all be fulfilled, and only after
this is an appeal to the corresponding party organ permissible."*
Centralism was reaffirmed: *"The whole matter of assignment of party
workers is in the hands of the Central Committee of the party. Its
decision is binding for everyone..."* These decisions were used as a
weapon against the opposition: *"Translating this principle into
practice, the Secretariat under Krestinsky [a Trotsky supporter] began
deliberately to transfer party officials for political reasons, to end
personal conflicts and curb opposition."* In 1923, the Secretariat
*"brought into play its power of transfer, which had already proven to
be an effective political weapon against the Ukrainian Leftists and the
Workers' Opposition."* [Robert V. Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 113 and p.
229]

The party itself had been reorganised, with *"the replacement of local
party committees, which were at least democratic in form, by
bureaucratically constituted 'political departments.' With the
institution of such bodies, all political activity . . . was placed
under rigid control from above. This innovation was taken from the army;
as its origin suggests, it was strictly a military, authoritarian
institution, designed for transmitting propaganda downward rather than
opinion upward."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 114] Needless to say, it was Trotsky
himself who implemented that regime in the army to begin with.

It should also be remembered that when, in early in 1922, the *"Workers'
Opposition"* had appealed to the Communist abroad in the form of a
statement to a Comintern Congress, Trotsky defended the party against
its claims. These claims, ironically, included the accusation that the
*"party and trade-union bureaucracy . . . ignore the decisions of our
congresses on putting workers' democracy [inside the party] into
practice."* Their *"effort to draw the proletarian masses closer to the
state is declared to be 'anarcho-syndicalism,' and its adherents are
subjected to persecution and discrediting."* They argued that the
*"tutelage and pressure by the bureaucracy goes so far that it is
prescribed for members of the party, under threat of exclusion and other
repressive measures, to elect not those whom the Communists want
themselves, but those whom the ignorant high places want."* [quoted by
Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 162]

Even more ironically, the dominant faction of the bureaucracy heaped
upon Trotsky's opposition faction similar insults to those he (and
Lenin) had heaped upon previous oppositions inside and outside the
party. In 1924, the Trotskyist opposition was accused of having
*"clearly violated the decision of the Tenth Congress . . . which
prohibited the formation of factions within the party"* and has
*"enlivened the hopes of all enemies of the party, including the
West-European bourgeoisie, for a split in the ranks of the Russian
Communist Party."* In fact, it was a *"direct departure of Leninism"*
and *"also a clearly expressed **petty-bourgeois deviation**"*
reflecting *"the pressure of the petty bourgeois on the position of the
proletarian party and its policy."* [contained in Daniels, **A
Documentary History of Communism**, vol. 1, pp. 247-8] In 1927 the
"United Opposition" was *"[o]bjectively . . . a tool of the bourgeois
elements."* [quoted by Daniels, **The Conscience of the Revolution**, p.
318]

One of the ways which supporters of Leninism seek to differentiate it
from Stalinism is on the issue of repression within the Communist Party
itself. However, the suppression of opposition currents within
Bolshevism did not start under Stalinism, it had existed to some degree
from the start. Ironically, Trotsky's belated opposition faced exactly
the same measures he had approved for use against groups like the
*"Workers' Opposition"* within a party regime he himself had helped
create.

Of course, the Stalinists did not stop there. Once the "Left Opposition"
was broken its members were brutally repressed. Some were simply
murdered, many more arrested and placed into prison camps where many
died. Which shows, in its own way, a key difference between Lenin's and
Stalin's regime. Under Lenin, the opposition **outside** the party was
brutally repressed. Stalin simply applied the methods used by Lenin
outside the party to oppositions within it.

4 What do these oppositions tell us about the essence of Leninism?
------------------------------------------------------------------

The history and ideas of these oppositions are important in evaluating
the claims of pro-Bolsheviks. If, as modern-day supporters of Bolshevism
argue, Leninism is inherently democratic and that before the revolution
it stood for basic civil liberties for the working class then we have to
come to the conclusion that none of the party oppositions represented
the *"true"* Leninist tradition. Given that many Trotskyists support the
*"Left Opposition"* as the only *"real"* opposition to Stalin, defending
the true essence of Bolshevism, we can only wonder what the "real"
Bolshevik tradition is. After all, the *"Left Opposition"*
wholeheartedly supported party dictatorship, remained silent on workers'
control and urged the speeding up of industrialisation to meet
competition from the west.

However, there are groups which did raise more substantial critiques of
mainstream Bolshevism. They raised their ideas between 1921 and 1923.
How Lenin and Trotsky responded to them is significant. Rather than
embrace them as expressing what the (according to Leninists) **really**
stood for, they used state repression to break them and they were kicked
out of the Communist Party. All with the approval of Lenin and Trotsky.

The only groups associated with the Bolshevik party which advocated
democracy and freedom for working people were the dissidents of the
*"Workers' Truth"* and *"Workers' Group."* Material on both is hard to
come by. The *"Workers' Truth"* group was labelled *"Menshevik"* by the
ruling party while the *"Workers' Group"* was dismissed as
*"anarcho-syndicalist."* Both were expelled from the party and their
members arrested by the Bolsheviks. The latter group is better known
than the former and so, by necessity, we will concentrate on that. It
was also the largest, boldest and composed mainly of workers. We find
them labelled the NEP the *"New Exploitation of the Proletariat"* and
attacking, like the *"Workers' Opposition"*, the *"purely bureaucratic
way"* industry was run and urging *"the direct participation of the
working class"* in it. However, unlike the *"Workers' Opposition"*, the
*"Workers' Group"* extended their call for workers' democracy to beyond
the workplace and party. They wondered if the proletariat might not be
*"compelled once again to start anew the struggle . . . for the
overthrow of the oligarchy."* They noted that ruling clique in the party
*"will tolerate no criticism, since it considers itself just as
infallible as the Pope of Rome."* [quoted by E.H. Carr, **The
Interregnum 1923-1924**, p. 82, p. 269]

The *"Workers' Group"* is associated with the old worker Bolshevik G. T.
Miasnikov, its founder and leading thinker (see Paul Avrich's essay
**Bolshevik Opposition to Lenin: G. T. Miasnikov and the Workers'
Group** for more details -- any non-attributed quotes can be found in
this essay). As Ante Ciliga recounted in his experiences of political
debate in the prison camps in the late 1920s and early 1930s
(ironically, there had always been more freedom of expression in prison
than in Bolshevik society):

> *"In the criticism of the Lenin of the revolutionary period the tone
> was set by . . . the Workers Group . . . [It was], in origin, from the
> Bolshevik old guard. But . . . they criticised Lenin's course of
> action from the beginning, and not on details but as a whole. The
> Workers Opposition denounced Lenin's economic line. The Workers Group
> went even farther and attacked the political regime and the single
> party established by Lenin prior to the NEP . . .*
> "Having put as the basis of its programme Marx's watchword for the 1st
> International -- 'The emancipation of the workers must be the task of
> the workers themselves' -- the Workers Group declared war from the
> start on the Leninist concept of the 'dictatorship of the party' and
> the bureaucratic organisation of production, enunciated by Lenin in
> the initial period of the revolution's decline. Against the Leninist
> line, they demanded organisation of production by the masses
> themselves, beginning with factory collectives. Politically, the
> Workers Group demanded the control of power and of the party by the
> worker masses. These, the true political leaders of the country, must
> have the right to withdraw power from any political party, even from
> the Communist Party, if they judged that that party was not defending
> their interests. Contrary to . . . the majority of the Workers'
> Opposition, for whom the demand for 'workers' democracy' was
> practically limited to the economic domain, and who tried to reconcile
> it with the 'single party,' the Workers Group extended its struggle
> for workers' democracy to the demand for the workers to choose among
> competing political parties of the worker milieu. Socialism could only
> be the work of free creation by the workers. While that which was
> being constructed by coercion, and given the name of socialism, was
> for them nothing but bureaucratic State capitalism from the very
> beginning." [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 277-8]

Years before, Miasnikov had exposed the abuses he has seen first hand
under Lenin's regimed. In 1921, he stated the obvious that *"[i]t stands
to reason that workers' democracy presupposes not only the right to vote
but also freedom of speech and press. If workers who govern the country,
manage factories, do not have freedom of speech, we get a highly
abnormal state."* He urged total freedom of speech for all. He discussed
corruption within the party, noting that a *"special type of Communist
is evolving. He is forward, sensible, and, what counts most, he knows
how to please his superiors, which the latter like only too much."*
Furthermore, *"[i]f one of the party rank and file dares to have an
opinion of his own, he is looked upon as a heretic and people scoff at
him saying, 'Wouldn't Ilyitch (Lenin) have come to this idea if it were
timely now? So you are the only clever man around, eh, you want to be
wiser than all? Ha, ha, ha! You want to be clever than Ilyitch!' This is
the typical 'argumentation' of the honourable Communist fraternity."*
*"Any one who ventures a critical opinion of his own,"* he noted, *"will
be labelled a Menshevik of Social-Revolutionist, with all the
consequences that entails."* [quoted by G. P. Maximoff, **The Guillotine
at Work**, p. 269 and p. 268]

Lenin tried to reply to Miasnikov's demand for freedom of speech.
Freedom of the press, Lenin argued, would, under existing circumstances,
strengthen the forces of counter-revolution. Lenin rejected *"freedom"*
in the abstract. Freedom for whom? he demanded. Under what conditions?
For which class? *"We do not believe in 'absolutes.' We laugh at 'pure
democracy,'"* he asserted. *"Freedom of press in the RSFSR,"* Lenin
maintained, *"surrounded by bourgeois enemies everywhere means freedom
for the bourgeoisie"* and as *"we do not want to commit suicide and that
is why we will never do this"* (i.e. introduce freedom of speech).
According to Lenin, freedom of speech was a *"non-party,
anti-proletarian slogan"* as well as a *"flagrant political error."*
After sober reflection, Lenin hoped, Miasnikov would recognise his
errors and return to useful party work.

Miasnikov was not convinced by Lenin's arguments. He drafted a strong
reply. Reminding Lenin of his revolutionary credentials, he wrote: *"You
say that I want freedom of the press for the bourgeoisie. On the
contrary, I want freedom of the press for myself, a proletarian, a
member of the party for fifteen years, who has been a party member in
Russia and not abroad. I spent seven and a half of the eleven years of
my party membership before 1917 in prisons and at hard labour, with a
total of seventy-five days in hunger strikes. I was mercilessly beaten
and subjected to other tortures . . . I escaped not abroad, but for
party work here in Russia. To me one can grant at least a little freedom
of press. Or is it that I must leave or be expelled from the party as
soon as I disagree with you in the evaluation of social forces? Such
simplified treatment evades but does not tackle our problems."* [quoted
by Maximoff, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 270-1] Lenin said, Miasnikov went on,
that the jaws of the bourgeoisie must be cracked:

> *"To break the jaws of international bourgeoisie, is all very well,
> but the trouble is that, you raise your hand against the bourgeoisie
> and you strike at the worker. Which class now supplies the greatest
> numbers of people arrested on charges of counter-revolution? Peasants
> and workers, to be sure. There is no Communist working class. There is
> just a working class pure and simple."* [quoted by Maximoff, **Op.
> Cit.**, p. 271]

*"Don't you know,"* he asked Lenin, *"that thousands of proletarians are
kept in prison because they talked the way I am talking now, and that
bourgeois people are not arrested on this source for the simple reason
that the are never concerned with these questions? If I am still at
large, that is so because of my standing as a Communist. I have suffered
for my Communist views; moreover, I am known by the workers; were it not
for these facts, were I just an ordinary Communist mechanic from the
same factory, where would I be now? In the Che-Ka [prison] . . . Once
more I say: you raise your hand against the bourgeoisie, but it is I who
am spitting blood, and it is we, the workers, whose jaws are being
cracked."* [quoted by Maximoff, **Ibid.**]

After engaging in political activity in his home area, Miasnikov was
summoned to Moscow and placed under the control of the Central
Committee. In defiance of the Central Committee, he returned to the
Urals and resumed his agitation. At the end of August he appeared before
a general meeting of Motovilikha party members and succeeded in winning
them over to his side. Adopting a resolution against the Orgburo's
censure of Miasnikov, they branded his transfer to Moscow a form of
*"banishment"* and demanded that he be allowed *"full freedom of speech
and press within the party."*

On November 25 he wrote to a sympathiser in Petrograd urging a campaign
of agitation in preparation for the 11th party congress. By now
Miasnikov was being watched by the Cheka, and his letter was
intercepted. For Lenin, this was the last straw: *"We must devote
greater attention to Miasnikov's agitation,"* he wrote to Molotov on
December 5, *"and to report on it to the Politburo twice a month."* To
deal with Miasnikov, meanwhile, the Orgburo formed a new commission.
This commission recommended his expulsion from the party, which was
agreed by the Politburo on February 20, 1922. This was the first
instance, except for the brief expulsion of S. A. Lozovsky in 1918,
where Lenin actually expelled a well-known Bolshevik of long standing.

By the start of 1923, he had organised a clandestine opposition and
formed (despite his expulsion) the *"Workers' Group of the Russian
Communist Party."* He claimed that it, and not the Bolshevik leadership,
represented the authentic voice of the proletariat. Joining hands in the
venture were P. B. Moiseev, a Bolshevik since 1914, and N. V. Kuznetsov,
the former Workers' Oppositionist. The three men, all workers,
constituted themselves as the *"Provisional Central Organisational
Bureau"* of the group. Their first act, in February 1923, was to draw up
a statement of principles in anticipation of the Twelfth Party Congress
called the "Manifesto of the Workers' Group of the Russian Communist
Party." The manifesto was *"denouncing the New Exploitation of the
Proletariat and urging the workers to fight for soviet democracy,"*
according to Trotskyist historian I. Deutscher. [**The Prophet
Unarmed**, p.107]

The manifesto recapitulated the program of Miasnikov's earlier writings:
workers' self-determination and self-management, the removal of
bourgeois specialists from positions of authority, freedom of discussion
within the party, and the election of new soviets centred in the
factories. It protested against administrative high-handedness, the
expanding bureaucracy, the predominance of non-workers within the party,
and the suppression of local initiative and debate. The manifesto
denounced the New Economic Policy (NEP) as the *"New Exploitation of the
Proletariat."* In spite of the abolition of private ownership, the worst
features of capitalism had been preserved: wage slavery, differences of
income and status, hierarchical authority, bureaucratism. In the words
of the manifesto, the *"organisation of this industry since the Ninth
Congress of the RCP(b) is carried out without the direct participation
of the working class by nominations in a purely bureaucratic way."*
[quoted by Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 204]

The manifesto wondered whether the Russian proletariat might not be
compelled *"to start anew the struggle -- and perhaps a bloody one --
for the overthrow of the oligarchy."* Not that it contemplated an
immediate insurrection. Rather it sought to rally the workers, Communist
and non-Communist alike, to press for the elimination of bureaucratism
and the revival of proletarian democracy. Within the party the manifesto
defended-the right to form factions and draw up platforms. *"If
criticism does not have a distinct point of view,"* Miasnikov wrote to
Zinoviev, *"a platform on which to rally a majority of party members, on
which to develop a new policy with regard to this or that question, then
it is not really criticism but a mere collection of words, nothing but
chatter."* He went even further, calling into question the very
Bolshevik monopoly of power. Under a single-party dictatorship, he
argued, elections remained *"an empty formality."* To speak of
*"workers' democracy"* while insisting on one-party government, he told
Zinoviev, was to entwine oneself in a contradiction, a *"contradiction
in terms."*

Miasnikov was arrested by the GPU (the new name for the Cheka) on May
25, 1923, a month after the Twelfth Party Congress (the rest of the
group's leadership was soon to follow). Miasnikov was released from
custody and permitted to leave the country and left for Germany (this
was a device not infrequently used by the authorities to rid themselves
of dissenters). In Berlin he formed ties with the council communists of
the German Communist Workers' Party (KAPD) and with the left wing of the
German Communist Party. With the aid of these groups, Miasnikov was able
to publish the manifesto of the Workers' Group, prefaced by an appeal
drafted by his associates in Moscow. The appeal concluded with a set of
slogans proclaiming the aims of the Workers' Group: *"The strength of
the working class lies in its solidarity. Long live freedom of speech
and press for the proletarians! Long live Soviet Power! Long live
Proletarian Democracy! Long live Communism!"*

Inside Russia the manifesto was having its effect. Fresh recruits were
drawn into the Workers' Group. It established ties with discontented
workers in several cities and began negotiations with leaders of the now
defunct Workers' Opposition. The group won support within the Red Army
garrison quartered in the Kremlin, a company of which had to be
transferred to Smolensk. By summer of 1923 the group had some 300
members in Moscow, as well as a sprinkling of adherents in other cities.
Many were Old Bolsheviks, and all, or nearly all, were workers. Soon an
unexpected opportunity for the group to extend its influence arrived. In
August and September 1923 a wave of strikes (which recalled the events
of February 1921) swept Russia's industrial centres. An economic crisis
(named the *"scissors' crisis"*) had been deepening since the beginning
of the year, bringing cuts in wages and the dismissal of large numbers
of workers. The resulting strikes, which broke out in Moscow and other
cities, were spontaneous and no evidence existed to connect them with
any oppositionist faction. The Workers' Group, however, sought to take
advantage of the unrest to oppose the party leadership. Stepping up its
agitation, it considered calling a one-day general strike and organising
a mass demonstration of workers, on the lines of Bloody Sunday 1905,
with a portrait of Lenin (rather than the Tzar!) at the lead.

The authorities became alarmed. The Central Committee branded the
Workers' Group as *"anti-Communist and anti-Soviet"* and ordered the GPU
to suppress it. By the end of September its meeting places had been
raided, literature seized, and leaders arrested. Twelve members were
expelled from the party and fourteen others received reprimands. As one
Trotskyist historian put it, the *"party leaders"* were *"determined to
suppress the Workers' Group and the Workers' Truth."* [I. Deutscher,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 108] Miasnikov was considered such a threat that in the
autumn of 1923 he was lured back to Russia on assurances from Zinoviev
and Krestinsky, the Soviet ambassador in Berlin, that he would not be
molested. Once in Russia he was immediately placed behind bars. The
arrest was carried out by Dzerzhinsky himself (the infamous creator and
head of the Cheka), a token of the gravity with which the government
viewed the case.

This response is significant, simply because Trotsky was still an
influential member of the Communist Party leadership. As Paul Avrich
points out, *"[i]n January 1924, Lenin died. By then the Workers' Group
had been silenced. It was the last dissident movement within the party
to be liquidated while Lenin was still alive. It was also the last
rank-and-file group to be smashed with the blessing of all the top
Soviet leaders, who now began their struggle for Lenin's mantle."*
[**Bolshevik Opposition To Lenin: G. Miasnikov and the Workers Group**]

The response of Trotsky is particularly important, given that for most
modern day Leninists he raised the banner of "authentic" Leninism
against the obvious evils of Stalinism. What was his reaction to the
state repression of the Workers' Group? As Deutscher notes, Trotsky
*"did not protest when their adherents were thrown into prison . . . Nor
was he inclined to countenance industrial unrest . . . Nor was he at all
eager to support the demand for Soviet democracy in the extreme form in
which the Workers' Opposition and its splinter groups [like the Workers'
Group] had raised it."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 108-9] Dzerzhinsky was given
the task of breaking the opposition groups by the central committee. He
*"found that even party members of unquestioned loyalty regarded them as
comrades and refused to testify against them. He then turned to the
Politburo and asked it to declare it was the duty of any party member to
denounce to the GPU people inside the party engaged aggressive action
against the official leaders."* Trotsky *"did not tell the Politburo
plainly that it should reject Dzerzhinsky's demand. He evaded the
question."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 108 and p. 109]

Trotskyist Tony Cliff presents a similar picture of Trotsky's lack of
concern for opposition groups and his utter failure to support working
class self-activity or calls for **real** democracy. He notes that in
July and August 1923 Moscow and Petrograd *"were shaken by industrial
unrest . . . Unofficial strikes broke out in many places . . . In
November 1923, rumours of a general strike circulated throughout Moscow,
and the movement seems at the point of turning into a political revolt.
Not since the Kronstadt rising of 1921 had there been so much tension in
the working class and so much alarm in the ruling circles."* The ruling
elite, including Trotsky, acted to maintain their position and the
secret police turned on any political group which could influence the
movement. The *"strike wave gave a new lease of life to the Mensheviks"*
and so *"the GPU carried out a massive round up of Mensheviks, and as
many as one thousand were arrested in Moscow alone."* When it was the
turn of the Workers Group and Workers Truth, Trotsky *"did not condemn
their persecution"* and he *"did not support their incitement of workers
to industrial unrest."* Moreover, *"[n]or was Trotsky ready to support
the demand for workers' democracy in the extreme form to which the
Workers Group and Workers Truth raised it."* [**Trotsky**, vol. 3, p.
25, p. 26 and pp. 26-7]

By *"extreme,"* Cliff obviously means *"genuine"* as Trotsky did not
call for workers' democracy in any meaningful form. Indeed, his *"New
Course Resolution"* even went so far as to say that *"it is obvious that
there can be no toleration of the formation of groupings whose
ideological content is directed against the party as a whole and against
the dictatorship of the proletariat. as for instance the Workers' Truth
and Workers' Group."* Trotsky himself was at pains to distance himself
from Myainikov. [**The Challenge of the Left Opposition (1923-25)**, p.
408 and p. 80] The resolution made it clear that it considered *"the
dictatorship of the proletariat"* to be incompatible with **real**
workers democracy by arguing *"it is impossible to tolerate groupings,
the ideological contents of which are directed against the party as a
whole and against the dictatorship of the proletariat (such as, for
example, the 'Workers' Truth' and the 'Workers' Group')."* [quoted by
Robert V. Daniels, **Op. Cit.**, p. 222] Given that both these groups
advocated actual soviet and trade union democracy, the Politburo was
simply indicating that **actual** *"workers' democracy"* was *"against"*
the dictatorship of the proletariat (i.e. the dictatorship of the
party).

Thus we come to the strange fact that it was Lenin and Trotsky
themselves who knowingly destroyed the groups which represent what
modern day Leninists assert is the *"real"* essence of Leninism.
Furthermore, modern day Leninists generally ignore these opposition
groups when they discuss alternatives to Stalinism or the
bureaucratisation under Lenin. This seems a strange fate to befall
tendencies which, if we take Leninists at their word, expressed what
their tradition stands for. Equally, in spite of their support for party
dictatorship, the *"Workers' Opposition"* did have some constructive
suggests to make as regards combating the economic bureaucratisation
which existed under Lenin. Yet almost all modern Leninists (like Lenin
and Trotsky) dismiss them as *"syndicalist"* and utopian. Which is, of
course, significant about the **real** essence of Leninism.

Ultimately, the nature of the various oppositions within the party and
the fate of such real dissidents as the *"Workers' Group"* says far more
about the real reasons the Russian revolution than most Trotskyist books
on the matter. Little wonder there is so much silence and distortion
about these events. They prove that the *"essence"* of Bolshevism is not
a democratic one but rather a deeply authoritarian one hidden (at times)
behind libertarian sounding rhetoric. Faced with opposition which were
somewhat libertarian, the response of Lenin and Trotsky was to repress
them. In summary, they show that the problems of the revolution and
subsequent civil war did not create but rather revealed Bolshevism's
authoritarian core.
