Reply to errors and distortions in Phil Mitchinson's ***Marxism and direct action***
====================================================================================

Phil Mitchinson essay [**Marxism and direct
action**](http://www.marxist.com/Theory/direct_action.html) attempts to
provide a "Marxist" (i.e. Leninist/Trotskyist) critique of the current
"Direct Action" based groups which came to notice at various
demonstrations across the world -- most famously in Seattle, November
1999. He, correctly, links these groups and currents with anarchism.
However, his "critique" is nothing but a self-contradictory collection
of false assertions, lies and nonsense, as we shall prove (indeed, his
"critique" seems more the product of envy at anarchist influence in
these movements than the product of scholarship or objectivity). That is
why we have decided to reply to his article -- it gives us an ideal
possibility to indicate the depths to which some Marxists will swoop to
distort anarchist politics and movements.

1. How does Mitchinson impoverish the politics of the direct action groups?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

He begins by noting that the *"recent anti-capitalist demonstrations
have brought together many different groups protesting against the
destruction of the environment, racism, the exploitation of the third
world, and also many ordinary young people protesting at the state of
things in general. They have certainly shattered the myth that everyone
is happy and that the capitalist system is accepted as the only possible
form of society."* Of course, this is correct. What he fails to mention
is that these demonstrations and groups managed to do this **without**
the "guidance" of any Leninist party -- indeed, the vanguard parties are
noticeable by their absence and their frantic efforts to catch up with
these movements. This, of course, is not the first time this has
happened. Looking at every revolution we discover the "revolutionary"
parties either playing no role in their early stages or a distinctly
counter-productive role.

He states that *"[a]ll around us we see the misery this system causes.
Famine, war, unemployment, homelessness and despair, these are the
violent acts that the system perpetrates against millions every day."*
However, as much as these aspects of capitalism are terrible, the
anti-capitalist revolt expressed by many within the direct action groups
is much wider than this (standard) leftist list. The movements, or at
least parts of them, have a much more radical critique of the evils of
capitalism -- one that bases it self on abolishing alienation,
domination, wage slavery, oppression, exploitation, the spiritual as
well as material poverty of everyday life, by means of self-management,
autonomy, self-organisation and direct action. They raise the
possibility of playful, meaningful, empowering and productive
self-activity to replace *"tedious, over-tiring jobs"* as well as the
vision of a libertarian communist (i.e. moneyless, stateless) society.
Mitchinson's account of the movements he is trying to critique is as
poverty stricken intellectually as the capitalist system these movements
are challenging. Leninists like Mitchinson, instead of a swallowing a
dose of humility and learning from the very different ways this new wave
of protest is being framed, are trying to squeeze the protest into their
own particular one-dimensional model of revolution. Being unable to
understand the movements he is referring to, he pushes their vision into
the narrow confines of his ideology and distorts it.

He goes on to state that *"[w]itnessing and experiencing this
destruction and chaos, young people everywhere are driven to protest."*
Of course, anyone who is part of these movements will tell you that a
wide cross-section of age groups are involved, not just *"young
people."* However, Mitchinson's comments on age are not surprising --
ever since Lenin, Bolshevik inspired Marxists have attributed other,
more radical, political theories, analyses and visions to the alleged
youth of those who hold these opinions (in spite of the facts). In other
words, these ideas, they claim, are the produce of immaturity,
inexperience and youth and will, hopefully, be grown out of. Just as
many parents mutter to themselves that their anarchist (or socialist,
homosexual, whatever) children will "grow out of it", Lenin and his
followers like Mitchinson consider themselves as the wiser, older
relations (perhaps a friendly Uncle or a Big Brother?) of these "young"
rebels and hope they will "grow out of" their infantile politics.

The word patronising does not do Mitchinson justice!

2. Does anarchism *"juxtapose"* theory and action?
--------------------------------------------------

Now Mitchinson launches into his first strawman of his essay. He
asserts:

> *"However, the idea of getting involved in a political organisation is
> a turn off for many, who understandably want to do something, and do
> something now. In reality, the attempt to juxtapose organisation,
> discussion, and debate with 'direct action' is pure sophistry."*

We are not aware of any anarchist or direct action group which does not
discuss and debate their actions, the rationale of their actions and the
aims of their actions. These demonstrations that *"young people"*
apparently turn up at are, in fact, organised by groups who have
meetings, discuss their ideas, their objectives, their politics, and so
on. That much should be obvious. In reality, it is Mitchinson who
expresses *"pure sophistry,"* not the *"many"* who he claims act without
thinking. And, of course, he fails to mention the two days of meetings,
discussion and debate which took place the Saturday/Sunday before the
May Day actions in London. To mention the May Day 2000 conference would
confuse the reader with facts and so goes unmentioned.

He then asserts that the *"ideas of Marxism are not the subject of
academic study, they are precisely a guide to action."* Of course, we
have to point out here that the Marxist Parties Mitchinson urges us to
build did not take part in organising the actions he praises (a few
members of these parties did come along, on some of them, to sell
papers, of course, but this is hardly a "vanguard" role). In general,
the vanguard parties were noticeable by their absence or, **at best**,
their lack of numbers and involvement. If we judge people by what they
do, rather than what they say (as Marx urged), then we must draw the
conclusion that the Marxism of Mitchinson is a guide to inaction rather
than action.

Mitchinson continues by stating Marxists *"are all in favour of action,
but it must be clearly thought out, with definite aims and objectives if
it is to succeed. Otherwise we end up with directionless action."* It
would be impolite to point out that no anarchist or member of a direct
action organisation would disagree with this statement. Every
anti-capitalist demonstration has had a definite aim and objective, was
clearly thought out and organised. It did not "just happen." Mitchinson
presents us with a strawman so fragile that even a breeze of reality
would make it disintegrate.

The question is, of course, what kind of organisation do we create, how
do we determine our aims and objectives. That is the key question, one
that Mitchinson hides behind the strawman of organisation versus
non-organisation, planned action versus *"directionless action."* To
state it bluntly, the question is actually one of do we organise in an
authoritarian manner or a libertarian manner, not whether or not we
organise. Mitchinson may not see the difference (in which case he thinks
all organisation is "authoritarian") but for anarchists and members of
direct action groups the difference is vital.

He goes on to state:

> *"Furthermore without political organisation who decides what action
> is to be taken, when and where? There can be no greater direct action
> than the seizing of control over our own lives by the vast majority of
> society. In that act lies the essence of revolution. Not just an
> aimless 'direct action' but mass, democratic and conscious action, the
> struggle not just against capitalism, but for a new form of society,
> socialism."*

Again Mitchinson presents us with the strawman of *"conscious"* action
verses *"aimless"* action. As noted above, the anti-capitalist
demonstrations **were** organised -- non-hierarchical groups decided
collectively what action was to be organised, when and where. The real
question is not organisation versus non-organisation but rather
authoritarian versus libertarian organisation. Either decision making
from the bottom up or decision making from the top-down. As for there
bring *"no greater direct action"* than revolution, well, anarchists
have been saying that for over one hundred years -- we don't need a
Marxist to tell us our own ideas!

3. How does Mitchinson distort the London May Day demo?
-------------------------------------------------------

He then gets to the crux of the issue -- *"So, what comes next?"* He
goes on to assert:

> *"The organisers of the demo tell us this was not a protest in order
> to secure changes, reforms apparently are a waste of time. No, simply
> by participating in what they call the 'carnival' we become better
> people, and eventually more and more people will participate, until a
> critical mass is reached and we all ignore capitalism, don't pay our
> bills, until they go away. What an infantile flight of fancy!"*

Yes, indeed, what an infantile flight of fancy! However, the flight is
purely Mitchinson's. No one in RTS (or any other anarchist) makes such a
claim. Yes, RTS urged people to take part in a carnival -- as they
argue, *"[m]any of the great moments of revolutionary history were
carnivalesque . . . But we are not waiting for these moments of
carnivalesque revolution, we are trying to merge them into every moment
of everyday life. We cannot live on one-off days, a letting of stream,
safety values for society enabling life to return to normal the next day
or for hierarchical domination to return, as did in so many historical
revolutions. Revolution is not an act but a process and carnival can
prepare us for this process."* [**Maybe**, p. 9] Thus *"carnival"* is
**not** seen as an end to itself (as Mitchinson asserts) but rather an
aid to the creation of a revolutionary movement. Mitchinson confuses a
celebration of May Day with an insurrection! In the words of **Maybe**:

> *"And although Mayday is just one day, it seeks to incite continuous
> creativity and action towards a radical remaking of everyday life.
> Steeped in a history of daily struggle, of 'day in day out' organising
> for social change, but pulsating with the celebration of renewal and
> fresh hope that returns with the coming of summer. Mayday will always
> be a pivotal moment."* [**Maybe**, p. 5]

**Maybe** is clear -- we need to organise the daily struggle and enjoy
ourselves while we are at it. Mitchinson' distortion of that message is
pitiful.

4. Do anarchists really think *"the bosses will do nothing to defend their system"*?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

He continues:

> *"The genuine intentions of those protesting is not open to question.
> However, the way to hell is paved with many such good intentions. Are
> we really to believe that whilst we all 'place ourselves outside of
> capitalism', the bosses will do nothing to defend their system? This
> ostrich like tactic of burying our heads in the sand until they go
> away is not serious. Nor is it action. In reality, it is
> irresponsible, indirect inaction."*

The comment about *"indirect inaction"* is somewhat funny coming from a
political tendency which did not produce a movement of the importance of
Seattle 1999 and is now trying to recruit from it. But it would be
interesting to discover in which anarchist work comes the notion that we
do not think the bosses will not defend their system. Yes, Lenin did
claim that anarchists would *"lay down their arms"* after a revolution,
but as Murray Bookchin notes, anarchists are *"not so naive as to
believe anarchism could be established overnight. In imputing this
notion to Bakunin, Marx and Engels wilfully distorted the Russian
anarchist's views. Nor did the anarchists . . . believe that the
abolition of the state involved 'laying down arms' immediately after the
revolution. . ."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 213] Bakunin, for
example, thought the *"Commune would be organised by the standing
federation of the Barricades"* and that *"the federation of insurgent
associations, communes and provinces . . . [would] organise a
revolutionary force capable of defeating reaction . . . it is the very
fact of the expansion and organisation of the revolution for the purpose
of self-defence among the insurgent areas that will bring about the
triumph of the revolution."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p.
170 and p. 171]

Moreover, RTS actions have continually came into conflict with the state
and its forces of defence. Mitchinson seems to think that the
participants of RTS and its demonstrations are incapable of actually
understanding and learning from their experiences -- they have seen and
felt the capitalist system defending itself. Anyone on the J18, N30, A16
or M1 demos or just watching them on TV would have seen the capitalist
system defending itself with vigour -- and the protestors **fighting
back.** Rather than acknowledge the obvious, Mitchinson asserts
nonsense. The only person burying their head in the sand is Mitchinson
if he ignores the experiences of his own senses (and the basic
principles of materialism) in favour of an ideological diatribe with no
basis in reality.

What **is** *"irresponsible"* is misrepresenting the viewpoints of your
enemies and expecting them not to point our your errors.

5. How does Mitchinson misrepresent anarchist organisation?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson now moves onto the real enemy, anarchism. He asserts that:

> *"Anarchist organisations have always hidden behind a facade of
> 'self-organisation'. They claim to have no leaders, no policy etc. Yet
> who decides?"*

Yes, anarchist groups claim to have no leaders but they do not claim to
be without policies. Anyone with any comprehension of anarchist theory
and history would know this (just one example, Bakunin argued that we
needed to establish *"a genuine workers' program -- the policy of the
International [Workers Association]"* [*"The Policy of the
International"*, **The Basic Bakunin**, p. 100]).

Mitchinson asks the question, if we do not have leaders, *"who
decides?"* That in itself exposes the authoritarian nature of his
politics and the Bolshevik style party. He obviously cannot comprehend
that, without leaders deciding things for us, we manage our own affairs
-- we decide the policy of our organisations collectively, by the direct
democracy of the membership. Forgetting his early comment of that there
is *"no greater direct action than the seizing of control over our own
lives by the vast majority of society,"* he now asks how the vast
majority of society can seize control over our own lives without leaders
to tell us what to do!

Anarchists reject the idea of leaders -- instead we argue for the
***"leadership of ideas."** As we discuss this concept in [section
J.3.6](secJ3.html#secj36) and so will not do so here. However, the key
concept is that anarchists seek to spread their ideas by discussing
their politics **as equals** in popular organisations and convincing the
mass assemblies of these bodies by argument. Rather than using these
bodies to be elected to positions of power (i.e. leadership as it is
traditionally understood) anarchists consider it essential that power
remains in the hands of the base of an organisation and argue that the
policies of the organisation be decided by the member directly in
assemblies and co-ordinated by conferences of mandated, recallable
delegates (see [section A.2.9](secA2.html#seca29) for more discussion).*

This is to be expected, of course, as anarchists believe that a free
society can only be created by organisations which reflect the
principles of that society. Hence we see policies being made by those
affected by them and oppose attempts to turn self-managed organisations
into little more than vehicles to elect "leaders." A free society is a
self-managed one and can only be created by self-management in the class
struggle or revolutionary process. All that revolutionaries should do is
try and influence the decisions these organisations make by discussing
our ideas with their membership -- simply as any other member could in
the mass assemblies the organisation is built upon. Any attempt by
revolutionaries to seize power upon behalf of these organisations means
destroying their revolutionary potential and the revolution itself by
replacing the participation of all with the power of a few (the party).

Thus anarchist theory and practice is very clear on the question *"who
decides"* -- it is those who are affected by the question via group
assemblies and conferences of mandated, recallable delegates. Rather
than have *"no policy,"* policy in an anarchist organisation is decided
directly by the membership. Without *"leaders"* -- without power
delegated into the hands of a few -- who else **could** make the
decisions and policy? That Mitchinson cannot comprehend this implies
that he cannot envision a society without a few telling the many what to
do.

He continues:

> *"If there was no leadership and no policy then there could be no
> action of any kind. The recent demonstrations have been highly
> organised and co-ordinated on an international scale. Good, so it
> should be. However, without organisation and democracy no-one, except
> a clique at the top, has any say in why, where and when. Such a
> movement will never bring international capital trembling to its
> knees."*

Firstly, we must point out that these demonstrations which have spread
like wild-fire across the world have, most definitely, made
international capital nervous. Secondly, we must point out that no
Leninist vanguards were involved in organising them (a few members
turned up to sell papers later, once their significance had registered
with the party leadership). Thirdly, we must point out that no Leninist
vanguard has made *"international capital"* tremble in the knees for
quite a few decades -- since 1917, only Stalinist vanguards have had any
effect (and, of course, *"international capital"* soon realised they
could work with the Bolsheviks and other "Communist" leaders as one
ruling elite with another). It seems somewhat ironic that a Leninist,
whose movement was noticeable in its absence, mocks the first movement
to scare the ruling class for nearly 30 years.

Secondly, we must note that the policy decided upon by the multitude of
groups across the world was decided upon by the members of those groups.
They practised organisation and **direct** democracy to make their
policy decisions and implement them. Given that Mitchinson wonders how
people can make decisions without leaders, his comments about rule by
*"a clique at the top"* are somewhat ironic. As the history of the
Russian Revolution indicates, a highly centralised state system (which
mimics the highly centralised party) soon results in rule by the top
party officials, not by the mass of people.

Mitchinson again decides to flog his fallacy of organisation versus
non-organisation:

> *"One of the best known anarchist groups in Britain, Reclaim the
> Streets, save the game away in their spoof Mayday publication,
> 'Maybe'. Incidentally, who wrote these articles, who decided what went
> in and what didn't, who edited it, where did the money come from? Our
> intention here is not to accuse them of dodgy financing - simply to
> point out that this 'no leaders' stuff is a self-organised myth."*

It states who put together **MayDay** on page 5 of the paper. It was
*"an organic group of 'guerrilla gardeners'"* -- in other words, members
of **Reclaim the Streets** who desired to produce the paper for that
event. These people would have joined the group producing it via the
weekly RTS open meetings and would have been held accountable to that
same open meeting. No great mystery there -- if you have even the
slightest vision of how a non-hierarchical organisation works. Rather
than being a *"myth"*, RTS shows that we do not need to follow leaders
-- instead we can manage our own organisations directly and freely
participate in projects organised via the main open meeting. Writing
articles, editing, and so on are not the work of *"leaders"* -- rather
they are simply tasks that need doing. They do not imply a leadership
role -- if they did then every hack journalist is a *"leader."*

He continues to attack what he cannot understand:

> *"On page 20 they announce 'Reclaim the streets is non-hierarchical,
> spontaneous and self-organised. We have no leaders, no committee, no
> board of directors, no spokes people. There is no centralised unit for
> decision making, strategic planning and production of ideology. There
> is no membership and no formalised commitment. There is no master plan
> and no pre-defined agenda.'*
>
> "There are two problems here. Firstly who is 'we', who made the above
> statement, and who decided it. Secondly, if it were true, it would not
> be something of which to be proud. Whether you like it or not, there
> is no way the capitalist system will ever be overthrown by such a
> haphazard and slipshod method."

Taking the first issue, *"who is 'we,' who made the above statement, and
who decided it."* Why, it is the membership of RTS -- decided via their
weekly open meeting (as mentioned on that page). That Mitchinson cannot
comprehend this says a lot about his politics and vision. He cannot
comprehend self-management, direct democracy. He seems not to be able to
understand that groups can make decisions collectively, without having
to elect leaders to make any decisions for them.

Taking the second issue, it is clear that Mitchinson fails to understand
the role of RTS (and other anarchist groups). Anarchists do not try to
overthrow capitalism **on behalf of others** -- they urge them to
overthrow it themselves, by their own direct action. The aim of groups
like RTS is to encourage people to take direct action, to fight the
powers that be and, in the process, create their own organs of
self-management and resistance. Such a process of working class
self-activity and self-organisation in struggle is the starting process
of every revolution. People in struggle create their own organisations
-- such as soviets (workers' councils), factory committees, community
assemblies -- through which they start to manage their own affairs and,
hopefully, overthrow the state and abolish capitalism. It is not the
task of RTS to overthrow capitalism, it is the task of the whole
population.

Moreover, many anarchists do see the need for a specific anarchist
organisation -- three national federations exist in the UK, for example.
RTS does not need to organise in this fashion simply because such groups
**already** exist. It is not its role -- its role is a means to
encourage self-activity and direct action as well as raising libertarian
ideas in a popular manner. For more "serious" political organisation,
people can and do turn to other anarchist groups and federations.

The street carnival principle of RTS is precisely the type of organising
anarchists excel at -- namely fun organising that catches the fun and
excitement of popular direct action and, most importantly, **gets people
out on the streets** -- something Marxists have failed to do very well
(if at all). It's a small step from organising a street carnival to
further, "more serious" organising. Anarchist revolution is about
bringing joy back into human lives, not endless (and often dishonest)
polemics on the ideas of long dead philosophers. Rather, it is about
creating a philosophy which, while inspired by past thinkers, is not
subservient to them and aims to base itself on **current** struggles and
needs rather than past ones. It is also about building a new political
culture, one that is popular, active, street-based (versus ivory-tower
elitist), and above all, fun. Only this way can we catch the imagination
of everyday people and move them from resigned apathy to active
resistance. The Marxists have tried their approach, and it has been a
resounding failure -- everyday people consider Marxism at best
irrelevant, and at worst, inhuman and lifeless. Fortunately, anarchists
are not following the Marxist model of organising, having learned from
history

Thus Mitchinson fails to understand the role of RTS or its position in
the UK anarchist movement.

He then asserts:

> *"There is no theory, no coherent analysis of society, no alternative
> programme. To brag of a lack of direction, a lack of purpose and a
> lack of coherence, in the face of such a highly organised and brutal
> enemy as international capital, is surely the height of
> irresponsibility."*

Firstly, anyone reading **Maybe** or other RTS publications will quickly
see there is theory, coherent analysis and an alternative vision. As
Mitchinson has obviously read **Maybe** we can only assume his claim is
a conscious lie. Secondly, RTS in the quoted passage clearly do **not**
*"brag of a lack of direction, a lack of purpose and a lack of
coherence."* They do state there is no *"centralised unit for
decision-making"* -- which is true, they have a **decentralised** unit
for decision-making (direct democracy in open meetings). There is *"no
master-plan,"* etc. as any plans are decided upon by these open
meetings. There is no pre-defined agenda because, as a democratic
organisation, it is up to the open meeting to define their own agenda.

It is only Mitchinson's **assumption** that only centralised parties,
with leaders making the decisions, can have *"direction,"* *"purpose"*
and *"coherence."* As can be seen **by their actions** that RTS **does**
have direction, purpose and coherence. Needless to say, while other
anarchists may be critical about RTS and its actions, we do not deny
that it has been an effective organisation, involving a great many
people in its actions who would probably not be involved in political
activities. Rather than being *"irresponsible,"* RTS shows the validity
of libertarian organisation and its effectiveness. No Marxist Party has
remotely approached RTS's successes in terms of involving people in
political actions. This is hardly a surprise.

6. How does Mitchinson define anarchism wrongly?
------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson states:

> *"In reality the leaders of these movements are not devoid of
> ideology, they are anarchists. Anarchism is not simply a term of
> abuse, it comes from the Greek word 'anarchos' meaning 'without
> government'. To anarchists the state - the institutions of government,
> the army, police, courts etc. - is the root cause of all that is wrong
> in the world. It must be destroyed and replaced not with any new form
> of government, but the immediate introduction of a stateless
> society."*

Firstly, *"anarchos"* actually means *"without authority,"* or
*"contrary to authority"* (as Kropotkin put it). It does **not** mean
"without government" as such (although it commonly is used that way).
This means that anarchism does **not** consider the state as *"the root
of all that is wrong with the world"* -- we consider it, like capitalism
(wage slavery), patriarchy, hierarchy in general, etc., as a symptom of
a deeper problem, namely authority (or, more precisely, authoritarian
social relations, hierarchical power -- of which class power is a
subset). Therefore anarchist theory is concerned with more than just the
state -- it is against capitalism just as much as it is against the
state, for example.

Thus, to state the obvious, as anyone familiar with anarchist theory
could tell you, anarchists do not think that *"the state"* is the root
of all that is wrong in the world. Marxists have asserted this for years
-- unfortunately for them, repetition does not make something true!
Rather, anarchists see the state as **one** of the causes of evil in the
world and the main protector of all the rest. We also stress that in
order to combat all the evils, we need to destroy the state so that we
are in a position to abolish the other evils by being in control of our
own lives. For example, in order to abolish capitalism -- i.e. for
workers' to seize the means of life -- the state, which protects
property rights, must be destroyed. Without doing so, the police and
army will come and take back that which the workers' have taken.
However, we do not claim that the state causes all of our problems -- we
do claim that getting rid of the state is an essential act, on which
many others are dependent.

As Brian Morris argues:

> *"Another criticism of anarchism is that it has a narrow view of
> politics: that it sees the state as the fount of all evil, ignoring
> other aspects of social and economic life. This is a misrepresentation
> of anarchism. It partly derives from the way anarchism has been
> defined, and partly because Marxist historians have tried to exclude
> anarchism from the broader socialist movement. But when one examines
> the writings of classical anarchists. . . as well as the character of
> anarchist movements. . . it is clearly evident that it has never had
> this limited vision. It has always challenged all forms of authority
> and exploitation, and has been equally critical of capitalism and
> religion as it has been of the state."* [*"Anthropology and
> Anarchism,"* **Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed**, no. 45, p, p. 40]

As can be seen, Mitchinson repeats into the usual Marxist straw man.

7. Does anarchism reject fighting for reforms?
----------------------------------------------

After asserting the usual Marxist falsehoods about anarchism, he moves
on:

> *"This opposition to the state and authority leads to a rejection of
> participation in any form of parliamentary activity, belonging to a
> political party or fighting for any reforms, that is political change
> through the state."*

Again Mitchinson smuggles in a falsehood into his "analysis." Anarchists
do not reject *"fighting for any reforms"* -- far from it. We do reject
parliamentary activity, that is true, but we think that reforms can and
must be won. We see such reforms coming via the direct action of those
who desire them -- for example, by workers striking for better working
conditions, more wages and so. Anyone with even a passing awareness of
anarchist thought would know this. Indeed, that is what direct action
means -- it was coined by French anarcho-syndicalists to describe the
struggle for reforms within capitalism!

As for rejecting parliamentary activity, yes, anarchists do reject this
form of "action." However, we do so for reasons Mitchinson fails to
mention. [Section J.2](secJ2.html) of the FAQ discusses the reasons why
anarchists support direct action and oppose electioneering as a means of
both reform and for revolution.

Similarly, anarchists reject political parties but we do not reject
political organisations -- i.e. specific anarchist groups. The
difference is that political parties are generally organised in a
hierarchical fashion and anarchist federations are not -- we try and
create the new world when we organise rather than reproducing the traits
of the current, bourgeois, one.

Needless to say, Mitchinson seeks to recruit the people he is slandering
and so holds out an olive-branch by stating that *"[o]f course, Marxism
is opposed to the brutal domination of the capitalist state too. Marx
saw a future society without a state but instead 'an association in
which the free development of each is the condition for the free
development of all.' That is a self-governing people. The question
however is how can this be achieved?"*

Yes, as Bakunin argued, Marxists do not reject our programme out of
hand. They claim to also seek a free society and so Mitchinson is
correct -- the question is how can this be achieved. Anarchists argue
that a self-governing people can only be achieved by self-governing
means -- *"Bakunin . . . advocated socialist (i.e., libertarian) means
in order to achieve a socialist (i.e., libertarian) society."* [Arthur
Lehning, *"Introduction"*, **Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p.
27] Thus means and ends must be consistent -- revolutionary movements
must be organised in a way that reflects the society we want to create.
Thus a self-governing society can only be created by self-governing
organisations and a self-governing movement. If the revolutionary
movement reflect bourgeois society -- for example, is hierarchical --
then it cannot create a free society. That is the rationale for the way
anarchist groups organise, including RTS. Marxists, as we will see,
disagree and consider how a revolutionary movement organises itself as
irrelevant.

Also, we must note that earlier Mitchinson denied that a self-governing
organisation could exist when he was discussing RTS. He asserted that
*"[i]f there was no leadership and no policy then there could be no
action of any kind."* Now he claims that it is possible, but only
**after** the revolution. We will note the obvious contradiction -- how
do people become capable of self-government post-revolution if they do
not practice it pre-revolution and, obviously, during the revolution?

8. Does anarchism see the state as the root of all problems?
------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson moves on to assert that:

> *"Since anarchism sees in the state the root of all problems, it
> therefore believes these problems will be resolved by the destruction
> of the state."*

As noted above, anarchists do **not** see in the state the root of all
problems. We do urge the destruction of the state but that is because
the state is the protector of existing society and in order to transform
that society we need get rid of it. Kropotkin, for example, was well
aware of *"the evil done by Capitalism and the State that supports it."*
[**Evolution and Environment**, p. 83] Rather than seeing the State as
the root of all evil, anarchists are well aware that evil is caused by
many things -- particularly capitalism -- and that the state, as well as
causing its own evils, supports and protects others. Thus anarchists are
aware that the state is a tool for minority rule and only one source of
evil.

Mitchinson, after misrepresenting anarchist thought, states:

> *"Marxism, meanwhile, sees the division of society into classes, a
> minority who own the means of producing wealth, and the majority of us
> whose labour is the source of that wealth, as the crux of the matter.
> It is this class division of society which gives rise to the state -
> because the minority need a special force to maintain their rule over
> the majority - which has evolved over thousands of years into the
> complicated structures we see today."*

Anarchists would agree, as far as this goes. Bakunin argued that the
State *"is authority, domination, and forced, organised by the
property-owning and so-called enlightened classes against the masses."*
He saw the social revolution as destroying capitalism and the state at
the same time, that is *"to overturn the State's domination, and that of
the privileged classes whom it solely represents."* [**The Basic
Bakunin**, p. 140] The idea that the state is a means to ensure class
rule is one anarchists, as can be seen, would agree with.

However, anarchists do not reduce their understanding of the state to
this simplistic Marxist analysis. While being well aware that the state
is the means of ensuring the domination of an economic elite, anarchists
recognise that the state machine also has interests of its own. The
state, for anarchists, is the delegation of power into the hands of a
few. This creates, by its very nature, a privileged position for those
at the top of the hierarchy:

> *"A government, that is a group of people entrusted with making the
> laws and empowered to use the collective force to oblige each
> individual to obey them, is already a privileged class and cut off
> from the people. As any constituted body would do, it will
> instinctively seek to extend its powers, to be beyond public control,
> to impose its own policies and to give priority to its special
> interests. Having been put in a privileged position, the government is
> already at odds with the people whose strength it disposes of."*
> [Malatesta, **Anarchy**, p. 34]

Thus, while it is true that the state (particularly under capitalism)
acts as the agent of the capitalist class, it does not mean that it does
not have interests of its own. The State has developed as a means of
imposing minority rule -- that much anarchists and Marxists can agree
upon. To do so it has developed certain features, notably delegation of
power into the hands of a few. This feature of the state is a product of
its function. However, function and feature are inseparable -- retain
the feature and the function will be re-established. In other words,
maintain the state and minority rule will be re-established.

The simplistic class analysis of the state has always caused Marxists
problems, particularly Trotskyists who used it to deny the obvious class
nature of Stalinist Russia. Rather than see the USSR as a class society
in which the State bureaucracy exploited and oppressed the working class
for its own benefits, Trotskyists argued it was an autocratic,
privileged bureaucracy in a classless society. As anarchist Camillo
Berneri argued:

> *"In history there is no absurdity. An autocratic bureaucracy is a
> class, therefore it is not absurd that it should exist in a society
> where classes remain -- the bureaucratic class and the proletarian
> class. If the USSR was a 'classless' society, it would also be a
> society without a bureaucratic autocracy, which is the natural fruit
> of the permanent existence of the State."* [*"The State and Classes"*,
> **Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review**, no, 4, p. 49]

The weakness (or incompleteness) of the Marxist understanding of the
state can best be seen by Trotsky's and his followers lack of
understanding of Stalinism. As the state owned all the land and means of
production, there could be no classes and so the Soviet Union must be a
classless society. However, the obvious privileges of the bureaucracy
could not be denied (as Trotsky was once a leading bureaucrat, he saw
and experienced them at first hand). But as the state bureaucracy could
not be a class and have class interests (by definition), Trotsky could
not see the wood for the trees. The actual practice of Leninism in power
is enough to expose its own theoretical weaknesses.

9. Why is Mitchinson wrong about the *"Abolishion [i.e. Abolition] of the state"*?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson moves on to argue that the *"modern capitalist state can wear
many guises, monarchy, republic, dictatorship, but in the end its
purpose remains the same, to maintain the minority rule of the
capitalist class. Marxism's goal therefore is not simply to abolish the
state, but to put an end to class society."* Needless to say, that is
also anarchism's goal. As Bakunin argued, *"political transformation . .
. [and] economic transformation . . . must be accomplished together and
simultaneously."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 106] So, as can be seen,
anarchism's goal is not simply abolishing the state, but to put an end
to class society. That anarchists have always argued the state and
capitalism must be destroyed at the same time is easily discovered from
reading their works.

Continuing this theme he argues that the state *"was born with the split
of society into classes to defend private property. So long as there are
classes there will be a state. So, how can class society be ended? Not
by its denial, but only by the victory of one of the contending classes.
Triumph for capitalism spells ruin for millions."*

Of course, we could point out here that many anthropologists disagree
with the claim that the state is a product of class society. As Michael
Taylor summarises, the *"evidence does not give this proposition a great
deal of support. Much of the evidence which has been offered in support
of it shows only that the primary states, not long after their
emergence, were economically stratified. But this is of course
consistent also with the simultaneous rise . . . of political and
economic stratification, or with the **prior** development of the state
-- i.e. of **political** stratification -- and the creation of economic
stratification by the ruling class."* [**Community, Anarchy and
Liberty**, p. 132]

Also, of course, as should be obvious from what we have said previously,
anarchists do not think class society can be ended by "denial." As is
clear from even a quick reading of any anarchist thinker, anarchists
seek to end class society as well as the state. However, we reject as
simplistic the Marxist notion that the state exists purely to defend
classes. The state has certain properties **because it is a state** and
one of these is that it creates a bureaucratic class around it due to
its centralised, hierarchical nature. Within capitalism, the state
bureaucracy is part of the ruling class and (generally) under the
control of the capitalist class. However, to generalise from this
specific case is wrong as the state bureaucracy is a class in itself --
and so trying to abolish classes without abolishing the state is doomed
to failure.

10. Why is Mitchinson's comment that we face either *"socialism or barbarism"* actually undermine his case?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson continues:

> *"As Marx once explained the choice before us is not socialism or the
> status quo, but socialism or barbarism."*

We should point out that it Rosa Luxemburg who is usually associated
with this quote. She made her famous comment during the First World War.
The start of this war saw the Marxist German Social Democratic Party
(and a host of others) vote for war credits in Parliament. This party
was a mass workers' party which aimed to used every means, including
elections, to gain reforms for the working class. The net end result of
this strategy was the voting for war credits and the support of their
state and ruling class in the war -- that is, the betrayal of the
fundamental principles of socialism.

This event did not happen out of the blue. It was the end result of
years of working within the bourgeois political system, of using
elections (*"political activity"*) as a means of struggle. The Social
Democratic Parties had already been plagued with reformist elements for
years. These elements, again, did not come from nowhere but were rather
the response to what the party was actually doing. They desired to
reform the party to bring its rhetoric in-line with its practice. As one
of the most distinguished historians of this period put it, the
*"distinction between the contenders remained largely a subjective one,
a difference of ideas in the evaluation of reality rather than a
difference in the realm of action."* [C. Schorske, **German Social
Democracy**, p. 38] The debacle of 1914 was a logical result of the
means chosen, the evidence was already there for all to see (except,
apparently, Lenin who praised the *"fundamentals of parliamentary
tactics"* of the German and International Social Democracy and how they
were *"at the same time implacable on questions of principle and always
directed to the accomplishment of the final aim"* in his obituary of
August Bebel in 1913! [Marx, Engels and Lenin, **Anarchism and
Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 248])

Needless to say, this result had been predicted by Bakunin over 40 years
previously. And Mitchinson wants us to repeat this strategy? As Marx
said, history repeats itself -- first it is tragedy, second time it is
farce.

11. Why is Mitchinson wrong to assert anarchists do not believe in defending a revolution?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson argues that the *"victory of the working class can only mean
the destruction of the capitalist state. Will the capitalists take
defeat like sporting ladies and gentlemen, retiring quietly to the
pavilion? No, all history suggests that they would not. The workers
would need to create a new state, for the first time to defend the rule
of the majority over the minority."*

Yes, indeed, all history **does** show that a ruling class will not
retire quietly and a revolution will need to defend itself. If
anarchists **did** believe that they would retire peacefully then
Marxists would be correct to attack us. However, Marxist assertions are
false. Indeed, they must think anarchists are morons if they genuinely
do think we do not believe in defending a revolution. A few quotes
should suffice to expose these Marxist claims as lies:

> *"Commune will be organised by the standing federation of the
> Barricades. . . [T]he federation of insurgent associations, communes
> and provinces . . . [would] organise a revolutionary force capable of
> defeating reaction . . . it is the very fact of the expansion and
> organisation of the revolution for the purpose of self-defence among
> the insurgent areas that will bring about the triumph of the
> revolution."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, pp. 170-1]
>
> *"[L]et us suppose . . . it is Paris that starts [the revolution] . .
> . Paris will naturally make haste to organise itself as best it can,
> in revolutionary style, after the workers have joined into
> associations and made a clean sweep of all the instruments of labour,
> every kind of capital and building; armed and organised by streets and
> **quartiers**, they will form the revolutionary federation of all the
> **quartiers**, the federative commune. . . All the French and foreign
> revolutionary communes will then send representatives to organise the
> necessary common services . . . and to organise common defence against
> the enemies of the Revolution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 178-9]

Bakunin was well aware that revolution implied "civil war" -- i.e.
attempts by the ruling class to maintain its power (see, for example,
his *"Letters to a Frenchman"* in **Bakunin on Anarchism**). As can be
seen, Bakunin was well aware of the needs to defend a revolution after
destroying the state and abolishing capitalism. Similarly we discover
Malatesta arguing that we should *"[a]rm all the population,"* and the
*"creation of a voluntary militia, without powers to interfere as
militia in the life of the community, but only to deal with any armed
attacks by the forces of reaction to re-establish themselves, or to
resist outside intervention by countries as yet not in a state of
revolution."* [**Life and Ideas**, p. 170 and p. 166] In Malatesta's
words:

> *"But, by all means, let us admit that the governments of the still
> unemancipated countries were to want to, and could, attempt to reduce
> free people to a state of slavery once again. Would this people
> require a government to defend itself? To wage war men are needed who
> have all the necessary geographical and mechanical knowledge, and
> above all large masses of the population willing to go and fight. A
> government can neither increase the abilities of the former nor the
> will and courage of the latter. And the experience of history teaches
> us that a people who really want to defend their own country are
> invincible: and in Italy everyone knows that before the corps of
> volunteers (anarchist formations) thrones topple, and regular armies
> composed of conscripts or mercenaries disappear. . . [Some people]
> seem almost to believe that after having brought down government and
> private property we would allow both to be quietly built up again,
> because of a respect for the **freedom** of those who might feel the
> need to be rulers and property owners. A truly curious way of
> interpreting our ideas!"* [**Anarchy**, pp. 40-1]

Not only do we have this theoretical position, we can also point to
concrete historical examples -- the Makhnovist movement in the Russian
Revolution and the CNT militias during the Spanish Revolution, among
others -- that prove that anarchists do recognise the need and
importance of defending a successful revolution.

Therefore, statements asserting that anarchists are against defending a
revolution are either spreading a conscious lie or a product of deep
ignorance.

Thus the question is **not** one of defending or not defending a
revolution. The question is **how** do we defend it (and, another key
question, what **kind** of revolution do we aim for). Marxists urge us
to *"create a new state, for the first time to defend the rule of the
majority over the minority."* Anarchists reply that every state is based
on the delegation of power into the hands of a minority and so cannot be
used to defend the rule of the majority over the minority. Rather, it
would be the rule of those who claim to represent the majority. The
confusion between people power and party power is at the root of why
Leninism is not revolutionary.

Mitchinson then quotes Lenin and Trotsky to defend his assertion:

> *"The proletariat needs the state only temporarily. We do not at all
> disagree with the anarchists on the question of the abolition of the
> state as the aim. We maintain that, to achieve this aim, we must
> temporarily make use of the instruments resources and methods of state
> power against the exploiters."* [Lenin]
>
> *"Marxists are wholly in agreement with the anarchists in regard to
> the final goal: the liquidation of the state. Marxists are statist
> only to the extent that one cannot achieve the liquidation of the
> state simply by ignoring it."* [Trotsky]

Of course, quoting Lenin or Trotsky when they make a false assertion
does not turn lies into truth. As proven above, anarchists are well
aware of the necessity of overthrowing the state by revolution **and**
defending that revolution against attempts to defeat it. To state
otherwise is to misrepresent anarchist theory on this subject. Moreover,
despite Trotsky's claims, anarchists are aware that you do not destroy
something by ignoring it. The real question is thus **not** whether to
defend a revolution or whether to shatter the state machine. The
questions are, **how** do you shatter the state, what do you replace
existing society with and how do you defend a revolution. To state
otherwise is to build a strawman -- unfortunately much of Lenin's
"masterpiece" **The State and Revolution** is based on destroying this
self-created strawman.

12. Would the "workers' state" really be different, as Mitchinson claims?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson argues that from *"the very beginning this would be like no
previous state machine. From day one it would be in effect a
semi-state."* The question is, for anarchists, whether this "semi-state"
is marked by the delegation of power into the hands of a government. If
so, then the "semi-state" is no such thing -- it is a state like any
other and so an instrument of minority rule. Yes, this minority may
state it represents the majority but in practice it can only represent
itself and claim that is what the majority desires.

Hence, for anarchists, *"the essence of the state . . . [is] centralised
power **or to put it another way the coercive authority** of which the
state enjoys the monopoly, in that organisation of violence know as
'government'; in the hierarchical despotism, juridical, police and
military despotism that imposes laws on everyone."* [Luigi Fabbri, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 24-5] The so-called "semi-state" is nothing of the kind --
it is a centralised power in which a few govern the many. Therefore, the
"workers' state" would be "workers" in name only.

Mitchinson continues:

> *"The task of all previous revolutions was to seize state power. From
> the experience of the Paris Commune of 1871 Marx and Engels concluded
> that it would not be possible for the workers to simply use the old
> state apparatus, they would instead have to replace it with an
> entirely new one, to serve the interests of the majority and lay the
> basis for a socialist society."*

Needless to say, he forgets the **key** question -- **who** is to seize
power. Is it the majority, directly, or a minority (the leaders of a
party) who claim to represent the majority. Leninists are clear, it is
to be the party, not the working class as a whole. They confuse party
power with class power. In the words of Lenin:

> *"The very presentation of the question -- 'dictatorship of the Party
> **or** dictatorship of the class, dictatorship (Party) of the leaders
> **or** dictatorship (Party) of the masses?' -- is evidence of the most
> incredible and hopeless confusion of mind . . . [because] classes are
> usually . . . led by political parties. . . "*

And:

> *"To go so far in this matter as to draw a contrast in general between
> the dictatorship of the masses and the dictatorship of the leaders, is
> ridiculously absurd and stupid."* [**Left-wing Communism: An Infantile
> Disorder**, pp. 25-6 and p. 27]

However, what is **truly** stupid is confusing the rule by a minority
with that of the majority managing their own affairs. The two things are
different, they generate different social relationships and to confuse
the two is to lay the ground work for the rule by a bureaucratic elite,
a dictatorship of state officials **over** the working class.

Now we come to the usual Leninist claims about Bolshevik theory:

> *"To ensure that the workers maintain control over this state, Lenin
> argued for the election of all officials who should be held
> accountable and subject to recall, and paid no more than the wage of a
> skilled worker. All bureaucratic tasks should be rotated. There should
> be no special armed force standing apart from the people, and we would
> add, all political parties except fascists should be allowed to
> organise."*

This is what Lenin, essentially, said he desired in **The State and
Revolution** (Mitchinson misses out one key aspect, to which we will
return later). Anarchists reply in three ways.

Firstly, we note that *"much that passes for 'Marxism' in **State and
Revolution** is pure anarchism -- for example, the substitution of
revolutionary militias for professional armed bodies and the
substitution of organs of self-management for parliamentary bodies. What
is authentically Marxist in Lenin's pamphlet is the demand for 'strict
centralism,' the acceptance of a 'new' bureaucracy, and the
identification of soviets with a state."* [Murray Bookchin,
**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 213] As an example, let us look at the
recall of "officials" (inspired by the Paris Commune). We find this in
Bakunin's and Proudhon's work **before** it was applied by the
Communards and praised by Marx. Bakunin in 1868 argued for a
*"Revolutionary Communal Council"* composed of *"delegates . . . vested
with plenary but accountable and removable mandates."* [**Michael
Bakunin: Selected Writings**, pp. 170-1] Proudhon's election manifesto
of 1848 argued for *"universal suffrage and as a consequence of
universal suffrage, we want implementation of the binding mandate.
Politicians balk at it! Which means that in their eyes, the people, in
electing representatives, do not appoint mandatories but rather abjure
their sovereignty! That is assuredly not socialism: it is not even
democracy."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 63] As can be seen,
Lenin's recommendations were first proposed by anarchists.

Thus the positive aspects of Lenin's work are libertarian in nature,
**not** Marxist as such. Indeed given how much time is spent on the
Paris Commune (an essentially libertarian revolt obviously inspired by
Proudhon's ideas) his work is more libertarian than Marxist, as Bookchin
makes clear. It is the non-libertarian aspects which helped to undermine
the anarchist elements of the work.

Secondly, Lenin does not mention, never mind discuss, the role of the
Bolshevik Party would have in the new "semi-state." Indeed, the party is
mentioned only in passing. That in itself indicates the weakness of
using **The State and Revolution** as a guide book to Leninist theory or
practice. Given the importance of the role of the party in Lenin's
previous and latter works, it suggests that to quote **The State and
Revolution** as proof of Leninism's democratic heart leaves much to be
desired. And even **The State and Revolution**, in its one serious
reference to the Party, is ambiguous in the extreme:

> *"By educating the workers' party, Marxism educates the vanguard of
> the proletariat which is capable of assuming power and **of leading
> the whole people** to Socialism, of directing and organising the new
> order, of being the teacher, the guide, the leader of all the toiling
> and exploited in the task of building up their social life without the
> bourgeoisie and against the bourgeoisie."* [**The Essential Lenin**,
> p. 288]

Is it the vanguard **or** the proletariat which is *"capable of assuming
power"*? The answer is important as a **social** revolution requires the
fullest participation of the formerly oppressed masses in the management
of their own affairs. In the context of the rest of **The State and
Revolution** it could be argued it is the proletariat. However, this
cannot be squared with Lenin's (or Trotsky's) post-October arguments and
practices or the resolution of the Second World Congress of the
Communist International which stated that *"[e]very class struggle is a
political struggle. The goal of this struggle . . . is the conquest of
political power. Political power cannot be seized, organised and
operated except through a political party."* [cited by Duncan Hallas,
**The Comintern**, p. 35] It is obvious that if the party rules, the
working class does not. A socialist society cannot be built without the
participation, self-activity and self-management of the working class.
Thus the question of **who** makes decisions and **how** they do so is
essential -- if it is not the masses then the slide into bureaucracy is
inevitable.

Thus to quote **The State and Revolution** proves nothing for anarchists
-- it does not discuss the key question of the party and so fails to
present a clear picture of Leninist politics and their immediate aims.
As soon becomes clear if you look at Leninism in power -- i.e. what it
actually did when it had the chance, to which we now turn.

Thirdly, we point to what he actually **did** in power. In this we
follow Marx, who argued that we should judge people by what they do
rather than what they say. We will concentrate on the pre-Civil War
(October 1917 to May 1918) period to indicate that this breaking of
promises started **before** the horrors of Civil War can be claimed to
have forced these decisions onto the Bolsheviks.

Before the out-break of Civil War, the Bolsheviks had replaced election
of *"all officials"* by appointment from above in many areas of life --
for example, they abolished the election of officers in the Red Army and
replaced workers' self-management in production with one-man management,
both forms of democracy being substituted by appointed from above. In
addition, by the end of April, 1918, Lenin **himself** was arguing
*"[o]bedience, and unquestioning obedience at that, during work to the
one-man decisions of Soviet directors, of the dictators elected **or
appointed** by Soviet institutions, vested with dictatorial powers."*
[**Six Theses on the Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government**, p. 44
-- our emphasis] Moreover, the Soviet Constitution stated that *"[e]very
commissar [of the Council of People's Commissars -- i.e. the Soviet
government] has a collegium (committee) of which he is the president,
and the members of which are appointed by the Council of People's
Commissars."* Appointment was the rule at the very heights of the state.
The *"election of all officers"* (*"without exception"* [Lenin, **The
State and Revolution**, p. 302]) had ended by month six of the
revolution even in Lenin's own writings -- and **before** the start of
the Civil War.

Lenin also argued in mid-April 1918 that the *"socialist character of
Soviet, i.e. **proletarian**, democracy"* lies, in part, in *"the people
themselves determin[ing] the order and time of elections."* [**The
Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government**, pp. 36-7] Given that *"the
government [had] continually postponed the new general elections to the
Petrograd Soviet, the term of which had ended in March 1918"* because it
*"feared that the opposition parties would show gains"* Lenin's comments
seem hypocritical in the extreme. [Samuel Farber, **Before Stalinism**,
p. 22]

Moreover, the Bolsheviks did not stay true to Lenin's claim in **The
State and Revolution** that *"since the majority of the people
**itself** suppresses its oppressors, a 'special force' is **no longer
necessary**"* as so *"in place of a **special** repressive force, the
whole population itself came on the scene."* In this way the *"state
machine"* would be *"the armed masses of workers who become transformed
into a universal people's militia."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 301, p. 320 and
p. 347] Instead they created a political police force (the Cheka) and a
standing army (in which elections were a set aside by decree). These
were special, professional, armed forces standing apart from the people
and unaccountable to them. Indeed, they were used to repress strikes and
working class unrest. So much for Mitchinson's claim that *"there should
be no special armed force standing apart from the people"* -- it did not
last three months (the Cheka was founded two months into the revolution,
the Red Army was created in early 1918 and elections set aside by March
of that year).

Lastly, the Bolsheviks banned newspapers from the start -- including
other socialist papers. In addition, they did not allow other political
tendencies to organise freely. The repression started **before** the
Civil War with the attack, by the Cheka, in April 1918 on the anarchist
movements in Petrograd and Moscow. While repression obviously existed
during the Civil War, it is significant that it, in fact, started
**before** it began. During the Civil War, the Bolsheviks repressed all
political parties, including the Mensheviks even though they
*"consistently pursued a policy of peaceable opposition to the Bolshevik
regime, a policy conducted by strictly legitimate means"* and
*"[i]ndividual Mensheviks who joined organisations aiming at the
overthrow of the Soviet Government were expelled from the Menshevik
Party."* [George Leggett, **The Cheka: Lenin's Political Police**, pp.
318-9 and p. 332] In fact, repression **increased** after the end of the
Civil War -- a strange fact if it was that war which necessitated
repression in the first place.

Moreover, Mitchinson fails to mention Lenin's argument that, like the
Paris Commune, the workers' state would be based on a fusion of
executive and administrative functions in the hands of the workers'
delegates. This is hardly surprising, as Lenin created an executive body
(the Council of People's Commissars) immediately after the October
Revolution. This division of executive and administrative powers was
written into the Soviet Constitution. So much for **The State and
Revolution** -- its promises did not last a night.

Thus, his claims that the "semi-state" would not be like any other state
are contradicted by the actual experience of Bolshevism in power. For
anarchists, this comes as no surprise as they are well aware that the
state machine does not (indeed, **cannot**) represent the interests of
the working classes due to its centralised, hierarchical and elitist
nature -- all it can do is represent the interests of the party in
power, its own bureaucratic needs and privileges and slowly, but surely,
remove itself from popular control. Hence the movement away from popular
control -- it is the nature of centralised power to remove itself from
control from below, control by the masses, particularly when all other
focal points of working class self-management have been abolished as
being no longer required as we have a "semi-state."

Mitchinson seems to want us to look purely at Bolshevik theory and not
its practice. It is exactly what supporters of capitalism desire us to
do -- in theory, capitalism is based on free agreement and free exchange
between autonomous individuals but in practice it is a system of
inequality which violates the autonomy of individuals and makes a
mockery of free agreement.

In a way, **The State and Revolution** laid out the foundations and
sketched out the essential features of an alternative to Bolshevik power
-- as noted, that system would be essentially libertarian. Only the
pro-Leninist tradition has used Lenin's work, almost to quiet their
conscience, because Lenin, once in power, ignored it totally. Such is
the nature of the state -- as Kropotkin and all other anarchists have
argued, there can be no such thing as a "revolutionary government."
Conflict will inevitably arise between the party which aims to control
the revolution and the actions of the masses themselves. To resolve the
conflict the state must eliminate the organs of workers self-activity
which the revolution creates otherwise the party cannot impose its
decisions -- and this is what the Bolshevik state did, aided of course
by the horrors of the civil war.

To state the obvious, to quote theory and not relate it to the practice
of those who claim to follow that theory is a joke. It is little more
than sophistry. If you look at the actions of the Bolsheviks before and
after the Russian Revolution you cannot help draw the conclusion that
Lenin's **State and Revolution** has nothing to do with Bolshevik policy
and presents a false image of what Trotskyists desire.

13. Is the Marxist "worker's state" really the rule of one class over another?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson argues that the *"task of this state would be to develop the
economy to eradicate want. Less need, means less need to govern society,
less need for a state. Class society and the state will begin to wither
away as the government of people, the rule of one class over another, is
replaced by the administration of things, the planned use of resources
to meet society's needs."*

As Malatesta makes clear, this is pure sophistry:

> *"Whoever has power over things has power over men; whoever governs
> production also governs the producers; who determines consumption is
> master over the consumer.*
>
> "This is the question; either things are administered on the basis of
> free agreement of the interested parties, and this is anarchy; or they
> are administered according to laws made by administrators and this is
> government, it is the State, and inevitably it turns out to be
> tyrannical.
>
> "It is not a question of the good intentions or the good will of this
> or that man, but of the inevitability of the situation, and of the
> tendencies which man generally develops in given circumstances."
> [**Life and Ideas**, p. 145]

Moreover, it is debatable whether Trotskyists really desire the rule of
one class over another in the sense of working class over capitalist
class. To quote Trotsky:

> *"the proletariat can take power only through its vanguard. In itself
> the necessity for state power arises from an insufficient cultural
> level of the masses and their heterogeneity. In the revolutionary
> vanguard, organised in a party, is crystallised the aspirations of the
> masses to obtain their freedom. Without the confidence of the class in
> the vanguard, without support of the vanguard by the class, there can
> be no talk of the conquest of power.*
>
> "In this sense the proletarian revolution and dictatorship are the
> work of the whole class, but only under the leadership of the
> vanguard." [**Stalinism and Bolshevism**]

Thus, rather than the working class as a whole seizing power, it is the
"vanguard" which takes power -- *"a revolutionary party, even after
seizing power . . . is still by no means the sovereign ruler of
society."* [**Ibid.**] That is, of course, true -- they are still organs
of working class self-management (such as factory committees, workers
councils, trade unions, soldier committees) through which working people
can still exercise their sovereignty. Little wonder Trotsky abolished
independent unions, decreed the end of soldier committees and urged
one-man management and the militarisation of labour when in power. Such
working class organs do conflict with the sovereign rule of the party
and so have to be abolished.

After being in power four years, Trotsky was arguing that the *"Party is
obliged to maintain its dictatorship . . . regardless of temporary
vacillations even in the working class . . . The dictatorship does not
base itself at every moment on the formal principle of a workers'
democracy."* [quoted by Brinton, **The Bolsheviks and Workers'
Control**, p. 78]

This position follows naturally from Trotsky's comments that the party
*"crystallises"* the *"aspirations"* of the masses. If the masses reject
the party then, obviously, their *"cultural level"* has fallen and so
the party has the right, nay the duty, to impose its dictatorship over
them. Similarly, the destruction of organs of working class
self-management can be justified because the vanguard has taken power --
which is **exactly** what Trotsky argued.

With regards to the Red Army and its elected officers, he stated in
March 1918 that *"the principle of election is politically purposeless
and technically inexpedient, and it has been, in practice, abolished by
decree"* because the Bolshevik Party held power or, as he put it,
*"political power is in the hands of the same working class from whose
ranks the Army is recruited."* Of course, power was actually held by the
Bolshevik party, not the working class, but never fear:

> *"Once we have established the Soviet regime, that is a system under
> which the government is headed by persons who have been directly
> elected by the Soviets of Workers', Peasants' and Soldiers' Deputies,
> there can be no antagonism between the government and the mass of the
> workers, just as there is no antagonism between the administration of
> the union and the general assembly of its members, and, therefore,
> there cannot be any grounds for fearing the **appointment** of members
> of the commanding staff by the organs of the Soviet Power."* [**Work,
> Discipline, Order**]

He made the same comments with regard the factory committees:

> *"It would be a most crying error to confuse the question as to the
> supremacy of the proletariat with the question of boards of workers at
> the head of factories. The dictatorship of the proletariat is
> expressed in the abolition of private property in the means of
> production, in the supremacy of the collective will of the workers [a
> euphemism for the Party -- M.B.] and not at all in the form in which
> individual economic organisations are administered."* [quoted by
> Maurice Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 66]

This point is reiterated in his essay, *"Bolshevism and Stalinism"*
(written in 1937) when he argued that:

> *"Those who propose the abstraction of Soviets to the party
> dictatorship should understand that only thanks to the party
> dictatorship were the Soviets able to lift themselves out of the mud
> of reformism and attain the state form of the proletariat."* [Trotsky,
> **Op. Cit.**, p. 18]

And, obviously, without party dictatorship the soviets would return to
the *"mud."* In other words, the soviets are only important to attain
party rule and if the two come into conflict then Trotskyism provides
the rule of the party with an ideological justification to eliminate
soviet democracy. Lenin's and Trotsky's politics allowed them to argue
that if you let the proletariat have a say then the dictatorship of the
proletariat could be in danger.

Thus, for Trotsky, the *"dictatorship of the proletariat"* is
independent of allowing the proletariat to manage their own affairs
directly. However, without the means of manage their own affairs
directly, control their own lives, the proletariat are placed into the
position of passive electors, who vote for parties who rule for and over
them, in their own name. Moreover, they face the constant danger of the
*"vanguard"* nullifying even these decisions as *"temporary
vacillations."* A fine liberation indeed.

Also, as libertarian socialist Maurice Brinton argues, none of the
Bolshevik leaders *"saw the proletarian nature of the Russian regime as
primarily and crucially dependent on the exercise of workers' power at
the point of production (i.e. workers' management of production). It
should have been obvious to them as Marxists that if the working class
did not hold economic power, its 'political' power would at best be
insecure and would in fact degenerate."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 42]

With direct working class sovereignty eroded by the Bolsheviks in the
name of indirect, i.e. party, sovereignty it is hardly surprising that
the dictatorship of the proletariat becomes the dictatorship **over**
the proletariat as Bakunin predicted. With the elimination of functional
democracy and self-management, indirect democracy would not be able to
survive for long in the face of centralised, top-down decision making by
the ruling party.

So hopeless was Trotsky's understanding of socialism and the nature of a
working class social revolution that he even considered the Stalinist
dictatorship to be an expression of the *"dictatorship of the
proletariat."* He argued that the *"bureaucracy has expropriated the
proletariat politically in order to guard its social conquests with
**its own** methods. The anatomy of society is determined by its
economic relations. So long as the forms of property that have been
created by the October Revolution are not overthrown, the proletariat
remains the ruling class."* [**The Class Nature of the Soviet State**]

Just to stress the point, according to Trotsky, under Stalinism **the
proletariat was the ruling class** and that Stalin's dictatorship
eliminated what remained (and it was not much) of working class
political influence in order *"to guard its social conquests"*! What
social conquests could remain if the proletariat was under the heel of a
totalitarian dictatorship? Just one, state ownership of property --
precisely the means by which the (state) bureaucracy enforced its
control over production and so the source of its economic power (and
privileges). To state the obvious, if the working class does not
**control** the property it is claimed to own then someone else does.
The economic relationship thus generated is a hierarchical one, in which
the working class is an oppressed class. Thus Trotsky identified the
source of the bureaucracy's economic power with "socialism" -- no wonder
his analysis of Stalinism (and vision of socialism) proved so
disastrous.

Trotsky argues that the *"liberal-anarchist thought closes its eyes to
the fact that the Bolshevik revolution, with all its repressions, meant
an upheaval of social relations in the interests of the masses, whereas
Stalin's Thermidorian upheaval accompanies the reconstruction of Soviet
society in the interest of a privileged minority."* [**Stalinism and
Bolshevism**] However, social relations are just that, **social** and so
between individuals and classes -- ownership of property cannot tell the
whole story. What social relations did Bolshevism bring about?

As far as the wage labour social relationship goes (and do not forget
that is the defining feature of capitalism), the Bolsheviks opposed
workers' self-management in favour of, first, *"control"* over the
capitalists and then one-man management. No change in social
relationships there. Property relations did change in the sense that the
state became the owner of capital rather than individual capitalists,
but the **social** relationship workers experienced during the working
day and within society was identical. The state bureaucrat replaced the
capitalist.

As for politics, the Bolshevik revolution replaced government with
government. Initially, it was an elected government and so it had the
typical social relationships of representative government. Later, it
became a one party dictatorship -- a situation that did not change under
Stalin. Thus the social relationships there, again, did not change. The
Bolshevik Party became the head of the government. That is all. This
event also saw the reconstruction of Soviet Society in the interest of a
privileged minority -- it is well known that the Communists gave
themselves the best rations, best premises and so on.

Thus the Bolshevik revolution did **not** change the social relations
people faced and so Trotsky's comments are wishful thinking. The
*"interests of the masses"* could not, and were not, defended by the
Bolshevik revolution as it did not change the relations of authority in
a society -- the social relationships people experienced remain
unchanged. Perhaps that is why Lenin argued that the proletarian nature
of the Russian regime was ensured by the nature of the ruling party?
There could be no other basis for saying the Bolshevik state was a
workers' state. After all, nationalised property without workers'
self-management **does not change social relationships** it just changes
who is telling the workers what to do.

The important point to note is that Trotsky argued that the proletariat
could be a ruling class when it had **no** political influence, never
mind democracy, when subject to a one-party state and bureaucratic
dictatorship and when the social relations of the society were obviously
capitalistic. No wonder he found it impossible to recognise that
dictatorship by the party did not equal dictatorship by the proletariat.

Therefore, the claim that Trotskyists see the *"dictatorship of the
proletariat"* as *"the rule of one class over another"* is, as can be
seen, a joke. Rather they see it as the rule of the party over the rest
of society, **including** the working class. Even when that party had
become a bureaucratic nightmare, murdering millions and sending hundreds
of thousands to forced labour camps, Trotsky still argued that the
*"working class"* was still the *"ruling class."* Not only that, his
political perspective allowed him to justify the suppression of workers'
democracy in the name of the *"rule"* of the workers. For this reason,
anarchists feel that the real utopians are the Leninists who believe
that party rule equals class rule and that centralised, hierarchical
power in the hands of the few will not become a new form of class rule.
History, we think, supports our politics on this issue (as in so many
others).

Mitchinson argues that *"Anarchism's utopian calls to abolish the state
overnight demonstrates neither the understanding of what the state is,
nor the programme of action necessary to achieve the goal it sets
itself."* However, as made clear, it is Marxism which is utopian,
believing that rule by a party equals rule by a class and that a state
machine can be utilised by the majority of the population. As Kropotkin
argued, Anarchists *"maintain that the State organisation, having been
the force to which minorities resorted for establishing and organising
their power over the masses, cannot be the force which will serve to
destroy these privileges."* [**Kropotkin's Revolutionary Pamphlets**, p.
170]

Luigi Fabbri sums up the difference well:

> *"The mistake of authoritarian communists in this connection is the
> belief that fighting and organising are impossible without submission
> to a government; and thus they regard anarchists . . . as the foes of
> all organisation and all co-ordinated struggle. We, on the other hand,
> maintain that not only are revolutionary struggle and revolutionary
> organisation possible outside and in spite of government interference
> but that, indeed, that is the only effective way to struggle and
> organise, for it has the active participation of all members of the
> collective unit, instead of their passively entrusting themselves to
> the authority of the supreme leaders."* [*"Anarchy and 'Scientific'
> Communism"*, in **The Poverty of Statism**, pp. 13-49, Albert Meltzer
> (ed.), p. 27]

Mitchinson moves on to the usual Marxist slander that as *"a modern
philosophy anarchism developed in the 19th century alongside the
explosive growth of capitalism and its state machine. It represented a
rebellion by a section of the petty bourgeoisie at the loss of their
position in society, driven to the wall by the growth of monopoly."* We
have refuted this assertion in another appendix ([Reply to errors and
distortions in David McNally's pamphlet "Socialism from
Below"](append3.html#app31)) and so will not do so here.

14. Why do anarchists reject the Marxist notion of *"conquest of power"*?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson now decides to quote some anarchists to back up his spurious
argument:

> *"Their case was argued by Mikhail Bakunin and his supporters in the
> First International. At an anarchist conference in 1872 they argued
> 'The aspirations of the proletariat can have no other aim than the
> creation of an absolutely free economic organisation and federation
> based on work and equality and wholly independent of any political
> government, and such an organisation can only come into being through
> the spontaneous action of the proletariat itself...no political
> organisation can be anything but the organisation of rule in the
> interests of a class and to the detriment of the masses...the
> proletariat, should it seize power, would become a ruling, and
> exploiting, class...'"*

To understand this passage it is necessary to place it in historical
context. In 1872, the proletariat was a **minority** class within all
nations **bar** the UK. In almost all nations, the majority of the
working class were either artisans or peasants (hence the reference to
*"the masses"*). To urge that the proletariat seize power meant to
advocate the class rule of a **minority** of the working masses.
Minority rule could be nothing else but the dictatorship of a minority
over the majority (a dictatorship in the usual sense of the word), and
dictatorships always become exploitative of the general population.

Thus Mitchinson's "analysis" is ahistoric and, fundamentally,
unscientific and a mockery of materialism.

Moreover, anarchists like Bakunin also made clear that the Marxist
notion of *"proletarian dictatorship"* did not even mean that the
proletariat **as a whole** would exercise power. In his words:

> *"What does it mean, 'the proletariat raised to a governing class?'
> Will the entire proletariat head the government? The Germans number
> about 40 million. Will all 40 million be members of the government?
> The entire nation will rule, but no one would be ruled. Then there
> will be no government, there will be no state; but if there is a
> state, there will also be those who are ruled, there will be slaves.*
>
> "In the Marxists' theory this dilemma is resolved in a simple fashion.
> By popular government they mean government of the people by a small
> number of representatives elected by the people. So-called popular
> representatives and rulers of the state elected by the entire nation
> on the basis of universal suffrage -- the last word of the Marxists,
> as well as the democratic school -- is a lie behind which the
> despotism of a ruling minority is concealed, a lie all the more
> dangerous in that it represents itself as the expression of a sham
> popular will.
>
> "So . . . it always comes down to the same dismal result: government
> of the vast majority of the people by a privileged minority. But this
> minority, the Marxists say, will consist of workers. Yes, perhaps, of
> **former** workers, who, as soon as they become rulers or
> representatives of the people will cease to be workers and will begin
> to look upon the whole workers' world from the heights of the state.
> They will no longer represent the people but themselves and their own
> pretensions to govern the people." [**Statism and Anarchy**, p. 178]

Thus anarchists reject the notion of the dictatorship of the proletariat
for two reasons. Firstly, because it excluded the bulk of the working
masses when it was first used by Marx and Engels. Secondly, because in
practice it would mean the dictatorship of the party **over** the
proletariat. Needless to say, Mitchinson does not mention these points.

Mitchinson argues that *"[a]lthough this sounds radical enough it
nonetheless amounts to a recipe for inaction and disaster."* And quotes
Trotsky to explain why:

> *"To renounce the conquest of power is voluntarily to leave the power
> with those who wield it, the exploiters. The essence of every
> revolution consisted and consists in putting a new class in power,
> thus enabling it to realise its own programme in life. It is
> impossible to wage war and to reject victory. It is impossible to lead
> the masses towards insurrection without preparing for the conquest of
> power."*

For anarchists the question immediately is, *"power to who"*? As is
clear from the writings of Lenin and Trotsky they see the *"conquest of
power"* **not** in terms of *"putting a new class in power"* but, in
fact, the **representatives** of that class, the vanguard party, into
power. Anarchists, in contrast, argue that organs of working class
self-management are the means of creating and defending a **social**
revolution as it is the only means that the mass of people can actually
run their own lives and any power over and above these organs means
dictatorship **over** the working class, a new form of state and class
power.

As Rudolf Rocker argues:

> *"Let no one object that the 'dictatorship of the proletariat' cannot
> be compared to run of the mill dictatorship because it is the
> dictatorship of a class. Dictatorship of a class cannot exist as such,
> for it ends up, in the last analysis, as being the dictatorship of a
> given party which arrogates to itself the right to speak for that
> class. Thus, the liberal bourgeoisie, in their fight against
> despotism, used to speak in the name of the 'people'. . .*
>
> "We already know that a revolution cannot be made with rosewater. And
> we know, too, that the owning classes will never yield up their
> privileges spontaneously. On the day of victorious revolution the
> workers will have to impose their will on the present owners of the
> soil, of the subsoil and of the means of production, which cannot be
> done -- let us be clear on this -- without the workers taking the
> capital of society into their own hands, and, above all, without their
> having demolished the authoritarian structure which is, and will
> continue to be, the fortress keeping the masses of the people under
> dominion. Such an action is, without doubt, an act of liberation; a
> proclamation of social justice; the very essence of social revolution,
> which has nothing in common with the utterly bourgeois principle of
> dictatorship.
>
> "The fact that a large number of socialist parties have rallied to the
> idea of councils, which is the proper mark of libertarian socialist
> and revolutionary syndicalists, is a confession, recognition that the
> tack they have taken up until now has been the product of a
> falsification, a distortion, and that with the councils the labour
> movement must create for itself a single organ capable of carrying
> into effect the unmitigated socialism that the conscious proletariat
> longs for. On the other hand, it ought not to be forgotten that this
> abrupt conversion runs the risk of introducing many alien features
> into the councils concept, features, that is, with no relation to the
> original tasks of socialism, and which have to be eliminated because
> they pose a threat to the further development of the councils. These
> alien elements are able only to conceive things from the dictatorial
> viewpoint. It must be our task to face up to this risk and warn our
> class comrades against experiments which cannot bring the dawn of
> social emancipation any nearer -- which indeed, to the contrary,
> positively postpone it.
>
> "Consequently, our advice is as follows: Everything for the councils
> or soviets! No power above them! A slogan which at the same time will
> be that of the social revolutionary." [**Anarchism and Sovietism**]

Or, as the Bakunin influenced Jura Federation of the First International
put it in 1874, *"the dictatorship that we want is one which the
insurgent masses exercise directly, without intermediary of any
committee or government."* [quoted by Peter Marshall, **Demanding the
Impossible**, p. 631] In other words, a situation in which the working
masses defend their freedom, their control over their own lives, from
those who seek to replace it with minority rule.

15. What caused the degeneration of the Russian Revolution?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson argues that:

> *"Anarchists see in the degeneration of the Soviet Union into a
> totalitarian dictatorship proof that Bakunin was right. In reality,
> only Leon Trotsky and Marxism have been able to explain the causes of
> that degeneration, finding its roots not in men's heads or
> personalities, but in the real life conditions of civil war, armies of
> foreign intervention, and the defeat of revolution in Europe."*

Needless to say, anarchism explains the causes of the degeneration in a
far more rich way than Mitchinson claims. The underlying assumption of
his "critique" of anarchism is that the **politics** of the Bolsheviks
had no influence on the outcome of the revolution -- it was a product
purely of objective forces. He also subscribes to the contradictory idea
that Bolshevik politics were essential for the success of that
revolution. The facts of the matter is that people are faced with
choices, choices that arise from the objective conditions that they
face. What decisions they make will be influenced by the ideas they hold
-- they will **not** occur automatically, as if people were on
auto-pilot -- and their ideas are shaped by the social relationships
they experience. Thus, someone placed into a position of power over
others will act in certain ways, have a certain world view, which would
be alien to someone subject to egalitarian social relations.

So, obviously the *"ideas in people's heads"* matter, particularly
during a revolution. Someone in favour of centralisation, centralised
power and who equates party rule with class rule (like Lenin and
Trotsky), will act in ways (and create structures) totally different
from someone who believes in decentralisation and federalism. In other
words, **political ideas do matter** in society. Nor do anarchists leave
our analysis at this obvious fact -- as noted, we also argue that the
types of organisation people create and work in shapes the way they
think and act. This is because specific kinds of organisation have
specific authority relations and so generate specific social
relationships. These obviously affect those subject to them -- a
centralised, hierarchical system will create authoritarian social
relationships which shape those within it in totally different ways than
a decentralised, egalitarian system. That Mitchinson denies this obvious
fact suggests he knows nothing of materialist philosophy.

Moreover, anarchists are aware of the problems facing the revolution.
After all, anarchists were involved in that revolution and wrote some of
the best works on that revolution (for example, Voline's **The Unknown
Revolution**, Arshinov's **The History of the Makhnovist Movement** and
Maximov's **The Guillotine at Work**). However, they point to the
obvious fact that the politics of the Bolsheviks played a key role in
how the revolution developed. While the terrible objective conditions
may have shaped certain aspects of the actions of the Bolsheviks it
cannot be denied that the impulse for them were rooted in Bolshevik
theory. After all, anarchist theory could not justify the suppression of
the functional democracy associated with the factory committees or the
soldiers election of officers in the Red Army. Bolshevik theory could,
and did.

Indeed, Trotsky was still claiming in 1937 that the *"Bolshevik party
achieved in the civil war the correct combination of military art and
Marxist politics."* [**Stalinism and Bolshevism**] In other words, the
Bolshevik policies implemented during the Civil War were the correct,
Marxist, ones. Also, although Lenin described the NEP (New Economic
Policy) of 1921 as a 'defeat', at no stage did he describe the
suppression of soviet democracy and workers' control in such language.
In other words, Bolshevik politics did play a role, a key role, in the
degeneration of the Russian Revolution and to deny it is to deny
reality. In the words of Maurice Brinton:

> *"[I]n relation to industrial policy there is a clear-cut and
> incontrovertible link between what happened under Lenin and Trotsky
> and the later practice of Stalinism. We know that many on the
> revolutionary left will find this statement hard to swallow. We are
> convinced however that any honest reading of the facts cannot but lead
> to this conclusion. The more one unearths about this period [1917-21],
> the more difficult it becomes to define -- or even see -- the 'gulf'
> allegedly separating what happened in Lenin's time from what happened
> later. Real knowledge of the facts also makes it impossible to accept
> . . . that the whole course of events was 'historically inevitable'
> and 'objectively determined.' Bolshevik ideology and practice were
> **themselves** important and sometimes decisive factors in the
> equation, at every critical stage of this critical period."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 84]

We should also point out that far from *"Leon Trotsky and Marxism"*
explaining the degeneration of the Russian revolution, Trotsky could not
understand that a *"totalitarian dictatorship"* could be an expression
of a new minority class and presented a decidedly false analysis of the
Soviet Union as a *"degenerated workers' state."* That analysis led
numerous Trotskyists to support these dictatorships and oppose workers'
revolts against them. In addition, Trotsky's own reservations were only
really voiced after he had lost power. Moreover, he never acknowledged
how his own policies (such as the elimination of soldiers democracy, the
militarisation of labour, etc.) played a key role in the rise of the
bureaucracy and Stalin.

Ultimately, every explanation of the degeneration of the Russian
revolution by Trotskyists ends up as an appeal to *"exception
circumstances"* -- they blame the rise of Stalinism on the Civil War, to
the *"exceptional circumstances"* created by that war. This can be
faulted for two reasons.

Firstly, as Trotsky himself argued (with respect to the Spanish
Anarchists) *"did not the leaders of German social democracy invoke, in
their time, the same excuse? Naturally, civil war is not a peaceful and
ordinary but an 'exceptional circumstance.' . . . we do severely blame
the anarchist theory, which seemed wholly suitable for times of peace,
but had to be dropped rapidly as soon as the 'exceptional circumstance'
of the . . . revolution had begun."* [**Stalinism and Bolshevism**]
Needless to say, he did not apply his critique to his own politics,
which were also a form of the *"exceptional circumstances"* excuse.
Given how quickly Bolshevik "principles" (as expressed in **The State
and Revolution**) were dropped, we can only assume that Bolshevik ideas
are also suitable purely for *"times of peace"* as well.

Secondly, this "explanation" basically argues that, **if** the bourgeois
did not defend their power in 1917, then Leninism would have worked out
fine. As Mitchinson himself noted above, belief that the bourgeois will
just go away without a fight is *"an infantile flight of fancy."* As
Lenin argued, *"revolution . . ., in its development, would give rise to
exceptionally complicated circumstances"* and *"[r]evolution is the
sharpest, most furious, desperate class war and civil war. Not a single
great revolution in history has escaped civil war. No one who does not
live in a shell could imagine that civil war is conceivable without
exceptionally complicated circumstances."* [**Will the Bolsheviks
Maintain Power?**, p. 80 and p. 81]

If the Civil War did solely produce the degeneration of the Russian
Revolution then all we can hope for is that in the next social
revolution, the civil war Lenin argued was inevitable is not as
destructive as the Russian one. Hope is not much of a basis to build a
"scientific" socialism -- but then again, neither is "fate" much of a
basis to explain the degeneration of the Russian Revolution but that is
what Trotskyists do argue.

We discuss the Russian Revolution in more detail in the appendix on ["
What happened during the Russian Revolution?"](append41.html) of the FAQ
and will not do so here. However, we can point out the experience of the
anarchist Makhnovist movement in the Ukraine during the Russian
Revolution. Facing exactly the same objective conditions they encouraged
soviet democracy, held regular congresses of workers and peasants (the
Bolsheviks tried to ban two of them), defended freedom of the press and
of association and so on. If objective conditions determined Bolshevik
policies, why did they not also determine the policies of the
Makhnovists? This practical example indicates that the usual Trotskyist
explanation of the degeneration of the Revolution is false.

Perhaps it is because of this, that it showed an alternative to
Bolshevik politics existed and worked, that Trotskyists slander it?
Trotsky himself asserted that the Makhnovists were simply *"kulaks"* on
horseback and that Makhno's *"followers . . . [expressed] a militant
anti-Semitism."* [Lenin and Trotsky, **Kronstadt**, p. 80] We discuss
the Makhnovist movement in the appendix on ["Why does the Makhnovist
movement show there is an alternative to Bolshevism?"](append46.html) of
the FAQ and there we refute claims that the Makhnovist movement was a
kulak (rich peasant) one. However, the charge of *"militant
anti-Semitism"* is a serious one and so we will expose its falsehood
here and well as in [section 9](append46.html#app9) of the specified
appendix.

The best source to refute claims of anti-Semitism is to quote the work
of the Jewish anarchist Voline. He summarises the extensive evidence
against such claims:

> *"We could cover dozens of pages with extensive and irrefutable proofs
> of the falseness of these assertions. We could mention articles and
> proclamations by Makhno and the Council of Revolutionary Insurgents
> denouncing anti-Semitism. We could tell of spontaneous acts by Makhno
> himself and other insurgents against the slightest manifestation of
> the anti-Semitic spirit on the part of a few isolated and misguided
> unfortunates in the army and the population. . . One of the reasons
> for the execution of Grigoriev by the Makhnovists was his
> anti-Semitism and the immense pogrom he organised at Elizabethgrad. .
> . We could cite a whole series of similar facts, but we do not find it
> necessary . . . and will content ourselves with mentioning briefly the
> following essential facts:*
>
> "1. A fairly important part in the Makhnovist movement was played by
> revolutionists of Jewish origin.
>
> "2. Several members of the Education and Propaganda Commission were
> Jewish.
>
> "3. Besides many Jewish combatants in various units of the army, there
> was a battery composed entirely of Jewish artillery men and a Jewish
> infantry unit.
>
> "4. Jewish colonies in the Ukraine furnished many volunteers to the
> Insurrectionary Army.
>
> "5. In general the Jewish population . . . took an active part in all
> the activities of the movement. The Jewish agricultural colonies . . .
> participated in the regional assemblies of workers, peasants and
> partisans; they sent their delegates to the regional Revolutionary
> Military Council. . ." [**The Unknown Revolution**, pp. 967-8]

Voline also quotes the eminent Jewish writer and historian M.
Tcherikover about the question of the Makhnovists and anti-Semitism. The
Jewish historian states *"with certainty that, on the whole, the
behaviour of Makhno's army cannot be compared with that of the other
armies which were operating in Russian during the events 1917-21 . . .
It is undeniable that, of all these armies, including the Red Army, the
Makhnovists behaved best with regard the civil population in general and
the Jewish population in particular . . . The proportion of
**justified** complaints against the Makhnovist army, in comparison with
the others, is negligible. . . Do not speak of pogroms alleged to have
been organised by Makhno himself. That is a slander or an error. Nothing
of the sort occurred. As for the Makhnovist Army . . . **[n]ot once**
have I been able to prove the existence of a Makhnovist unit at the
place a pogrom against the Jews took place. Consequently, the pogroms in
question could not have been the work of the Makhnovists."* [quoted by
Voline, **Op. Cit.**, p. 699]

Given that the Red Army agreed to two pacts with the Makhnovists, we can
only surmise, if Trotsky thought he was telling the truth, that Trotsky
was a hypocrite. However, Trotsky was either consciously lying or in
error -- unfortunately the Trotskyist publishers of his words did not
bother to note that his assertion was false. We are sorry for this
slight digression, but many Trotskyists take Trotsky's words at face
value and repeat his slander -- unless we indicate their false nature
they may not take our argument seriously.

Mitchinson continues by stating:

> *"The position of anarchism only serves to endorse the bourgeois
> slander that Stalinism was inherent in Bolshevism."*

This appeal against slander is ironic from someone who writes an article
full of it. But, of course, it is **bourgeois** slander that he objects
too -- Trotskyist slander (and falsification) is fine.

The question of whether it is a *"bourgeois slander"* to argue (with
supporting evidence) that *"Stalinism was inherent in Bolshevism"* is an
important one. Trotskyists often point out that anarchist and
libertarian Marxist critiques of Bolshevism sound similar to bourgeois
ones and that anarchist accounts of Bolshevik crimes against the
revolution and working class give ammunition to the defenders of the
status quo. However, this seems more like an attempt to stop critical
analysis of the Russian Revolution than a serious political position.
Yes, the bourgeois do argue that Stalinism was inherent in Bolshevism --
however they do so to discredit all forms of socialism and radical
social change. Anarchists, on the other hand, analyse the revolution,
see how the Bolsheviks acted and draw conclusions from the facts in
order to push forward revolutionary thought, tactics and ideas. Just
because the conclusions are similar does not mean that they are invalid
-- to label criticism of Bolshevism as *"bourgeois slander"* is nothing
less than attempt to put people off investigating the Russian
Revolution.

There is are course essential differences between the *"bourgeois
slanders"* against the Bolsheviks and the anarchist critique. The
bourgeois slander is based on an opposition to the revolution **as
such** while the anarchist critique affirms it. The bourgeois slanders
are not the result of the experiences of the working masses and
revolutionaries subject to the Bolshevik regime as the anarchist is.
Similarly, the bourgeois slanders ignore the nature of capitalist
society while the anarchist critique points out that the degeneration of
the Bolshevik state and party were a result of it not breaking with
bourgeois ideas and organisational structures. Ultimately, it is **not**
a case of *"bourgeois slanders"* but rather an honest evaluation of the
events of the Russian Revolution from a working class perspective.

To use an analogy, it is common place for the bourgeois press and
ideologists to attack trade unions as being bureaucratic and
unresponsive to the needs of their members. It is also common place for
members of those same trade unions to think exactly the same. Indeed, it
is a common refrain of Trotskyists that the trade unions **are**
bureaucratic and need to be reformed in a more democratic fashion
(indeed, Mitchinson calls for the unions to be *"transformed"* in his
essay). Needless to say, the bourgeois comments are "correct" in the
sense that the trade unions do have a bureaucracy -- their reasons for
stating that truth serve their interests and their solutions aid those
interests and not those of the members of the unions. Could a Trotskyist
say that it was a *"bourgeois slander"* if the capitalist press point to
the bureaucratic nature of the unions when their own papers do the same?

While it may be in the interests of the ruling elite and its apologists
to scream about *"bourgeois slanders"*, it hinders the process of
working class self-emancipation to do so. As intended, in all
likelihood.

16. Did anarchists reject *"the need for organisation in the shape of trade unions"*?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson now decides to "expose" anarchism:

> *"In its early days, this modern anarchism found a certain support
> amongst the workers. However, through the course of struggle workers
> learned the need for organisation in the shape of the trade unions,
> and also for political organisation which led to the building of the
> mass workers parties."*

To see the total nonsense of this claim we need only to turn to Marx. In
his words, Bakunin thought that the *"working class . . . must only
organise themselves by trades-unions."* [Marx, Engels and Lenin,
**Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 48] Bakunin himself argued
*"the natural organisation of the masses . . . is organisation based on
the various ways that their various types of work define their
day-to-day life; it is organisation by trade association."* [**The Basic
Bakunin**, p. 139] Kropotkin argued that the *"union [**syndicat**] is
absolutely necessary. It is the only form of workers' grouping which
permits the direct struggle to be maintained against capital without
falling into parliamentarism."* [quoted by Caroline Cahm, **Kropotkin
and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism**, p. 269]

So much for anarchism being against trade unions (as Mitchinson
implies). As for mass workers parties, well, history proved Bakunin
right -- such parties became corrupted, bureaucratic and reformist. For
Mitchinson the last 130 years have not existed.

He goes on to argue that *"Bakunin and co. denounced participation in
parliament, or the fight for reforms as a betrayal of the revolution,
they 'rejected all political action not having as its immediate and
direct objective the triumph of the workers over capitalism, and as a
consequence, the abolition of the state.'"*

We must first note that the Bakunin quote presented does not support
Mitchinson's assertions -- unless you think that reforms can only be won
via participation in parliament (something anarchists reject). The
reason **why** Bakunin rejected *"all political action"* (i.e. bourgeois
politics -- electioneering in other words) is not explained. We will now
do so.

Bakunin did denounce participation in parliament. History proved him
right. Participation in parliament ensured the corruption of the Social
Democratic Parties, the Greens and a host of other radical and socialist
organisations. Mitchinson seems to have forgotten the fights against
reformism that continually occurred in the Social Democratic Parties at
end of the nineteenth and start of the twentieth centuries, a fight
which ended with the defeat of the revolutionary wing and the decision
to support the nation state in the first world war. The actual
experience of using parliament confirmed Bakunin's prediction that when
*"the workers . . . send common workers . . . to Legislative Assemblies
. . . The worker-deputies, transplanted into a bourgeois environment,
into an atmosphere of purely bourgeois ideas, will in fact cease to be
workers and, becoming Statesmen, they will become bourgeois . . . For
men do not make their situations; on the contrary, men are made by
them."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 108]

What is not true, however, is that claim that Bakunin thought that *"the
fight for reforms [w]as a betrayal of the revolution."* Bakunin was a
firm believer in the importance of struggles for reforms, but struggles
of a specific kind -- namely struggles to win reforms which are based on
the **direct action** by workers themselves:

> *"What policy should the International [Workers' Association] follow
> during th[e] somewhat extended time period that separates us from this
> terrible social revolution . . . the International will give labour
> unrest in all countries an **essentially economic** character, with
> the aim of reducing working hours and increasing salary, by means of
> the **association of the working masses** . . . It will [also]
> propagandise its principles . . . [**Op. Cit.**, p. 109]*
>
> "And indeed, as soon as a worker believes that the economic state of
> affairs can be radically transformed in the near future, he begins to
> fight, in association with his comrades, for the reduction of his
> working hours and for an increase in his salary. . . through practice
> and action . . . the progressive expansion and development of the
> economic struggle will bring him more and more to recognise his true
> enemies: the privileged classes, including the clergy, the bourgeois,
> and the nobility; and the State, which exists only to safeguard all
> the privileges of those classes." [**Op. Cit.**, p. 103]

This argument for reforms by direct action and workers' associations was
a basic point of agreement in those sections of the First International
which supported Bakunin's ideas. In the words of an anarchist member of
the Jura Federation writing in 1875:

> *"Instead of begging the State for a law compelling employers to make
> them work only so many hours, the trade associations **directly
> impose** this reform on the employers; in this way, instead of a legal
> text which remains a dead letter, a real economic change is effected
> **by the direct initiative of the workers** . . . if the workers
> devoted all their activity and energy to the organisation of their
> trades into societies of resistance, trade federations, local and
> regional, if, by meetings, lectures, study circles, papers and
> pamphlets, they kept up a permanent socialist and revolutionary
> agitation; if by linking practice to theory, they **realised
> directly**, without any bourgeois and governmental intervention, all
> immediately possible reforms, reforms advantageous not to a few
> workers but to the labouring mass -- certainly then the cause of
> labour would be better served than . . . legal agitation."* [quoted by
> Caroline Cahm, **Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism**,
> p. 226]

So much for Bakunin or the libertarian wing of the First International
being against reforms or the struggle for reforms. Anarchists have not
changed their minds on this issue.

17. Why do anarchists reject political activity?
------------------------------------------------

After spreading falsehoods against Bakunin, Mitchinson states that:

> *"Marxism fights for the conquest of political power by the working
> class and the building of a socialist society, under which the state
> will wither away.*
>
> "Until then should workers refrain from political activity? Should
> they reject all reforms that might improve their existence? Nothing
> would please Blair or the bosses more."

It is ironic that Mitchinson mentions Blair. He is, after all, the
leader of the Labour Party -- as mass workers party formed from the
trade unions to use political action to gain reforms within capitalism.
The current state of Labour indicates well the comment that *"in
proportion as the socialists become a power in the present bourgeois
society and State, their socialism must die out."* [Kropotkin,
**Kropotkin's Revolutionary Pamphlets**, p. 189] It is as if the history
of Social Democracy (or even the German Greens) does not exist for
Mitchinson -- he points to Blair to refute anarchist analysis that
Parliamentary politics corrupts the parties that use it! How strange, to
ignore the results of socialists actually using *"political activity"*
(and we must stress that anarchists traditionally use the term
*"political action"* to refer to electioneering, i.e. bourgeois
politics, only). Obviously reality is something which can be ignored
when creating a political theory.

Needless to say, as noted above, anarchists do not *"reject all
reforms."* We have quoted Bakunin, now we quote Kropotkin -- *"the
Anarchists have always advised taking an active part in those workers'
organisations which carry on the **direct** struggle of Labour against
Capital and its protector, the State."* He continued by arguing that
such struggle, *"better than any other indirect means, permits the
worker to obtain some temporary improvements in the present conditions
of work, while it opens his eyes to the evil done by Capitalism and the
State that supports it, and wakes up his thoughts concerning the
possibility of organising consumption, production, and exchange without
the intervention of the capitalist and the State."* [**Evolution and
Environment**, pp. 82-3]

Thus we do not think that political action (electioneering) equates to
reforms nor even is the best means of winning reforms in the first
place. Anarchists argue that by direct action we can win reforms.

Mitchinson continues his diatribe:

> *"Of course not, we must advocate the struggle for every gain no
> matter how minor, and use any and every field open to us. Only the
> dilettante can reject better wages or a health care system. Precisely
> through these struggles, and the struggles to transform the workers
> organisations the unions and the parties, we learn and become more
> powerful and bring closer the day when it will be possible to
> transform society for good."*

As noted, anarchists do not reject reforms. Only a dilettante
misrepresents the position of his enemies. And, as can be seen from the
above quotes by Bakunin and Kropotkin, anarchists agree with
Mitchinson's comments. Anarchists agree on the need to win reforms by
direct action, which necessitates the creation of new forms of working
class organisation based on firm libertarian principles and tactics --
organisations like workers' councils, factory committees, community
assemblies and so on.

However, when looking at the fields of struggle open to us, we evaluate
them based on a materialist basis -- looking at the implications of the
tactics in theory and how they **actually worked out in practice.**
Mitchinson obviously refuses to do this. Anarchists, on the other hand,
base their politics on such an evaluation. For example, Bakunin would
have been aware of Proudhon's experiences in the French National
Assembly during the 1848 revolution:

> *"As soon as I set foot in the parliamentary Sinai, I ceased to be in
> touch with the masses; because I was absorbed by my legislative work,
> I entirely lost sight of current events . . . One must have lived in
> that isolator which is called the National Assembly to realise how the
> men who are most completely ignorant of the state of the country are
> almost always those who represent it . . . fear of the people is the
> sickness of all those who belong to authority; the people, for those
> in power, are the enemy."* [Proudhon, quoted by Peter Marshall,
> **Demanding the Impossible**, p. 244]

Similarly, the practical experiences of a socialist elected into
Parliament would be easy to predict -- they would be swamped by
bourgeois politics, issues and activities. Anarchism gained such
socialists elected to parliament as Johann Most and Ferdinand
Nieuwenhuis who soon released the correctness of the anarchist analysis.
Thus actual experience confirmed the soundness of anarchist politics.
Mitchinson, on the other hand, has to deny history -- indeed, he fails
to mention the history of Social Democracy at all in his article.

Thus the claim that we should use *"every field open to us"* is
idealistic nonsense, at total odds with any claim to use scientific
techniques of analysis (i.e. to being a scientific socialist) or a
supporter of materialist philosophy. It means the rejection of
historical analysis and the embrace of ahistoric wishful thinking.

Moreover, why do the workers need to *"transform"* their own
organisations in the first place? Perhaps because they are bureaucratic
organisations in which power is centralised at the top, in a few hands?
Why did this happen, if fighting for reforms by any suitable means
(including electioneering) was their rationale? Perhaps because the
wrong people are in positions of power? But why are they the wrong
people? Because they are right-wing, have reformist ideas, etc. Why do
they have reformist ideas? Here Mitchinson must fall silent, because
obviously they have reformist ideas because the organisations and
activities they are part of are reformist through and through. The
tactics (using elections) and organisational structure (centralisation
of power) bred such ideas -- as Bakunin and other anarchists predicted.
Mitchinson's politics cannot explain why this occurs, which explains why
Lenin was so surprised when German Social Democracy supported its ruling
class during the First World War.

18. How do anarchists struggle for reforms under capitalism?
------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson continues his distortion of anarchism by arguing:

> *"Marxists fight for every reform, whilst at the same time explaining
> that while capitalism continues none of these advances are safe. Only
> socialism can really solve the problems of society."*

As noted above, anarchists also fight for every reform possible -- but
by direct action, by the strength of working people in their *"natural
organisations"* and *"social power"* (to use Bakunin's words). We also
argue that reforms are always in danger -- that is why we need to have
strong, direct action based organisations and self-reliance. If we leave
it to leaders to protect (never mind **win** reforms) we would not have
them for long. Given that Labour governments have whittled previous
reforms just as much as Conservative ones, anarchists feel our strategy
is the relevant one.

Mitchinson continues:

> *"Our modern day anarchists, Reclaim the Streets and others, have no
> support in Britain amongst the organised workers."*

Which is not true, as RTS and other anarchists do seek influence with
the organised workers (and the unorganised ones, and the unemployed,
etc.). They have invited rank-and-file trade union activists to their
demonstrations to speak, trade unionists are members of anarchist
organisations, etc. Anarchists are at the forefront of supporting
strikers, particularly when their union betrays their struggle and does
not support them. For example, during the Liverpool dockers strike RTS
and the dockers formed a common front, organised common demonstrations
and so on. The trade unions did nothing to support the dockers, RTS and
other anarchist groups did. That in itself indicates the weakness of
Mitchinson's claims. It would also be useful to point out that
Trotskyists have little support amongst organised workers as well.

Moreover, anarchists do not seek to become part of the trade union
bureaucracy and so their influence cannot be easily gauged.

After asserting these dubious "facts" about anarchist influence, he
continues:

> *"Some radicalised youth however are attracted to their 'direct
> action' stance. There is a vacuum left by the absence of a mass Labour
> youth organisation which, fighting for a socialist programme, could
> attract these young workers and students. With no lead being given by
> the tops of the unions, and Labour in government attacking young
> people, that vacuum can be temporarily and partly filled by groups
> like Reclaim the Streets."*

Needless to say, Mitchinson does not pose the question **why** the
Labour government is attacking *"young people"* (and numerous other
sections of the working class). Why has the Labour Party, a mass workers
party which uses elections to gain reforms, been attacking (as it has
always done, we must note) its support? If its because the leaders are
"right-wing" then why have the membership supported them? Why have the
"right-wing" gained such influence? Also, why is there no *"mass Labour
youth organisation"*? And why should *"young people"* join an
organisation which is part of the party which is attacking them? And why
are the *"tops of the unions"* not giving a *"lead"*? Perhaps because
its not in their interests to do so? Because they hate direct action and
radical workers as much as the bosses?

Mitchinson's "analysis" is question begging in the extreme.

He continues:

> *"What action do they propose though? In their press statement
> (2/5/00) they explain, 'We were not protesting. Under the shadow of an
> irrelevant parliament we were planting the seeds of a society where
> ordinary people are in control of their land, their resources, their
> food and their decision making. The garden symbolised an urge to be
> self-reliant rather than dependent on capitalism.'"*

Firstly, we should point out that having access to land **is** a key way
for workers to be independent of capitalism. Perhaps Mitchinson forgets
Marx's discussion of the colonies in chapter 33 of **Capital**? In it
Marx discusses how access to land allowed immigrants to America and
Australia to reject wage labour (i.e. capitalism) by providing them with
the means to survive without selling themselves on the labour market to
survive. The state had to be used to enforce the laws of supply and
demand by restricting access to the land. Or, perhaps, he had forgotten
Marx's discussion in chapter 27 of **Capital** of the role of enclosures
in creating a dispossessed mass of people who were forced, by necessity,
to become the first generation of wage slaves? Either way, access to the
land **was** (and still is, in many countries) a means of being
independent of capitalism -- and one which the state acts to destroy.

Secondly, the garden was a **symbol** of a communist society, not an
expression of the type of society RTS and other anarchists desire. So,
as a **symbol** of a anti-capitalist vision, the garden is a good one
given the history of state violence used to separate working people from
the land and propel them into the labour market. However, it is only a
**symbol** and not, obviously, to be taken as an example of the future
society RTS or other anarchists desire. Only someone lacking in
imagination could confuse a symbol with a vision -- as the press release
states it *"celebrated the possibility of a world that encourages
co-operation and sharing rather than one which rewards greed,
individualism and competition."*

Thirdly, as their press release states, *"Guerrilla Gardening is not a
protest; by its very nature it is a creative peaceful celebration of the
growing global anticapitalist movement."* Mitchinson attacks the action
for being something it was never intended to be.

He "analyses" the RTS press release:

> *"The fact that parliament appears powerless to prevent job losses or
> the destruction of the environment, only demonstrates that it serves
> the interests of capitalism."*

Very true, as Kropotkin argued the *"State is there to protect
exploitation, speculation and private property; it is itself the
by-product of the rapine of the people. The proletariat must rely on his
own hands; he can expect nothing of the State. It is nothing more than
an organisation devised to hinder emancipation at all costs."* [**Words
of a Rebel**, p. 27] He argues elsewhere that *"small groups of men [and
women] were imbued with the . . . spirit of revolt. They also rebelled
-- sometimes with the hope of partial success; for example winning a
strike and of obtaining bread for their children . . . Without the
menace contained in such revolts, no serious concession has ever been
wrung by the people from governing classes."* [**Evolution and
Environment**, p. 103]

Mitchinson seems to agree:

> *"However, under pressure from below it is possible to introduce
> reforms through parliament that are in the interests of ordinary
> people."*

Thus reforms **are** possible, but only if we rely on ourselves,
organise pressure from below and use direct action to force parliament
to act (if that is required). Which is what anarchists have always
argued. Without anti-parliamentary action, parliament will ignore the
population. That is what anarchists have always argued -- we have to
reply on our own organisations, solidarity and direct action to change
things for the better. Faced with such a movement, parliament would
introduce reforms regardless of who was a member of it. Without such a
movement, you end up with Tony Blair. Thus Mitchinson is confused -- by
his own logic, the anarchists are correct, we have to work outside
parliament and electioneering in order to be effective.

He continues:

> *"It is no use declaring parliament to be irrelevant, and turning your
> back on it when the majority do not agree, and still look to
> government to make their lives better. This is the mirror image of the
> sects attitude to the Labour Party. Any and every avenue which can be
> used to improve our lives must be used."*

How do you change the opinion of the majority? By changing your position
to match theirs? Of course not. You change their position by argument
and proving that direct action is more effective in making their lives
better than looking to government. Mitchinson would have a fit if
someone argued *"it is no use declaring capitalism to be wrong and
fighting against it when the majority do not agree and still look to it
to make their lives better."* If the majority do not agree with you,
then you try and change their opinion -- you do not accept that opinion
and hope it goes away by itself!

Mitchinson seems to be following Lenin when he argued *"[y]ou must not
sink to the level of the masses . . . You must tell them the bitter
truth. You are duty bound to call their bourgeois-democratic and
parliamentary prejudices what they are -- prejudices. But at the same
time you must **soberly** follow the **actual** state of the
class-consciousness . . . of **all** the toiling masses."* [**Left-wing
Communism: An Infantile Disorder**, p. 41] Obviously, you cannot tell
workers the bitter truth and at the same time follow their prejudices.
In practice, if you follow their prejudices you cannot help but
encourage faith in parliament, social democratic parties, leaders and so
on. Progress is achieved by discussing issues with people, not ducking
the question of political issues in favour of saying what the majority
want to hear (which is what the capitalist media and education system
encourage them to believe in the first place). As a means of encouraging
revolutionary thought it is doomed to failure.

Also, just to stress the point, any and every avenue which can be used
to improve our lives must be used but only if it actually is
revolutionary and does not place obstacles in the process of social
change. Parliamentary action has been proven time and time again to be a
false way for radical change -- it only ends up turning radicals into
supporters of the status quo. It makes as much sense as arguing that any
and every avenue must be used to cure a disease, including those which
give you a new disease in its place.

19. How does Mitchinson distorts the use of the term *"Self-reliance"*?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson argues that:

> *"In any case this 'self-reliance' is no alternative. Self-reliance
> won't get electricity into your house, educate your children or treat
> you when you are ill."*

No anarchist and no one in RTS ever claimed it would. We use the term
*"self-reliance"* in a totally different way -- as anyone familiar with
anarchist or RTS theory would know. We use it to describe individuals
who think for themselves, question authority, act for themselves and do
not follow leaders. No anarchist uses the term to describe some sort of
peasant life-style. But then why let facts get in the way of a nice
diatribe?

He continues:

> *"We have the resources to cater for all of society's needs, the only
> problem is that we do not own them."*

Actually, the **real** problem is that we do not **control** them. The
examples of Nationalised industries and the Soviet Union should make
this clear. In theory, they were both owned by their populations but, in
practice, they were effectively owned by those who managed them -- state
bureaucrats and managers. They were not used to cater for our needs, but
rather the needs of those who controlled them. For this reason
anarchists argue that common ownership without workers' self-management
in the workplace and community would be little more than state
capitalism (wage labour would still exist, but the state would replace
the boss).

He continues with his distortion of the concept of *"self-reliance"*:

> *"Individualism (self-reliance) cannot be an alternative to socialism,
> where all the resources of society are at all of our disposal, and
> equally we all contribute what we can to society."*

Firstly, anarchists are socialists and mostly seek a (libertarian)
communist society where the resources of the world are at our disposal.

Secondly, self-reliance has little to do with *"individualism"* -- it
has a lot to do with **individuality,** however. The difference is
important.

Thirdly, in a part of the press release strangely unquoted by
Mitchinson, RTS argue that their action *"celebrated the possibility of
a world that encourages co-operation and sharing rather than one which
rewards greed, individualism and competition."* RTS are well aware that
self-reliance does not equal individualism and they are very clear that
oppose individualism and desire co-operation. Given that Mitchinson
quotes from their press release, he must know this and yet he asserts
the opposite.

Mitchinson seems to equate self-reliance with *"individualism"* and so,
presumably, capitalism. However, capitalists do not want self-reliant
workers, they want order takers, people who will not question their
authority. As David Noble points out, after an experiment in workers'
control General Electric replaces it with a the regime that was
*"designed to 'break' the pilots of their new found 'habits' of
self-reliance, self-discipline, and self-respect."* [**Forces of
Production**, p. 307]

Capitalists know the danger of self-reliant people. Self-reliant people
question authority, think for themselves, do not follow leaders and
bring these abilities into any groups they join. Thus self-reliance is
not purely an individual thing, it also refers to groups **and**
classes. Anarchists desire to see a self-reliant working class -- a
class which makes its own decisions and does not follow leaders. Thus,
for anarchists, self-reliance refers to **both** individuals and groups
(just as self-management and self-liberation does). Needless to say, for
those in authority or those seeking authority self-reliance is an evil
thing which must be combated. Hence Mitchinson's diatribe -- it is the
cry of the would-be leader who is afraid his followers will not respect
his authority.

20. Is anarchism an example of *"Philosophical idealism"*?
----------------------------------------------------------

He turns to the May Day demonstration:

> *"Guerrilla gardening and its related varieties that have sprung up in
> various places, is nothing more than an offshoot of the old utopian
> idea of changing society by example."*

Actually, it was a specific demonstration to encourage people to get
involved in collective action, to have a good time and challenge
authority and the status quo. It was an attempt to change society by
example only in the sense that it would encourage others to act, to
challenge the status quo and get involved in collective action. If
Mitchinson was consistent he would have to oppose **every**
demonstration that occurred before the final insurrection that created
the "workers' state" -- a demonstration is, by its very nature, an
example to others of what is possible, an example of our collective
strength and our desire for change. You may be critical of the nature of
the guerrilla gardening action (and many anarchists are), but you cannot
misrepresent its nature as Mitchinson does and be expected to be taken
seriously.

He continues:

> *"The roots of this scheme lie in idealist philosophy. Philosophical
> idealism refers to the notion that people's actions are a consequence
> of their thoughts, that ideas and not our conditions of life determine
> our outlook. When, through a long process of accumulation, we change
> people's minds, then they will live differently, capitalism will
> simply be redundant. The capitalist class themselves will presumably
> sit idly by and watch their system fall apart."*

Given that the "anti-capitalist" demonstrations have meet extensive
state violence, it is clear that those involved are well aware that
capitalist class will not just watch its power disappear.

Also, calling RTS's action *"idealist philosophy"* is quite ironic for
someone who seems intent in ignoring the history of Social Democracy and
dismisses attempts to analyse the Bolsheviks in power as *"bourgeois
slanders."* However, Mitchinson in his diatribe forgets one of the basic
arguments of materialism -- namely that ideas themselves are part of the
material world and so influence society and how it develops. He rejects
the notion that peoples thoughts and ideas determine their actions. He
obviously thinks that people operate on auto-pilot, not thinking about
their actions. However, in reality, what people do is dependent on their
thoughts -- they think about their actions and what motivates them
influences their activity. If thoughts did not determine people's
actions then Mitchinson would not have spent so much time writing this
article!

Thus Mitchinson is well aware of the importance of ideas in social
change, at least implicitly. Indeed, he argues for the need for a *"mass
Labour youth organisation which, fighting for a socialist programme,
could attract these young workers and students."* To state the obvious,
a socialist programme is a means to *"change people's minds"* and
present the possibility of creating a new society. Does he seriously
think a socialist revolution is possible without changing people's
minds, getting them to desire a socialist society?

Moreover, if he had read Bakunin he would be aware that anarchists
consider the class struggle as the way to change people's ideas. As
Bakunin argued:

> *"the germs of [socialist thought] . . . [are to] be found in the
> instinct of every earnest worker. The goal . . . is to make the worker
> fully aware of what he wants, to unjam within him a stream of thought
> corresponding to his instinct . . . What impedes the swifter
> development of this salutary though among the working masses? Their
> ignorance to be sure, that is, for the most part the political and
> religious prejudices with which self-interested classes still try to
> obscure their conscious and their natural instinct. How can we dispel
> this ignorance and destroy these harmful prejudices? By education and
> propaganda? . . . they are insufficient . . . [and] who will conduct
> this propaganda? . . . [The] workers' world . . . is left with but a
> single path, that of **emancipation through practical action** . . .
> It means workers' solidarity in their struggle against the bosses. It
> means **trade-unions**, **organisation** . . . To deliver [the worker]
> from that ignorance [of reactionary ideas], the International relies
> on collective experience he gains in its bosom, especially on the
> progress of the collective struggle of the workers against the bosses
> . . . As soon as he begins to take an active part in this wholly
> material struggle, . . . Socialism replaces religion in his mind. . .
> through practice and collective experience . . . the progressive and
> development of the economic struggle will bring him more and more to
> recognise his true enemies . . . The workers thus enlisted in the
> struggle will necessarily . . . recognise himself to be a
> revolutionary socialist, and he will act as one."* [**The Basic
> Bakunin**, pp. 102-3]

Thus anarchists are aware that experience determines thought but we are
also aware that thought is essential for action. We recognise the
importance of ideas in the class struggle but we also realise that the
ideas people have change as a result of that struggle. To state
otherwise is to misrepresent anarchist thought.

21. How is Mitchinson's critique self-contradictory?
----------------------------------------------------

He continues his distortion:

> *"Whilst believing in a revolutionary struggle to overthrow
> capitalism, anarchists argue that it must be replaced by...nothing."*

This is ironic for quite a few reasons. Firstly, above Mitchinson
claimed that anarchists did not aim to overthrow capitalism, just the
state. Now he is claiming we **do** believe in overthrowing capitalism.
Secondly, he quoted Trotsky saying that anarchists just ignore the
state. Now Mitchinson states we aim to overthrow the capitalism via
revolutionary struggle. How do you overthrow something via revolutionary
struggle by ignoring it? His critique is not even internally consistent.

Moreover, he is well aware what anarchists want to replace capitalism
with, after all he quotes an anarchist conference which stated that they
aimed for *"the creation of an absolutely free economic organisation and
federation based on work and equality"*! Bakunin was always arguing that
the International Workers Association should become *"an earnest
organisation of workers associations from all countries, capable of
replacing this departing world of States and bourgeoisie."* [**The Basic
Bakunin**, p. 110] In other words, the *"future social organisation must
be made solely from the bottom upwards, by the free association of
workers, first in their unions, then in the communes, regions, nations
and finally in a great federation, international and universal."*
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 206] Even Engels
acknowledged that the anarchists aimed to *"dispose all the authorities,
abolish the state and replace it with the organisation of the
International."* [Marx, Engels and Lenin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 72] Anyone
with even a basic knowledge of anarchist theory would know this. And
given that Mitchinson stated that *"Marx saw a future society without a
state"* as well and that he quotes Trotsky as arguing *"Marxists are
wholly in agreement with the anarchists in regard to the final goal: the
liquidation of the state"* we can only assume that Marxists also aim at
replacing it, eventually, when the state *"withers away,"* with
*"nothing."*

This sentence, more than any other, shows the level which some Marxists
will sink to when discussing anarchism. It shows that the standard
Marxist critique of anarchism is little more than an inconsistent
collection of lies, distortion and misrepresentation. Mitchinson not
only contradicts his ideological gurus, he even contradicts himself!
That is truly impressive.

22. How did Trotsky make the trains run on time?
------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson asks:

> *"Yet with no central apparatus, no organisation, how would the trains
> run on time, how could organ transplants be organised, how could the
> world's resources be channelled into permanently overcoming famine."*

Firstly, we must note the usual fallacy -- being opposed to a *"central
apparatus"* does not imply *"no organisation."* Instead of centralised
organisation, anarchists propose **federal** organisations in which
co-ordination is achieved by collective decision making from the bottom
up. In other words, rather than delegate power into the hands of
*"leaders"*, an anarchist organisation leaves power at the bottom and
co-ordination results from collective agreements that reflect the needs
of those directly affected by them. Thus a federal organisation
co-ordinates activities but in a bottom-up fashion rather than top-down,
as in a centralised body.

Secondly, needless to say, anarchists are quite clear on who would make
the trains run on time -- the railway workers. Anarchists are firm
supporters of workers' self-management. Anyone with even a basic
understanding of anarchist theory would know that. Moreover, the
experience of workers' self-management of the railways by the anarchist
union the CNT during the Spanish Revolution indicates that such
anarchism can, and does, ensure that the trains run on time In contrast,
the experience of Russia -- when the Bolsheviks did create a *"central
apparatus"* -- proved a total failure. It is quite appropriate that
Mitchinson uses the *"trains running on time"* example, after all it is
what apologists for Italian fascism praised Mussolini for! This is
because Trotsky (when he ran the railways) did so in a way that
Mussolini would have been proud of -- he subjected the railway workers
to military discipline:

> *"Due to the Civil War -- and to other factors less often mentioned,
> such as the attitude of the railway workers to the 'new' regime -- the
> Russian railways had virtually ceased to function. Trotsky, Commissar
> for Transport, was granted wide emergency powers [in August 1920] to
> try out his theories of 'militarisation of labour.' He started out
> placing the railwaymen and the personnel of the repair workshops under
> martial law. When the railwaymen's trade union objected, he summarily
> ousted its leaders and, **with the full support and endorsement of the
> Party leadership,** 'appointed others willing to do his bidding. He
> repeated the procedure in other unions of transport workers.'"*
> [Maurice Brinton, **The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control**, p. 67]

He ruled the *"central apparatus"* he created, called the Tsektran,
*"along strict military and bureaucratic lines."* [**Ibid.**] The trains
did start moving again, of course. The question is -- do workers manage
their own activity or does some other group. Trotsky and Lenin in power
decided for the latter -- and built the *"centralised apparatus"*
required to ensure that result. Needless to say, Trotsky did not justify
his militarisation of work in terms of necessary evils resulting from
appalling objective conditions. Rather he saw it as a matter of
*"principle"*:

> *"The working class cannot be left wandering all over Russia. They
> must be thrown here and there, appointed, commanded, just like
> soldiers."*
>
> "The very principle of compulsory labour is for the Communist quite
> unquestionable . . . the only solution to economic difficulties from
> the point of view of both principle and of practice is to treat the
> population of the whole country as the reservoir of the necessary
> labour power . . . and to introduce strict order into the work of its
> registration, mobilisation and utilisation."
>
> "The introduction of compulsory labour service is unthinkable without
> the application . . . of the methods of militarisation of labour."
> [quoted by M. Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 61 and p. 66]

Why *"principle"*? Perhaps because Marx and Engels had stated in **The
Communist Manifesto** that one of the measures required during the
revolution was the *"[e]stablishment of industrial armies"*? [**Selected
Writings**, p. 53]

Moreover, the experience of *"central apparatus"* in Bolshevik Russia
helped create famine -- the vast bureaucracy spawned by the "workers'
state" could not handle the information a centralised distribution
system required. Food rotted in trains waiting for bureaucrats to
*"channel"* resources (and, needless to say, the bureaucrats never went
hungry).

23. Can centralised planning meet the needs of the whole of society?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Our Marxist friend then quotes **Maybe**:

> *"The radical social movements that are increasingly coming together
> don't want to seize power but to dissolve it. They are dreaming up
> many autonomous alternative forms of social organisation, forms that
> are directly linked to the specific needs of locality. What might be
> an alternative to capitalism for people living currently in a housing
> estate in Croydon is completely different to what might be suitable
> for the inhabitants of the slums of Delhi."*

He comments on these very sensible words:

> *"It cannot be of no concern to us what form a new society will take
> in different countries or even different regions. The economic power
> we have created over centuries can and must be used in a planned,
> rational way to eradicate hunger, disease and illiteracy. It must be
> used in the interests of the whole of society."*

Obviously, the needs of actual people, what sort of society they want,
is irrelevant to Marxism. Also ignored is the fact that different
cultures will have different visions of what a free society will be
like. Thus, for Mitchinson, everyone, everywhere, will be subject to the
same form of society -- *"in the interests of society."* However, as
Bakunin argued, the state *"is an arbitrary creature in whose breast all
the positive, living, individual or local interests of the people clash,
destroy and absorb each other into the abstraction known as the common
interest, the **public good** or the **public welfare**, and where all
real wills are dissolved into the other abstraction that bears the name
of **the will of the people.** It follows that this alleged will of the
people is never anything but the sacrifice and dissolution of all the
real wants of the population, just as this so-called public good is
nothing but the sacrifice of their interests."* [**Michael Bakunin:
Selected Writings**, pp. 265-6]

The different needs of different areas and regions must be the starting
point of any social reconstruction, the basis on which we create
specific programmes to improve our societies, eco-systems and world. If
we do not recognise the diversity inherent in a world of billions of
people, millions of eco-systems, thousands of cultures, hundreds of
regions then we cannot use the resources of society to improve our
lives. Instead we would have uniform plan imposed on everything which,
by its very nature, cannot take into accounts the real needs of those
who make up *"the whole of society."* In other words, the resources of
the world must not be used by an abstraction claiming to act *"in the
interests of society"* but rather by the people who actually make up
society themselves -- if we do that we ensure that their interests are
meet directly as they manage their own affairs and that their use
reflects the specific requirements of specific people and eco-systems
and not some abstraction called *"the interests of society"* which, by
its centralised nature, would sacrifice those interests.

Of course, it seems somewhat strange that Mitchinson thinks that people
in, say, New Delhi or Croyden, will not seek to eradicate hunger,
disease and illiteracy as they see fit, co-operating with others as and
when they need to and creating the federative organisations required to
do so. The need to share experiences and resources does not conflict
with the different areas experimenting in different ways, expressing
themselves in ways which suit their particular needs and difficulties.
As any ecologist could tell you, different eco-systems need different
forms of care. The same with communities -- Mitchinson would drown local
needs in the name of an artificial construct.

He continues:

> *"That can only be achieved by the democratic planning of society
> where the power at our fingertips could be used with due respect for
> the future of the planet, the conservation of it's resources, our own
> working conditions, and living standards. Whether we like it or not,
> growing a few carrots on empty plots of land will not eradicate hunger
> and famine."*

How can *"democratic planning"* of the whole *"of society"* take into
account the needs of specific localities, eco-systems, communities? It
cannot. Respect for the future of our planet means respecting the
fundamental law of nature -- namely that conformity is death. Diversity
is the law of life -- which means that a future socialist society must
be libertarian, organised from the bottom up, based on local
self-management and a respect for diversity. Such a federal structures
does not preclude co-ordinated activity (or the creation of democratic
**plans**) -- the reverse in fact, as federalism exists to allow
co-ordination -- but instead of being imposed by a few *"leaders"* as in
a centralised system, it is the product of local needs and so reflective
of the needs of real people and eco-systems.

As for his comment about *"due respect of the future of the planet"* is
obviously inspired by *"the youth"* being concerned about ecological
issues. However, Leninism's desire for centralised states and planning
excludes an ecological perspective by definition. As Bakunin argued:

> *"What man, what group of individuals, no matter how great their
> genius, would dare to think themselves able to embrace and understand
> the plethora of interests, attitudes and activities so various in
> every country, every province, locality and profession."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 240]

Diversity is the basis of any eco-system. Centralism cannot, as Bakunin
makes clear, embrace it.

Needless to say, Mitchinson's comments about carrots is pure stupidity
and an insult to the intelligence of his audience.

24. Is technology neutral?
--------------------------

Mitchinson goes on:

> *"We have the power to do just that, but only if we combine new
> technology, industry and the talents and active participation of
> millions."*

Needless to say, he fails to indicate how the millions **can**
participate in a *"centralised apparatus"* beyond electing their
*"leaders."* Which indicates the fallacy of Marxism -- it claims to
desire a society based on the participation of everyone yet favours a
form of organisation -- centralisation -- that precludes that
participation.

In addition, he fails to note that technology and industry have been
developed by capitalists to enhance their own power. As we argued in
[section D.10](secD10.html), technology cannot be viewed in isolation
from the class struggle. This means that industry and technology was not
developed to allow the active participation of millions. The first act
of any revolution will be seizing of the means of life -- including
industry and technology -- by those who use it and, from that moment on,
their radical transformation into **appropriate** technology and
industry, based on the needs of the workers, the community and the
planet. Mitchinson obvious shares the common Marxist failing of
believing technology and industry is neutral. In this he follows Lenin.
As S.A. Smith correctly summarises:

> *"Lenin believed that socialism could be built only on the basis of
> large-scale industry as developed by capitalism, with its specific
> types of productivity and social organisation of labour. Thus for him,
> capitalist methods of labour-discipline or one-man management were not
> necessarily incompatible with socialism. Indeed, he went so far as to
> consider them to be inherently progressive, failing to recognise that
> such methods undermined workers' initiative at the point of
> production. This was because Lenin believed that the transition to
> socialism was guaranteed, ultimately, not by the self-activity of
> workers, but by the 'proletarian' character of state power. . . There
> is no doubt that Lenin did conceive proletarian power in terms of the
> central state and lacked a conception of localising such power at the
> point of production."* [**Red Petrograd**, pp. 261-2]

The Russian workers, unsurprisingly, had a different perspective:

> *"Implicit in the movement for workers' control was a belief that
> capitalist methods cannot be used for socialist ends. In their battle
> to democratise the factory, in their emphasis on the importance of
> collective initiatives by the direct producers in transforming the
> work situation, the factory committees had become aware -- in a
> partial and groping way, to be sure -- that factories are not merely
> sites of production, but also of reproduction -- the reproduction of a
> certain structure of social relations based on the division between
> those who give orders and those who take them, between those who
> direct and those who execute . . . inscribed within their practice was
> a distinctive vision of socialism, central to which was workplace
> democracy."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 261]

The movement for workers' control was undermined and finally replaced by
one-man management by the kind of *"central apparatus"* Mitchinson urges
us to build (see M. Brinton's classic work **The Bolsheviks and Workers'
Control** for more details). Those who do not study history are doomed
to repeat it.

He goes on:

> *"The economic power we have created can be compared to the
> destructive force of lightning, untamed and anarchic under the market,
> yet organised into cables and wires electricity transforms our lives.
> Industry is not the enemy, nor are machines. The state is, but it is a
> symptom not the disease. It is capitalism and its ownership of the
> economy, its stewardship of society that we have to replace."*

However, unlike electricity, *"economic power"* requires people to
operate it. The question is not whether *"machines"* are the enemy
(often they are, as machines are used by capitalists to weaken the power
of workers and control them). The question is whether the future society
we aim at is one based on workers' and community self-management or
whether it is based on an authoritarian system of delegated power. It is
clear that Marxists like Mitchinson desire the latter -- indeed, as is
clear from his diatribe, he cannot comprehend an alternative to
hierarchical organisation.

Given that one of the things capitalism and the state have in common is
a hierarchical, top-down structure, it is clear that any revolutionary
movement must fight both -- at the same time.

25. Do anarchists ignore the *"strength of the working class"*?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Mitchinson argues that:

> *"The task of our time is to combine the strength and experience of
> the working class and its mighty organisations with the power and
> energy of the youth internationally, on the basis of a clear
> understanding of what capitalism is, what the state is, and a
> programme for changing society. That requires a combination of theory
> and action. In that combination lies the strength of Marxism."*

The first question is surely **what** *"mighty organisations"* of the
working class is he talking about. Is it the Labour Party? Or is it the
trade unions? Probably the latter -- if so, the question is how
effective have these *"mighty organisations"* been recently? The answer
must, surely, be "not very." Why is that? In union there is strength, as
anarchists have long been aware. Why has this strength been so lacking?
Simply because the unions are centralised, bureaucratic and run from the
top down. They have placed numerous barriers in front of their members
when they have taken militant action. That is why anarchists urge
workers to form rank-and-file controlled organisations to manage their
own struggles and take back the power they have delegated to their
so-called leaders. Only in this way, by building truly revolutionary
organisations like workers' councils (soviets), factory committees,
community assemblies and so on can they really create a *"mighty"*
force. In other words, anarchists are well aware of the strength of
working class people and their power to change society -- indeed, as
proven above, anarchism is based on that awareness and organise
appropriately!

The second question is surely to ask whether Mitchinson is aware that
**Reclaim the Streets** have been building links with rank and file
trade union militants for years -- long before Mitchinson decided to
enlighten them with *"the strength of Marxism."* In other words, *"the
strength of Marxism"* seems to rest in telling radical working class
people to do what they have already doing! Such strength is truly
amazing and must explain the prominent role Leninists have had in the
numerous anti-capitalist demonstrations and organisations recently.

Needless to say, **anarchism** provides *"a clear understanding of what
capitalism is, what the state is, and a programme for changing society.
That requires a combination of theory and action."* This has been proven
above when we corrected Mitchinson's numerous errors regarding anarchist
theory. Moreover, as far as combining theory and action goes, it is
clear that **anarchism** has been doing that of late, **not** Marxism.
While anarchists have been at the forefront of the anti-capitalist
demonstrations, working with others as equals, Marxists have been
noticeable by their absence. Combining theory and practice,
non-hierarchically organised direct action closed down the WTO and
presented a clear message to the oppressed around the world --
**resistance is fertile.** What have Marxists achieved? Apparently
producing articles such as these, distorting the politics and activities
of those who actually **are** changing the world rather than just
interpreting it. That they cannot produce an honest critique of
anarchism indicates the uselessness of their politics.

26. What does Mitchinson's article tell about the nature of Trotskyism?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

He finishes his diatribe as follows:

> *"If you want to fight against capitalism, do so fully armed with a
> socialist programme and perspective. Join with us in the struggle for
> the socialist transformation of the planet."*

It is clear that to be *"fully armed with a socialist programme"* means
to critique that which you know nothing about, spread slanders and lie
about what your opponents actually think. There **is** much to be
critical of in the recent anti-capitalist demonstrations and the various
groups that have helped organise and take part in them. Anarchists have
been the first to point these out. However, we have a lot to learn from
them as well -- they are struggling against capitalism and, as Kropotkin
argues, *"Anarchism . . . originated in everyday struggles"* and *"the
Anarchist movement was renewed each time it received an impression from
some great practical lesson: it derived its origin from the teachings of
life itself."* [**Evolution and Environment**, p. 58 and p. 57]

Thus we must critique these movements honestly and as equals --
Mitchinson, as can be seen, does neither. He slanders those involved and
dismisses out of hand their experiences and the reasons that have
brought them to struggle in a specific way against the dominant society.
In this he follows Lenin, who argued in **Left-Wing Communism: An
Infantile Disorder** that western revolutionaries ignore their own
experiences in their own -- and similar -- countries and instead follow
the "lessons" of experiences gained in a near pre-capitalist, absolutist
state. The stupidity of such an approach is clear.

Mitchinson presents those in struggle with the ultimatum "subscribe to
our platform or be denounced." Little wonder that Leninists are
non-existent in the groups that have taken part and organised the
anti-capitalist demonstrations -- not willing to learn from those
involved in the class struggle, all they can do is act as petty
sectarians. Sectarians expect working class people to relate to their
predetermined political positions, whereas revolutionaries apply our
politics to the conditions we face as members of the working class. For
Leninists revolutionary consciousness is not generated by working class
self-activity, but is embodied in the party. The important issues facing
the working class -- and how to fight -- are to be determined not by the
workers ourselves, but by the leadership of the party, who are the
"vanguard of the working class". Hence Mitchinson's dismissal (in a
particularly dishonest manner, we must stress) of those involved in
struggle and their experiences. True "revolution" obviously lies in the
unchanging ideas generated at the start of the twentieth century in a
monarchy developing towards capitalism, **not** in the experiences and
desires of living people fighting for freedom in the here and now. Yes,
these ideas and movements can be confused and unclear -- but they are
living and subject to change by the influence of revolutionaries who act
in a libertarian manner (i.e. as equals, willing to learn as well as
teach).

The Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci once wrote that *"to tell the truth
is a communist and revolutionary act."* However, even he did not apply
this when discussing anarchism and the activities of anarchists (see
Gwyn Williams' **Proletarian Order**, pp. 193-4). Be that as it may,
Gramsci's point is correct. Telling the truth is a revolutionary act. If
we judge Mitchinson's article by this standard then we can only conclude
that neither he nor the politics he defends are revolutionary or
communist.

Thus we find his ending comment truly a *"flight of fancy"* -- after
reading our comments above, we hope you agree with us. If you seek a
**true** socialist transformation of this planet rather than its
degeneration into centralised state capitalism, discover more about
anarchism.
