5 Will privatising "the commons" increase liberty?
==================================================

"Anarcho"-capitalists aim for a situation in which *"no land areas, no
square footage in the world shall remain 'public,'"* in other words
**everything** will be *"privatised."* [Murray Rothbard, **Nations by
Consent**, p. 84] They claim that privatising "the commons" (e.g. roads,
parks, etc.) which are now freely available to all will increase
liberty. Is this true? We have shown before why the claim that
privatisation can protect the environment is highly implausible (see
section [E.2](secE2.html)). Here we will concern ourselves with private
ownership of commonly used "property" which we all take for granted and
pay for with taxes.

Its clear from even a brief consideration of a hypothetical society
based on "privatised" roads (as suggested by Murray Rothbard in **For a
New Liberty**, pp. 202-203 and David Friedman in **The Machinery of
Freedom**, pp. 98-101) that the only increase of liberty will be for the
ruling elite. As "anarcho"-capitalism is based on paying for what one
uses, privatisation of roads would require some method of tracking
individuals to ensure that they pay for the roads they use. In the UK,
for example, during the 1980s the British Tory government looked into
the idea of toll-based motorways. Obviously having toll-booths on
motorways would hinder their use and restrict "freedom," and so they
came up with the idea of tracking cars by satellite. Every vehicle would
have a tracking device installed in it and a satellite would record
where people went and which roads they used. They would then be sent a
bill or have their bank balances debited based on this information (in
the fascist city-state/company town of Singapore such a scheme **has**
been introduced).

If we extrapolate from this example to a system of **fully** privatised
"commons," it would clearly require all individuals to have tracking
devices on them so they could be properly billed for use of roads,
pavements, etc. Obviously being tracked by private firms would be a
serious threat to individual liberty. Another, less costly, option would
be for private guards to randomly stop and question car-owners and
individuals to make sure they had paid for the use of the road or
pavement in question. "Parasites" would be arrested and fined or locked
up. Again, however, being stopped and questioned by uniformed
individuals has more in common with police states than liberty.
Toll-boothing **every** street would be highly unfeasible due to the
costs involved and difficulties for use that it implies. Thus the idea
of privatising roads and charging drivers to gain access seems
impractical at best and distinctly freedom endangering if implemented at
worse.

Of course, the option of owners letting users have free access to the
roads and pavements they construct and run would be difficult for a
profit-based company. No one could make a profit in that case. If
companies paid to construct roads for their customers/employees to use,
they would be financially hindered in competition with other companies
that did not, and thus would be unlikely to do so. If they restricted
use purely to their own customers, the tracking problem appears again.

Some may object that this picture of extensive surveillance of
individuals would not occur or be impossible. However, Murray Rothbard
(in a slightly different context) argued that technology would be
available to collate information about individuals. He argued that
*"[i]t should be pointed out that modern technology makes even more
feasible the collection and dissemination of information about people's
credit ratings and records of keeping or violating their contracts or
arbitration agreements. Presumably, an anarchist [sic!] society would
see the expansion of this sort of dissemination of data."* [*"Society
Without A State"*, in **Nomos XIX**, Pennock and Chapman (eds.), p. 199]
So, perhaps, with the total privatisation of society we would also see
the rise of private Big Brothers, collecting information about
individuals for use by property owners. The example of the **Economic
League** (a British company who provided the "service" of tracking the
political affiliations and activities of workers for employers) springs
to mind.

And, of course, these privatisation suggestions ignore differences in
income and market power. If, for example, variable pricing is used to
discourage road use at times of peak demand (to eliminate traffic jams
at rush-hour) as is suggested both by Murray Rothbard and David
Friedman, then the rich will have far more "freedom" to travel than the
rest of the population. And we may even see people having to go into
debt just to get to work or move to look for work.

Which raises another problem with notion of total privatisation, the
problem that it implies the end of freedom of travel. Unless you get
permission or (and this seems more likely) pay for access, you will not
be able to travel **anywhere.** As Rothbard **himself** makes clear,
"anarcho"-capitalism means the end of the right to roam or even travel.
He states that *"it became clear to me that a totally privatised country
would not have open borders at all. If every piece of land in a country
were owned . . . no immigrant could enter there unless invited to enter
and allowed to rent, or purchase, property."* [**Nations by Consent**,
p. 84] What happens to those who cannot **afford** to pay for access is
not addressed (perhaps, being unable to exit a given capitalist's land
they will become bonded labourers? Or be imprisoned and used to undercut
workers' wages via prison labour? Perhaps they will just be shot as
trespassers? Who can tell?). Nor is it addressed how this situation
actually **increases** freedom. For Rothbard, a *"totally privatised
country would be as closed as the particular inhabitants and property
owners [**not** the same thing, we must point out] desire. It seems
clear, then, that the regime of open borders that exists **de facto** in
the US really amounts to a compulsory opening by the central state. . .
and does not genuinely reflect the wishes of the proprietors."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 85] Of course, the wishes of **non**-proprietors (the vast
majority) do not matter in the slightest. Thus, it is clear, that with
the privatisation of "the commons" the right to roam, to travel, would
become a privilege, subject to the laws and rules of the property
owners. This can hardly be said to **increase** freedom for anyone bar
the capitalist class.

Rothbard acknowledges that *"in a fully privatised world, access rights
would obviously be a crucial part of land ownership."* [**Nations by
Consent**, p. 86] Given that there is no free lunch, we can imagine we
would have to pay for such "rights." The implications of this are
obviously unappealing and an obvious danger to individual freedom. The
problem of access associated with the idea of privatising the roads can
only be avoided by having a "right of passage" encoded into the "general
libertarian law code." This would mean that road owners would be
required, by law, to let anyone use them. But where are "absolute"
property rights in this case? Are the owners of roads not to have the
same rights as other owners? And if "right of passage" is enforced, what
would this mean for road owners when people sue them for car-pollution
related illnesses? (The right of those injured by pollution to sue
polluters is the main way "anarcho"-capitalists propose to protect the
environment. See sections [E.2](secE2.html) and [E.3](secE3.html)). It
is unlikely that those wishing to bring suit could find, never mind sue,
the millions of individual car owners who could have potentially caused
their illness. Hence the road-owners would be sued for letting polluting
(or unsafe) cars onto "their" roads. The road-owners would therefore
desire to restrict pollution levels by restricting the right to use
their property, and so would resist the "right of passage" as an
"attack" on their "absolute" property rights. If the road-owners got
their way (which would be highly likely given the need for "absolute"
property rights and is suggested by the variable pricing way to avoid
traffic jams mentioned above) and were able to control who used their
property, freedom to travel would be **very** restricted and limited to
those whom the owner considered "desirable." Indeed, Murray Rothbard
supports such a regime (*"In the free [sic!] society, they [travellers]
would, in the first instance, have the right to travel only on those
streets whose owners agree to have them there"* [**The Ethics of
Liberty**, p. 119]). The threat to liberty in such a system is obvious
-- to all but Rothbard and other right-libertarians, of course.

To take another example, let us consider the privatisation of parks,
streets and other public areas. Currently, individuals can use these
areas to hold political demonstrations, hand out leaflets, picket and so
on. However, under "anarcho"-capitalism the owners of such property can
restrict such liberties if they desire, calling such activities
"initiation of force" (although they cannot explain how speaking your
mind is an example of "force"). Therefore, freedom of speech, assembly
and a host of other liberties we take for granted would be reduced (if
not eliminated) under a right-"libertarian" regime. Or, taking the case
of pickets and other forms of social struggle, its clear that
privatising "the commons" would only benefit the bosses. Strikers or
other activists picketing or handing out leaflets in shopping centre's
are quickly ejected by private security even today. Think about how much
worse it would become under "anarcho"-capitalism when the whole world
becomes a series of malls -- it would be impossible to hold a picket
when the owner of the pavement objects, for example (as Rothbard himself
argues, **Op. Cit.**, p. 132) and if the owner of the pavement also
happens to be the boss being picketed, then workers' rights would be
zero. Perhaps we could also see capitalists suing working class
organisations for littering their property if they do hand out leaflets
(so placing even greater stress on limited resources).

The I.W.W. went down in history for its rigorous defence of freedom of
speech because of its rightly famous "free speech" fights in numerous
American cities and towns. Repression was inflicted upon wobblies who
joined the struggle by "private citizens," but in the end the I.W.W.
won. Consider the case under "anarcho"-capitalism. The wobblies would
have been "criminal aggressors" as the owners of the streets have
refused to allow "undesirables" to use them to argue their case. If they
refused to acknowledge the decree of the property owners, private cops
would have taken them away. Given that those who controlled city
government in the historical example were the wealthiest citizens in
town, its likely that the same people would have been involved in the
fictional ("anarcho"-capitalist) account. Is it a good thing that in the
real account the wobblies are hailed as heroes of freedom but in the
fictional one they are "criminal aggressors"? Does converting public
spaces into private property **really** stop restrictions on free speech
being a bad thing?

Of course, Rothbard (and other right-libertarians) are aware that
privatisation will not remove restrictions on freedom of speech,
association and so on (while, at the same time, trying to portray
themselves as supporters of such liberties!). However, for
right-libertarians such restrictions are of no consequence. As Rothbard
argues, any *"prohibitions would not be state imposed, but would simply
be requirements for residence or for use of some person's or community's
land area."* [**Nations by Consent**, p. 85] Thus we yet again see the
blindness of right-libertarians to the commonality between private
property and the state. The state also maintains that submitting to its
authority is the requirement for taking up residence in its territory
(see also [section 2.3](append132.html#secf23) for more on this). As
Benjamin Tucker noted, the state can be defined as (in part) *"the
assumption of sole authority over a given area and all within it."*
[**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 24] If the property owners can
determine "prohibitions" (i.e. laws and rules) for those who use the
property then they are the *"sole authority over a given area and all
within it,"* i.e. a state. Thus privatising "the commons" means
subjecting the non-property owners to the rules and laws of the property
owners -- in effect, privatising the state and turning the world into a
series of Monarchies and oligarchies without the pretence of democracy
and democratic rights.

These examples can hardly be said to be increasing liberty for society
as a whole, although "anarcho" capitalists seem to think they would. So
far from **increasing** liberty for all, then, privatising the commons
would only increase it for the ruling elite, by giving them yet another
monopoly from which to collect income and exercise their power over. It
would **reduce** freedom for everyone else. As Peter Marshall notes,
*"[i]n the name of freedom, the anarcho-capitalists would like to turn
public spaces into private property, but freedom does not flourish
behind high fences protected by private companies but expands in the
open air when it is enjoyed by all"* [**Demanding the Impossible**, p.
564].

Little wonder Proudhon argued that *"if the public highway is nothing
but an accessory of private property; if the communal lands are
converted into private property; if the public domain, in short, is
guarded, exploited, leased, and sold like private property -- what
remains for the proletaire? Of what advantage is it to him that society
has left the state of war to enter the regime of police?"* [**System of
Economic Contradictions**, p. 371]
