4 What is the right-libertarian position on private property?
=============================================================

Right libertarians are not interested in eliminating capitalist private
property and thus the authority, oppression and exploitation which goes
with it. It is true that they call for an end to the state, but this is
not because they are concerned about workers being exploited or
oppressed but because they don't want the state to impede capitalists'
"freedom" to exploit and oppress workers even more than is the case now!

They make an idol of private property and claim to defend absolute,
"unrestricted" property rights (i.e. that property owners can do
anything they like with their property, as long as it does not damage
the property of others. In particular, taxation and theft are among the
greatest evils possible as they involve coercion against "justly held"
property). They agree with John Adams that *"[t]he moment that idea is
admitted into society that property is not as sacred as the Laws of God,
and that there is not a force of law and public justice to protect it,
anarchy and tyranny commence. Property must be sacred or liberty cannot
exist."*

But in their celebration of property as the source of liberty they
ignore the fact that private property is a source of "tyranny" in itself
(see sections [B.1](secB1.html) and [B.4](secB4.html), for example --
and please note that anarchists only object to private property, **not**
individual possession, see section [B.3.1](secB3.html#secb31)). However,
as much anarchists may disagree about other matters, they are united in
condemning private property. Thus Proudhon argued that property was
*"theft"* and *"despotism"* while Stirner indicated the religious and
statist nature of private property and its impact on individual liberty
when he wrote :

> *"Property in the civic sense means **sacred** property, such that I
> must **respect** your property... Be it ever so little, if one only
> has somewhat of his own - to wit, a **respected** property: The more
> such owners... the more 'free people and good patriots' has the
> State.*
> "Political liberalism, like everything religious, counts on
> **respect,** humaneness, the virtues of love. . . . For in practice
> people respect nothing, and everyday the small possessions are bought
> up again by greater proprietors, and the 'free people' change into day
> labourers." [**The Ego and Its Own**, p. 248]

Thus "anarcho"-capitalists reject totally one of the common (and so
defining) features of all anarchist traditions -- the opposition to
capitalist property. From Individualist Anarchists like Tucker to
Communist-Anarchists like Bookchin, anarchists have been opposed to what
Godwin termed *"accumulated property."* This was because it was in
*"direct contradiction"* to property in the form of *"the produce of his
[the worker's] own industry"* and so it allows *"one man. . . [to]
dispos[e] of the produce of another man's industry."* [**The Anarchist
Reader**, pp. 129-131] Thus, for anarchists, capitalist property is a
source exploitation and domination, **not** freedom (it undermines the
freedom associated with possession by created relations of domination
between owner and employee).

Hardly surprising then the fact that, according to Murray Bookchin,
Murray Rothbard *"attacked me [Bookchin] as an anarchist with vigour
because, as he put it, I am opposed to private property."* [**The
Raven**, no. 29, p. 343]

We will discuss Rothbard's "homesteading" justification of property in
the [next section](append134.html#secf41). However, we will note here
one aspect of right-libertarian defence of "unrestricted" property
rights, namely that it easily generates evil side effects such as
hierarchy and starvation. As famine expert Amartya Sen notes:

> *"Take a theory of entitlements based on a set of rights of
> 'ownership, transfer and rectification.' In this system a set of
> holdings of different people are judged to be just (or unjust) by
> looking at past history, and not by checking the consequences of that
> set of holdings. But what if the consequences are recognisably
> terrible? . . .[R]efer[ing] to some empirical findings in a work on
> famines . . . evidence [is presented] to indicate that in many large
> famines in the recent past, in which millions of people have died,
> there was no over-all decline in food availability at all, and the
> famines occurred precisely because of shifts in entitlement resulting
> from exercises of rights that are perfectly legitimate. . . . [Can]
> famines . . . occur with a system of rights of the kind morally
> defended in various ethical theories, including Nozick's. I believe
> the answer is straightforwardly yes, since for many people the only
> resource that they legitimately possess, viz. their labour-power, may
> well turn out to be unsaleable in the market, giving the person no
> command over food . . . [i]f results such as starvations and famines
> were to occur, would the distribution of holdings still be morally
> acceptable despite their disastrous consequences? There is something
> deeply implausible in the affirmative answer."* [**Resources, Values
> and Development**, pp. 311-2]

Thus "unrestricted" property rights can have seriously bad consequences
and so the existence of "justly held" property need not imply a just or
free society -- far from it. The inequalities property can generate can
have a serious on individual freedom (see section
[3.1](append133.html#secf31)). Indeed, Murray Rothbard argued that the
state was evil not because it restricted individual freedom but because
the resources it claimed to own were not "justly" acquired. Thus
right-libertarian theory judges property **not** on its impact on
current freedom but by looking at past history. This has the interesting
side effect of allowing its supporters to look at capitalist and statist
hierarchies, acknowledge their similar negative effects on the liberty
of those subjected to them but argue that one is legitimate and the
other is not simply because of their history! As if this changed the
domination and unfreedom that both inflict on people living today (see
section [2.3](append132.html#secf23) for further discussion and sections
[2.8](append132.html#secf28) and [4.2](append134.html#secf42) for other
examples of "justly acquired" property producing terrible consequences).

The defence of capitalist property does have one interesting side
effect, namely the need arises to defend inequality and the
authoritarian relationships inequality creates. In order to protect the
private property needed by capitalists in order to continue exploiting
the working class, "anarcho"-capitalists propose private security forces
rather than state security forces (police and military) -- a proposal
that is equivalent to bringing back the state under another name.

Due to (capitalist) private property, wage labour would still exist
under "anarcho"-capitalism (it is capitalism after all). This means that
"defensive" force, a state, is required to "defend" exploitation,
oppression, hierarchy and authority from those who suffer them.
Inequality makes a mockery of free agreement and "consent" (see section
[3.1](append133.html#secf31)). As Peter Kropotkin pointed out long ago:

> *"When a workman sells his labour to an employer . . . it is a mockery
> to call that a free contract. Modern economists may call it free, but
> the father of political economy -- Adam Smith -- was never guilty of
> such a misrepresentation. As long as three-quarters of humanity are
> compelled to enter into agreements of that description, force is, of
> course, necessary, both to enforce the supposed agreements and to
> maintain such a state of things. Force -- and a good deal of force --
> is necessary to prevent the labourers from taking possession of what
> they consider unjustly appropriated by the few. . . . The Spencerian
> party [proto-right-libertarians] perfectly well understand that; and
> while they advocate no force for changing the existing conditions,
> they advocate still more force than is now used for maintaining them.
> As to Anarchy, it is obviously as incompatible with plutocracy as with
> any other kind of -cracy."* [**Anarchism and Anarchist Communism**,
> pp. 52-53]

Because of this need to defend privilege and power, "anarcho"-capitalism
is best called "private-state" capitalism. This will be discussed in
more detail in section [6](append136.html).

By advocating private property, right libertarians contradict many of
their other claims. For example, they say that they support the right of
individuals to travel where they like. They make this claim because they
assume that only the state limits free travel. But this is a false
assumption. Owners must agree to let you on their land or property
(*"people only have the right to move to those properties and lands
where the owners desire to rent or sell to them."* [Murray Rothbard,
**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 119]. There is no "freedom of travel" onto
private property (including private roads). Therefore immigration may be
just as hard under "anarcho"-capitalism as it is under statism (after
all, the state, like the property owner, only lets people in whom it
wants to let in). People will still have to get another property owner
to agree to let them in before they can travel -- exactly as now (and,
of course, they also have to get the owners of the road to let them in
as well). Private property, as can be seen from this simple example, is
the state writ small.

One last point, this ignoring of ("politically incorrect") economic and
other views of dead political thinkers and activists while claiming them
as "libertarians" seems to be commonplace in right-Libertarian circles.
For example, Aristotle (beloved by Ayn Rand) *"thought that only living
things could bear fruit. Money, not a living thing, was by its nature
barren, and any attempt to make it bear fruit (**tokos**, in Greek, the
same word used for interest) was a crime against nature."* [Marcello de
Cecco, quoted by Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p. 41] Such opposition
to interest hardly fits well into capitalism, and so either goes
unmentioned or gets classed as an "error" (although we could ask why
Aristotle is in error while Rand is not). Similarly, individualist
anarchist opposition to capitalist property and rent, interest and
profits is ignored or dismissed as "bad economics" without realising
that these ideas played a key role in their politics and in ensuring
that an anarchy would not see freedom corrupted by inequality. To ignore
such an important concept in a person's ideas is to distort the
remainder into something it is not.

4.1 What is wrong with a "homesteading" theory of property?
-----------------------------------------------------------

So how do "anarcho"-capitalists justify property? Looking at Murray
Rothbard, we find that he proposes a *"homesteading theory of
property"*. In this theory it is argued that property comes from
occupancy and mixing labour with natural resources (which are assumed to
be unowned). Thus the world is transformed into private property, for
*"title to an unowned resource (such as land) comes properly only from
the expenditure of labour to transform that resource into use."* [**The
Ethics of Liberty**, p. 63]

Rothbard paints a conceptual history of individuals and families forging
a home in the wilderness by the sweat of their labour (its tempting to
rename his theory the *"immaculate conception of property"* as his
conceptual theory is somewhat at odds with actual historical fact).

Sadly for Murray Rothbard, his "homesteading" theory was refuted by
Proudhon in **What is Property?** in 1840 (along with many other
justifications of property). Proudhon rightly argues that *"if the
liberty of man is sacred, it is equally sacred in all individuals; that,
if it needs property for its objective action, that is, for its life,
the appropriation of material is equally necessary for all . . . Does it
not follow that if one individual cannot prevent another . . . from
appropriating an amount of material equal to his own, no more can he
prevent individuals to come."* And if all the available resources are
appropriated, and the owner *"draws boundaries, fences himself in . . .
Here, then, is a piece of land upon which, henceforth, no one has a
right to step, save the proprietor and his friends . . . Let [this]. . .
multiply, and soon the people . . . will have nowhere to rest, no place
to shelter, no ground to till. They will die at the proprietor's door,
on the edge of that property which was their birthright."* [**What is
Property?**, pp. 84-85, p. 118]

As Rothbard himself noted in respect to the aftermath of slavery (see
section [2.1](append132.html#secf21)), not having access to the means of
life places one the position of unjust dependency on those who do.
Rothbard's theory fails because for *"[w]e who belong to the proletaire
class, property excommunicates us!"* [P-J Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p.
105] and so the vast majority of the population experience property as
theft and despotism rather than as a source of liberty and empowerment
(which possession gives). Thus, Rothbard's account fails to take into
account the Lockean Proviso (see section [B.3.4](secB3.html#secb34)) and
so, for all its intuitive appeal, ends up justifying capitalist and
landlord domination (see [next section](append134.html#secf42) on why
the Lockean Proviso is important).

It also seems strange that while (correctly) attacking social contract
theories of the state as invalid (because *"no past generation can bind
later generations"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 145]) he fails to see he is doing
**exactly that** with his support of private property (similarly, Ayn
Rand argued that *"[a]ny alleged 'right' of one man, which necessitates
the violation of the right of another, is not and cannot be a right"*
[**Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal**, p. 325] but obviously appropriating
land does violate the rights of others to walk, use or appropriate that
land). Due to his support for appropriation and inheritance, he is
clearly ensuring that future generations are **not** born as free as the
first settlers were (after all, they cannot appropriate any land, it is
all taken!). If future generations cannot be bound by past ones, this
applies equally to resources and property rights. Something anarchists
have long realised -- there is no defensible reason why those who first
acquired property should control its use by future generations.

However, if we take Rothbard's theory at face value we find numerous
problems with it. If title to unowned resources comes via the
*"expenditure of labour"* on it, how can rivers, lakes and the oceans be
appropriated? The banks of the rivers can be transformed, but can the
river itself? How can you mix your labour with water?
"Anarcho"-capitalists usually blame pollution on the fact that rivers,
oceans, and so forth are unowned, but how can an individual "transform"
water by their labour? Also, does fencing in land mean you have "mixed
labour" with it? If so then transnational corporations can pay workers
to fence in vast tracks of virgin land (such as rainforest) and so come
to "own" it. Rothbard argues that this is not the case (he expresses
opposition to *"arbitrary claims"*). He notes that it is **not** the
case that *"the first discoverer . . . could properly lay claim to [a
piece of land] . . . [by] laying out a boundary for the area."* He
thinks that *"their claim would still be no more than the boundary
**itself**, and not to any of the land within, for only the boundary
will have been transformed and used by men"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 50f]

However, if the boundary **is** private property and the owner refuses
others permission to cross it, then the enclosed land is inaccessible to
others! If an "enterprising" right-libertarian builds a fence around the
only oasis in a desert and refuses permission to cross it to travellers
unless they pay his price (which is everything they own) then the person
**has** appropriated the oasis without "transforming" it by his labour.
The travellers have the choice of paying the price or dying (and the
oasis owner is well within his rights letting them die). Given
Rothbard's comments, it is probable that he will claim that such a
boundary is null and void as it allows "arbitrary" claims -- although
this position is not at all clear. After all, the fence builder **has**
transformed the boundary and "unrestricted" property rights is what
right-libertarianism is all about.

And, of course, Rothbard ignores the fact of economic power -- a
transnational corporation can "transform" far more virgin resources in a
day than a family could in a year. Transnational's "mixing their labour"
with the land does not spring into mind reading Rothbard's account of
property growth, but in the real world that is what will happen.

If we take the question of wilderness (a topic close to many
eco-anarchists' and deep ecologists' hearts) we run into similar
problems. Rothbard states clearly that *"libertarian theory must
invalidate [any] claim to ownership"* of land that has *"never been
transformed from its natural state"* (he presents an example of an owner
who has left a piece of his *"legally owned"* land untouched). If
another person appears who **does** transform the land, it becomes
*"justly owned by another"* and the original owner cannot stop her (and
should the original owner *"use violence to prevent another settler from
entering this never-used land and transforming it into use"* they also
become a *"criminal aggressor"*). Rothbard also stresses that he is
**not** saying that land must continually be in use to be valid property
[**Op. Cit.**, pp. 63-64] (after all, that would justify landless
workers seizing the land from landowners during a depression and working
it themselves).

Now, where does that leave wilderness? In response to ecologists who
oppose the destruction of the rainforest, "anarcho"-capitalists suggest
that they put their money where their mouth is and **buy** rainforest
land. In this way, it is claimed, rainforest will be protected (see
section [B.5](secB5.html) for why such arguments are nonsense). As
ecologists desire the rainforest **because it is wilderness** they are
unlikely to "transform" it by human labour (its precisely that they want
to stop). From Rothbard's arguments it is fair to ask whether logging
companies have a right to "transform" the virgin wilderness owned by
ecologists, after all it meets Rothbard's criteria (it is still
wilderness). Perhaps it will be claimed that fencing off land
"transforms" it (hardly what you imagine "mixing labour" with to mean,
but nevermind) -- but that allows large companies and rich individuals
to hire workers to fence in vast tracks of land (and recreate the land
monopoly by a "libertarian" route). But as we noted above, fencing off
land does not seem to imply that it becomes property in Rothbard's
theory. And, of course, fencing in areas of rainforest disrupts the
local eco-system -- animals cannot freely travel, for example -- which,
again, is what ecologists desire to stop. Would Rothbard accept a piece
of paper as "transforming" land? We doubt it (after all, in his example
the wilderness owner **did** legally own it) -- and so most ecologists
will have a hard time in "anarcho"-capitalism (wilderness is just not an
option).

As an aside, we must note that Rothbard fails to realise -- and this
comes from his worship of the market and his "Austrian economics" -- is
that people value many things which do not appear on the market. He
claims that wilderness is *"valueless unused natural objects"* (for it
people valued them, they would use -- i.e. appropriate -- them). But
unused things may be of **considerable** value to people, wilderness
being a classic example. And if something **cannot** be transformed into
private property, does that mean people do not value it? For example,
people value community, stress free working environments, meaningful
work -- if the market cannot provide these, does that mean they do not
value them? Of course not (see Juliet Schor's **The Overworked
American** on how working people's desire for shorter working hours was
not transformed into options on the market).

Moreover, Rothbard's "homesteading" theory actually violates his support
for unrestricted property rights. What if a property owner **wants**
part of her land to remain wilderness? Their desires are violated by the
"homesteading" theory (unless, of course, fencing things off equals
"transforming" them, which it apparently does not). How can companies
provide wilderness holidays to people if they have no right to stop
settlers (including large companies) "homesteading" that wilderness?
And, of course, where does Rothbard's theory leave hunter-gather or
nomad societies. They **use** the resources of the wilderness, but they
do not "transform" them (in this case you cannot easily tell if virgin
land is empty or being used as a resource). If a troop of nomads find
its traditionally used, but natural, oasis appropriated by a homesteader
what are they to do? If they ignore the homesteaders claims he can call
upon his "defence" firm to stop them -- and then, in true Rothbardian
fashion, the homesteader can refuse to supply water to them unless they
hand over all their possessions (see section
[4.2](append134.html#secf42) on this). And if the history of the United
States (which is obviously the model for Rothbard's theory) is anything
to go by, such people will become "criminal aggressors" and removed from
the picture.

Which is another problem with Rothbard's account. It is completely
ahistoric (and so, as we noted above, is more like an *"immaculate
conception of property"*). He has transported "capitalist man" into the
dawn of time and constructed a history of property based upon what he is
trying to justify (not surprising, as he does this with his "Natural
Law" theory too - see [section 7](append137.html)). What **is**
interesting to note, though, is that the **actual** experience of life
on the US frontier (the historic example Rothbard seems to want to
claim) was far from the individualistic framework he builds upon it and
(ironically enough) it was destroyed by the development of capitalism.

As Murray Bookchin notes, *"the independence that the New England
yeomanry enjoyed was itself a function of the co-operative social base
from which it emerged. To barter home-grown goods and objects, to share
tools and implements, to engage in common labour during harvesting time
in a system of mutual aid, indeed, to help new-comers in barn-raising,
corn-husking, log-rolling, and the like, was the indispensable cement
that bound scattered farmsteads into a united community."* [**The Third
Revolution**, vol. 1, p. 233] Bookchin quotes David P. Szatmary (author
of a book on Shay' Rebellion) stating that it was a society based upon
*"co-operative, community orientated interchanges"* and not a
*"basically competitive society."* [**Ibid.**]

Into this non-capitalist society came capitalist elements. Market forces
and economic power soon resulted in the transformation of this society.
Merchants asked for payment in specie which (and along with taxes) soon
resulted in indebtedness and the dispossession of the homesteaders from
their land and goods. In response Shay's rebellion started, a rebellion
which was an important factor in the centralisation of state power in
America to ensure that popular input and control over government were
marginalised and that the wealthy elite and their property rights were
protected against the many (see Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, for details).
Thus the homestead system was undermined, essentially, by the need to
pay for services in specie (as demanded by merchants).

So while Rothbard's theory as a certain appeal (reinforced by watching
too many Westerns, we imagine) it fails to justify the "unrestricted"
property rights theory (and the theory of freedom Rothbard derives from
it). All it does is to end up justifying capitalist and landlord
domination (which is probably what it was intended to do).

4.2 Why is the "Lockean Proviso" important?
-------------------------------------------

Robert Nozick, in his work **Anarchy, State, and Utopia** presented a
case for private property rights that was based on what he termed the
*"Lockean Proviso"* -- namely that common (or unowned) land and
resources could be appropriated by individuals as long as the position
of others is not worsen by so doing. However, if we **do** take this
Proviso seriously private property rights cannot be defined (see section
[B.3.4](secB3.html#secb34) for details). Thus Nozick's arguments in
favour of property rights fail.

Some right-libertarians, particularly those associated with the Austrian
school of economics argue that we must reject the Lockean Proviso
(probably due to the fact it can be used to undermine the case for
absolute property rights). Their argument goes as follows: if an
individual appropriates and uses a previously unused resource, it is
because it has value to him/her, as an individual, to engage in such
action. The individual has stolen nothing because it was previously
unowned and we cannot know if other people are better or worse off, all
we know is that, for whatever reason, they did not appropriate the
resource (*"If latecomers are worse off, well then that is their proper
assumption of risk in this free and uncertain world. There is no longer
a vast frontier in the United States, and there is no point crying over
the fact."* [Murray Rothbard, **The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 240]).

Hence the appropriation of resources is an essentially individualistic,
asocial act -- the requirements of others are either irrelevant or
unknown. However, such an argument fails to take into account **why**
the Lockean Proviso has such an appeal. When we do this we see that
rejecting it leads to massive injustice, even slavery.

However, let us start with a defence of rejecting the Proviso from a
leading Austrian economist:

> *"Consider . . . the case . . . of the unheld sole water hole in the
> desert (which **everyone** in a group of travellers knows about),
> which one of the travellers, by racing ahead of the others, succeeds
> in appropriating . . . [This] clearly and unjustly violates the
> Lockean proviso. . . For use, however, this view is by no means the
> only one possible. We notice that the energetic traveller who
> appropriated all the water was not doing anything which (always
> ignoring, of course, prohibitions resting on the Lockean proviso
> itself) the other travellers were not equally free to do. The other
> travellers, too, could have raced ahead . . . [they] did **not**
> bother to race for the water . . . It does not seem obvious that these
> other travellers can claim that they were **hurt** by an action which
> they could themselves have easily taken"* [Israel M. Kirzner,
> *"Entrepreneurship, Entitlement, and Economic Justice"*, pp. 385-413,
> in **Reading Nozick**, p. 406]

Murray Rothbard, we should note, takes a similar position in a similar
example, arguing that *"the owner [of the sole oasis] is scarcely being
'coercive'; in fact he is supplying a vital service, and should have the
right to refuse a sale or charge whatever the customers will pay. The
situation may be unfortunate for the customers, as are many situations
in life."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 221] (Rothbard, we should
note, is relying to the right-libertarian von Hayek who -- to his credit
-- does maintain that this is a coercive situation; but as others,
including other right-libertarians, point out, he has to change his
definition of coercion/freedom to do so -- see Stephan L. Newman's
**Liberalism at Wit's End**, pp. 130-134 for an excellent summary of
this debate).

Now, we could be tempted just to rant about the evils of the right
libertarian mind-frame but we will try to present a clam analysis of
this position. Now, what Kirzner (and Rothbard et al) fails to note is
that without the water the other travellers will die in a matter of
days. The monopolist has the power of life and death over his fellow
travellers. Perhaps he hates one of them and so raced ahead to ensure
their death. Perhaps he just recognised the vast power that his
appropriation would give him and so, correctly, sees that the other
travellers would give up all their possessions and property to him in
return for enough water to survive.

Either way, its clear that perhaps the other travellers did not *"race
ahead"* because they were ethical people -- they would not desire to
inflict such tyranny on others because they would not like it inflicted
upon them.

Thus we can answer Kirzner's question -- *"What . . . is so obviously
acceptable about the Lockean proviso. . . ?"* [**Ibid.**]

It is the means by which human actions are held accountable to social
standards and ethics. It is the means by which the greediest, most evil
and debased humans are stopped from dragging the rest of humanity down
to their level (via a "race to the bottom") and inflicting untold
tyranny and domination on their fellow humans. An ideology that could
consider the oppression which could result from such an appropriation as
"supplying a vital service" and any act to remove this tyranny as
"coercion" is obviously a very sick ideology. And we may note that the
right-libertarian position on this example is a good illustration of the
dangers of deductive logic from assumptions (see section
[1.3](append131.html#secf13) for more on this right-libertarian
methodology) -- after all W. Duncan Reekie, in his introduction to
Austrian Economics, states that *"[t]o be intellectually consistent one
must concede his absolute right to the oasis."* [**Markets,
Entrepreneurs and Liberty**, p. 181] To place ideology before people is
to ensure humanity is placed on a Procrustean bed.

Which brings us to another point. Often right-libertarians say that
anarchists and other socialists are "lazy" or "do not want to work". You
could interpret Kirzner's example as saying that the other travellers
are "lazy" for not rushing ahead and appropriating the oasis. But this
is false. For under capitalism you can only get rich by exploiting the
labour of others via wage slavery or, within a company, get better pay
by taking "positions of responsibility" (i.e. management positions). If
you have an ethical objection to treating others as objects ("means to
an end") then these options are unavailable to you. Thus anarchists and
other socialists are not "lazy" because they are not rich -- they just
have no desire to get rich off the labour and liberty of others (as
expressed in their opposition to private property and the relations of
domination it creates). In other words, Anarchism is not the "politics
of envy"; it is the politics of liberty and the desire to treat others
as "ends in themselves".

Rothbard is aware of what is involved in accepting the Lockean Proviso
-- namely the existence of private property (*"Locke's proviso may lead
to the outlawry of **all** private property of land, since one can
always say that the reduction of available land leaves everyone else . .
. worse off"*, **The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 240 -- see section
[B.3.4](secB3.html#secb34) for a discussion on why the Proviso **does**
imply the end of capitalist property rights). Which is why he, and other
right-libertarians, reject it. Its simple. Either you reject the Proviso
and embrace capitalist property rights (and so allow one class of people
to be dispossessed and another empowered at their expense) or you reject
private property in favour of possession and liberty. Anarchists,
obviously, favour the latter option.

As an aside, we should point out that (following Stirner) the would-be
monopolist is doing nothing wrong (as such) in attempting to monopolise
the oasis. He is, after all, following his self-interest. However, what
is objectionable is the right-libertarian attempt to turn thus act into
a "right" which must be respected by the other travellers. Simply put,
if the other travellers gang up and dispose of this would be tyrant then
they are right to do so -- to argue that this is a violation of the
monopolists "rights" is insane and an indication of a slave mentality
(or, following Rousseau, that the others are *"simple"*). Of course, if
the would-be monopolist has the necessary **force** to withstand the
other travellers then his property then the matter is closed -- might
makes right. But to worship rights, even when they obviously result in
despotism, is definitely a case of *"spooks in the head"* and "man is
created for the Sabbath" not "the Sabbath is created for man."

4.3 How does private property effect individualism?
---------------------------------------------------

Private property is usually associated by "anarcho"-capitalism with
individualism. Usually private property is seen as the key way of
ensuring individualism and individual freedom (and that private property
is the expression of individualism). Therefore it is useful to indicate
how private property can have a serious impact on individualism.

Usually right-libertarians contrast the joys of "individualism" with the
evils of "collectivism" in which the individual is sub-merged into the
group or collective and is made to work for the benefit of the group
(see any Ayn Rand book or essay on the evils of collectivism).

But what is ironic is that right-libertarian ideology creates a view of
industry which would (perhaps) shame even the most die-hard fan of
Stalin. What do we mean? Simply that right-libertarians stress the
abilities of the people at the top of the company, the owner, the
entrepreneur, and tend to ignore the very real subordination of those
lower down the hierarchy (see, again, any Ayn Rand book on the worship
of business leaders). In the Austrian school of economics, for example,
the entrepreneur is considered the driving force of the market process
and tend to abstract away from the organisations they govern. This
approach is usually followed by right-libertarians. Often you get the
impression that the accomplishments of a firm are the personal triumphs
of the capitalists, as though their subordinates are merely tools not
unlike the machines on which they labour.

We should not, of course, interpret this to mean that right-libertarians
believe that entrepreneurs run their companies single-handedly (although
you do get that impression sometimes!). But these abstractions help hide
the fact that the economy is overwhelmingly interdependent and organised
hierarchically within industry. Even in their primary role as
organisers, entrepreneurs depend on the group. A company president can
only issue general guidelines to his managers, who must inevitably
organise and direct much of their departments on their own. The larger a
company gets, the less personal and direct control an entrepreneur has
over it. They must delegate out an increasing share of authority and
responsibility, and is more dependent than ever on others to help him
run things, investigate conditions, inform policy, and make
recommendations. Moreover, the authority structures are from the
"top-down" -- indeed the firm is essentially a command economy, with all
members part of a collective working on a common plan to achieve a
common goal (i.e. it is essentially collectivist in nature -- which
means it is not too unsurprising that Lenin argued that state socialism
could be considered as one big firm or office and why the system he
built on that model was so horrific).

So the firm (the key component of the capitalist economy) is marked by a
distinct **lack** of individualism, a lack usually ignored by right
libertarians (or, at best, considered as "unavoidable"). As these firms
are hierarchical structures and workers are paid to obey, it does make
**some** sense -- in a capitalist environment -- to assume that the
entrepreneur is the main actor, but as an individualistic model of
activity it fails totally. Perhaps it would not be unfair to say that
capitalist individualism celebrates the entrepreneur because this
reflects a hierarchical system in which for the one to flourish, the
many must obey? (Also see section [1.1](append131.html#secf11)).

Capitalist individualism does not recognise the power structures that
exist within capitalism and how they affect individuals. In Brian
Morris' words, what they fail *"to recognise is that most productive
relations under capitalism allow little scope for creativity and
self-expression on the part of workers; that such relationships are not
equitable; nor are they freely engaged in for the mutual benefit of both
parties, for workers have no control over the production process or over
the product of their labour. Rand [like other right-libertarians]
misleadingly equates trade, artistic production and wage-slavery. . .
[but] wage-slavery . . . is quite different from the trade principle"*
as it is a form of *"exploitation."* [**Ecology & Anarchism**, p. 190]

He further notes that *"[s]o called trade relations involving human
labour are contrary to the egoist values Rand [and other capitalist
individualists] espouses - they involve little in the way of
independence, freedom, integrity or justice."* [**Ibid.**, p. 191]

Moreover, capitalist individualism actually **supports** authority and
hierarchy. As Joshua Chen and Joel Rogers point out, the *"achievement
of short-run material satisfaction often makes it irrational [from an
individualist perspective] to engage in more radical struggle, since
that struggle is by definition against those institutions which provide
one's current gain."* In other words, to rise up the company structure,
to "better oneself," (or even get a good reference) you cannot be a pain
in the side of management -- obedient workers do well, rebel workers do
not.

Thus the hierarchical structures help develop an "individualistic"
perspective which actually reinforces those authority structures. This,
as Cohn and Rogers notes, means that *"the structure in which [workers]
find themselves yields less than optimal social results from their
isolated but economically rational decisions."* [quoted by Alfie Kohn,
**No Contest**, p. 67, p. 260f]

Steve Biko, a black activist murdered by the South African police in the
1970s, argued that *"the most potent weapon of the oppressor is the mind
of the oppressed."* And this is something capitalists have long
recognised. Their investment in "Public Relations" and "education"
programmes for their employees shows this clearly, as does the
hierarchical nature of the firm. By having a ladder to climb, the firm
rewards obedience and penalises rebellion. This aims at creating a
mind-set which views hierarchy as good and so helps produce servile
people.

This is why anarchists would agree with Alfie Kohn when he argues that
*"the individualist worldview is a profoundly conservative doctrine: it
inherently stifles change."* [**Ibid.**, p. 67] So, what is the best way
for a boss to maintain his or her power? Create a hierarchical workplace
and encourage capitalist individualism (as capitalist individualism
actually works **against** attempts to increase freedom from hierarchy).
Needless to say, such a technique cannot work forever -- hierarchy also
encourages revolt -- but such divide and conquer can be **very**
effective.

And as anarchist author Michael Moorcock put it, *"Rugged individualism
also goes hand in hand with a strong faith in paternalism -- albeit a
tolerant and somewhat distant paternalism -- and many otherwise
sharp-witted libertarians seem to see nothing in the morality of a John
Wayne Western to conflict with their views. Heinlein's paternalism is at
heart the same as Wayne's. . . To be an anarchist, surely, is to reject
authority but to accept self-discipline and community responsibility. To
be a rugged individualist a la Heinlein and others is to be forever a
child who must obey, charm and cajole to be tolerated by some benign,
omniscient father: Rooster Coburn shuffling his feet in front of a judge
he respects for his office (but not necessarily himself) in True Grit."*
[**Starship Stormtroopers**]

One last thing, don't be fooled into thinking that individualism or
concern about individuality -- not **quite** the same thing -- is
restricted to the right, they are not. For example, the *"individualist
theory of society . . . might be advanced in a capitalist or in an
anti-capitalist form . . . the theory as developed by critics of
capitalism such as Hodgskin and the anarchist Tucker saw ownership of
capital by a few as an obstacle to genuine individualism, and the
individualist ideal was realisable only through the free association of
labourers (Hodgskin) or independent proprietorship (Tucker)."* [David
Miller, **Social Justice**, pp. 290-1]

And the reason why social anarchists oppose capitalism is that it
creates a **false** individualism, an abstract one which crushes the
individuality of the many and justifies (and supports) hierarchical and
authoritarian social relations. In Kropotkin's words, *"what has been
called 'individualism' up to now has been only a foolish egoism which
belittles the individual. It did not led to what it was established as a
goal: that is the complete, broad, and most perfectly attainable
development of individuality."* The new individualism desired by
Kropotkin *"will not consist . . . in the oppression of one's neighbour
. . . [as this] reduced the [individualist] . . .to the level of an
animal in a herd."* [**Selected Writings**, p, 295, p. 296]

4.4 How does private property affect relationships?
---------------------------------------------------

Obviously, capitalist private property affects relationships between
people by creating structures of power. Property, as we have argued all
through this FAQ, creates relationships based upon domination -- and
this cannot help but produce servile tendencies within those subject to
them (it also produces rebellious tendencies as well, the actual ratio
between the two tendencies dependent on the individual in question and
the community they are in). As anarchists have long recognised, power
corrupts -- both those subjected to it and those who exercise it.

While few, if any, anarchists would fail to recognise the importance of
possession -- which creates the necessary space all individuals need to
be themselves -- they all agree that private property corrupts this
liberatory aspect of "property" by allowing relationships of domination
and oppression to be built up on top of it. Because of this recognition,
all anarchists have tried to equalise property and turn it back into
possession.

Also, capitalist individualism actively builds barriers between people.
Under capitalism, money rules and individuality is expressed via
consumption choices (i.e. money). But money does not encourage an
empathy with others. As Frank Stronach (chair of Magna International, a
Canadian auto-parts maker that shifted its production to Mexico) put it,
*"[t]o be in business your first mandate is to make money, and money has
no heart, no soul, conscience, homeland."* [cited by Doug Henwood,
**Wall Street**, p. 113] And for those who study economics, it seems
that this dehumanising effect also strikes them as well:

> *"Studying economics also seems to make you a nastier person.
> Psychological studies have shown that economics graduate students are
> more likely to 'free ride' -- shirk contributions to an experimental
> 'public goods' account in the pursuit of higher private returns --
> than the general public. Economists also are less generous that other
> academics in charitable giving. Undergraduate economics majors are
> more likely to defect in the classic prisoner's dilemma game that are
> other majors. And on other tests, students grow less honest --
> expressing less of a tendency, for example, to return found money --
> after studying economics, but not studying a control subject like
> astronomy.*
> "This is no surprise, really. Mainstream economics is built entirely
> on a notion of self-interested individuals, rational self-maximisers
> who can order their wants and spend accordingly. There's little room
> for sentiment, uncertainty, selflessness, and social institutions.
> Whether this is an accurate picture of the average human is open to
> question, but there's no question that capitalism as a system and
> economics as a discipline both reward people who conform to the
> model." [Doug Henwood, **Op. Cit.**, p, 143]

Which, of course, highlights the problems within the "trader" model
advocated by Ayn Rand. According to her, the trader is **the** example
of moral behaviour -- you have something I want, I have something you
want, we trade and we both benefit and so our activity is
self-interested and no-one sacrifices themselves for another. While this
has **some** intuitive appeal it fails to note that in the real world it
is a pure fantasy. The trader wants to get the best deal possible for
themselves and if the bargaining positions are unequal then one person
will gain at the expense of the other (if the "commodity" being traded
is labour, the seller may not even have the option of not trading at
all). The trader is only involved in economic exchange, and has no
concern for the welfare of the person they are trading with. They are a
bearer of things, **not** an individual with a wide range of interests,
concerns, hopes and dreams. These are irrelevant, unless you can make
money out of them of course! Thus the trader is often a manipulator and
outside novels it most definitely is a case of "buyer beware!"

If the trader model is taken as the basis of interpersonal
relationships, economic gain replaces respect and empathy for others. It
replaces human relationships with relationships based on things -- and
such a mentality does not encompass how interpersonal relationships
affect both you and the society you life in. In the end, it impoverishes
society and individuality. Yes, any relationship must be based upon
self-interest (mutual aid is, after all, something we do because we
benefit from it in some way) but the trader model presents such a
**narrow** self-interest that it is useless and actively impoverishes
the very things it should be protecting -- individuality and
interpersonal relationships (see section [I.7.4](secI7.html#seci74) on
how capitalism does not protect individuality).

4.5 Does private property co-ordinate without hierarchy?
--------------------------------------------------------

It is usually to find right-libertarians maintain that private property
(i.e. capitalism) allows economic activity to be co-ordinated by
non-hierarchical means. In other words, they maintain that capitalism is
a system of large scale co-ordination without hierarchy. These claims
follow the argument of noted right-wing, "free market" economist Milton
Friedman who contrasts *"central planning involving the use of coercion
- the technique of the army or the modern totalitarian state"* with
*"voluntary co-operation between individuals - the technique of the
marketplace"* as two distinct ways of co-ordinating the economic
activity of large groups (*"millions"*) of people. [**Capitalism and
Freedom**, p. 13].

However, this is just playing with words. As they themselves point out
the internal structure of a corporation or capitalist company is **not**
a "market" (i.e. non-hierarchical) structure, it is a "non-market"
(hierarchical) structure of a market participant (see section
[2.2](append132.html#secf22)). However "market participants" are part of
the market. In other words, capitalism is **not** a system of
co-ordination without hierarchy because it does contain hierarchical
organisations which **are an essential part of the system**!

Indeed, the capitalist company **is** a form of central planning and
shares the same "technique" as the army. As the pro-capitalist writer
Peter Drucker noted in his history of General Motors, *"[t]here is a
remarkably close parallel between General Motors' scheme of organisation
and those of the two institutions most renowned for administrative
efficiency: that of the Catholic Church and that of the modern army . .
."* [quoted by David Enger, **Apostles of Greed**, p. 66]. And so
capitalism is marked by a series of totalitarian organisations -- and
since when was totalitarianism liberty enhancing? Indeed, many
"anarcho"-capitalists actually celebrate the command economy of the
capitalist firm as being more "efficient" than self-managed firms
(usually because democracy stops action with debate). The same argument
is applied by the Fascists to the political sphere. It does not change
much -- nor does it become less fascistic -- when applied to economic
structures. To state the obvious, such glorification of workplace
dictatorship seems somewhat at odds with an ideology calling itself
"libertarian" or "anarchist". Is dictatorship more liberty enhancing to
those subject to it than democracy? Anarchists doubt it (see section
[A.2.11](secA2.html#seca211) for details).

In order to claim that capitalism co-ordinates individual activity
without hierarchy right-libertarians have to abstract from individuals
and how they interact **within** companies and concentrate purely on
relationships **between** companies. This is pure sophistry. Like
markets, companies require at least two or more people to work - both
are forms of social co-operation. If co-ordination within companies is
hierarchical, then the system they work within is based upon hierarchy.
To claim that capitalism co-ordinates without hierarchy is simply false
- its based on hierarchy and authoritarianism. Capitalist companies are
based upon denying workers self-government (i.e. freedom) during work
hours. The boss tells workers what to do, when to do, how to do and for
how long. This denial of freedom is discussed in greater depth in
sections [B.1](secB1.html) and [B.4](secB4.html).

Because of the relations of power it creates, opposition to capitalist
private property (and so wage labour) and the desire to see it ended is
an essential aspect of anarchist theory. Due to its ideological blind
spot with regards to apparently "voluntary" relations of domination and
oppression created by the force of circumstances (see section
[2](append132.html) for details), "anarcho"-capitalism considers wage
labour as a form of freedom and ignore its fascistic aspects (when not
celebrating those aspects). Thus "anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchist.
By concentrating on the moment the contract is signed, they ignore that
freedom is restricted during the contract itself. While denouncing
(correctly) the totalitarianism of the army, they ignore it in the
workplace. But factory fascism is just as freedom destroying as the army
or political fascism.

Due to this basic lack of concern for freedom, "anarcho"-capitalists
cannot be considered as anarchists. Their total lack of concern about
factory fascism (i.e. wage labour) places them totally outside the
anarchist tradition. Real anarchists have always been aware of that
private property and wage labour restriction freedom and desired to
create a society in which people would be able to avoid it. In other
words, where **all** relations are non-hierarchical and truly
co-operative.

To conclude, to claim that private property eliminates hierarchy is
false. Nor does capitalism co-ordinate economic activities without
hierarchical structures. For this reason anarchists support co-operative
forms of production rather than capitalistic forms.
