Replies to Some Errors and Distortions in Bryan Caplan's "Anarchist
Theory FAQ" version 4.1.1.

There have been a few "anarchist" FAQ's produced before. Bryan Caplan's
anarchism FAQ is one of the more recent. While appearing to be a
"neutral" statement of anarchist ideas, it is actually in large part an
"anarcho"-capitalist FAQ. This can be seen by the fact that anarchist
ideas (which he calls "left-anarchist") are given less than half the
available space while "anarcho"-capitalist dogma makes up the majority
of it. Considering that anarchism has been around far longer than
"anarcho"-capitalism and is the bigger and better established movement,
this is surprising. Even his use of the term "left anarchist" is strange
as it is never used by anarchists and ignores the fact that
Individualist Anarchists like Tucker called themselves "socialists" and
considered themselves part of the wider socialist movement. For
anarchists, the expression "left anarchist" is meaningless as all
anarchists are anti-capitalist. Thus the terms used to describe each
"school" in his FAQ are biased (those whom Caplan calls "Left
anarchists" do not use that term, usually preferring "social anarchist"
to distinguish themselves from individualist anarchists like Tucker).

Caplan also frames the debate only around issues which he is comfortable
with. For example, when discussing "left anarchist" ideas he states that
*"A key value in this line of anarchist thought is egalitarianism, the
view that inequalities, especially of wealth and power, are undesirable,
immoral, and socially contingent."* This, however, is **not** why
anarchists are egalitarians. Anarchists oppose inequalities because they
undermine and restrict individual and social freedom.

Taking another example, under the question, *"How would left-anarchy
work?"*, Caplan fails to spell out some of the really obvious forms of
anarchist thought. For example, the works of Bookchin, Kropotkin,
Bakunin and Proudhon are not discussed in any detail. His vague and
confusing prose would seem to reflect the amount of thought that he has
put into it. Being an "anarcho"-capitalist, Caplan concentrates on the
economic aspect of anarchism and ignores its communal side. The economic
aspect of anarchism he discusses is anarcho-syndicalism and tries to
contrast the confederated economic system explained by one
anarcho-syndicalist with Bakunin's opposition to Marxism. Unfortunately
for Caplan, Bakunin is the source of anarcho-syndicalism's ideas on a
confederation of self-managed workplaces running the economy. Therefore,
to state that *"many"* anarchists *"have been very sceptical of setting
up any overall political structure, even a democratic one, and focused
instead on direct worker control at the factory level"* is simply
**false**. The idea of direct local control within a confederated whole
is a common thread through anarchist theory and activity, as any
anarchist could tell you.

Lastly, we must note that after Caplan posted his FAQ to the
"anarchy-list," many of the anarchists on that list presented numerous
critiques of the "anarcho"-capitalist theories and of the ideas
(falsely) attributed to social anarchists in the FAQ, which he chose to
ignore (that he was aware of these postings is asserted by the fact he
e-mailed one of the authors of this FAQ on the issue that anarchists
never used or use the term "left-anarchist" to describe social
anarchism. He replied by arguing that the term "left-anarchist" had been
used by Michel Foucault, who never claimed to be an anarchist, in one of
his private letters! Strangely, he never posted his FAQ to the list
again).

Therefore, as can be seen from these few examples, Caplan's "FAQ" is
blatantly biased towards "anarcho-capitalism" and based on the
mis-characterisations and the dis-emphasis on some of the most important
issues between "anarcho-capitalists" and anarchists. It is clear that
his viewpoint is anything but impartial.

This section will highlight some of the many errors and distortions in
that FAQ. Numbers in square brackets refer to the corresponding sections
Caplan's FAQ.

1 Is anarchism purely negative?
-------------------------------

[1]. Caplan, consulting his **American Heritage Dictionary**, claims:
*"Anarchism is a negative; it holds that one thing, namely government,
is bad and should be abolished. Aside from this defining tenet, it would
be difficult to list any belief that all anarchists hold."*

The last sentence is ridiculous. If we look at the works of Tucker,
Kropotkin, Proudhon and Bakunin (for example) we discover that we can,
indeed list one more *"belief that all anarchists hold."* This is
opposition to exploitation, to usury (i.e. profits, interest and rent).
For example, Tucker argued that *"Liberty insists. . . [on] the
abolition of the State and the abolition of usury; on no more government
of man by man, and no more exploitation of man by man."* [cited in
**Native American Anarchism - A Study of Left-Wing American
Individualism** by Eunice Schuster, p. 140] Such a position is one that
Proudhon, Bakunin and Kropotkin would agree with.

In other words, anarchists hold two beliefs -- opposition to government
**and** opposition to exploitation. Any person which rejects either of
these positions cannot be part of the anarchist movement. In other
words, an anarchist must be against capitalism in order to be a true
anarchist.

Moreover it is not at all difficult to find a more fundamental
*"defining tenet"* of anarchism. We can do so merely by analysing the
term *"an-archy,"* which is composed of the Greek words **an**, meaning
*"no"* or *"without,"* and **arche**, meaning literally *"a ruler,"* but
more generally referring to the **principle** of rulership, i.e.
hierarchical authority. Hence an anarchist is someone who advocates
abolishing the principle of hierarchical authority -- not just in
government but in all institutions and social relations.

Anarchists oppose the principle of hierarchical authority because it is
the basis of domination, which is not only degrading in itself but
generally leads to exploitation and all the social evils which follow
from exploitation, from poverty, hunger and homelessness to class
struggle and armed conflict.

Because anarchists oppose hierarchical authority, domination, and
exploitation, they naturally seek to eliminate all hierarchies, as the
very purpose of hierarchy is to facilitate the domination and (usually)
exploitation of subordinates.

The reason anarchists oppose government, then, is because government is
**one manifestation** of the evils of hierarchical authority,
domination, and exploitation. But the capitalist workplace is another.
In fact, the capitalist workplace is where most people have their most
frequent and unpleasant encounters with these evils. Hence workers'
control -- the elimination of the hierarchical workplace through
democratic self-management -- has been central to the agenda of
classical and contemporary anarchism from the 19th century to the
present. Indeed, anarchism was born out of the struggle of workers
against capitalist exploitation.

To accept Caplan's definition of anarchism, however, would mean that
anarchists' historical struggle for workers' self-management has never
been a "genuine" anarchist activity. This is clearly a **reductio ad
absurdum** of that definition.

Caplan has confused a necessary condition with a sufficient condition.
Opposition to government is a necessary condition of anarchism, but not
a sufficient one. To put it differently, all anarchists oppose
government, but opposition to government does not automatically make one
an anarchist. To be an anarchist one must oppose government for
anarchist reasons and be opposed to all other forms of hierarchical
structure.

To understand why let use look to capitalist property. Murray Rothbard
argues that *"[o]bviously, in a free society, Smith has the ultimate
decision-making power over his own just property, Jones over his, etc."*
[**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 173] Defence firms would be employed to
enforce those decisions (i.e. laws and rules). No real disagreement
there. What **is** illuminating is Rothbard's comments that the state
*"arrogates to itself a monopoly of force, of ultimate decision-making
power, over a given area territorial area"* [**Op. Cit.** , p. 170]
Which, to state the obvious, means that both the state and property is
marked by an *"ultimate decision-making power"* over their territory.
The only "difference" is that Rothbard claims the former is "just" (i.e.
"justly" acquired) and the latter is "unjust" (i.e. acquired by force).
In reality of course, the modern distribution of property is just as
much a product of past force as is the modern state. In other words, the
current property owners have acquired their property in the same unjust
fashion as the state has its. If one is valid, so is the other. Rothbard
(and "anarcho"-capitalists in general) are trying to have it both ways.

Rothbard goes on to show why statism and private property are
essentially the same thing:

> *"**If** the State may be said too properly **own** its territory,
> then it is proper for it to make rules for everyone who presumes to
> live in that area. It can legitimately seize or control private
> property because there **is** no private property in its area, because
> it really owns the entire land surface. **So long** as the State
> permits its subjects to leave its territory, then, it can be said to
> act as does any other owner who sets down rules for people living on
> his property."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 170]

Of course Rothbard does not draw the obvious conclusion. He wants to
maintain that the state is bad and property is good while drawing
attention to their obvious similarities! Ultimately Rothbard is exposing
the bankruptcy of his own politics and analysis. According to Rothbard,
something can look like a state (i.e. have the *"ultimate
decision-making power"* over an area) and act like a state (i.e. *"make
rules for everyone"* who lives in an area, i.e. govern them) but not be
a state. This not a viable position for obvious reasons.

In capitalism, property and possession are opposites -- as Proudhon
argued in **What is Property?**. Under possession, the "property" owner
exercises *"ultimate decision-making power"* over themselves as no-one
else uses the resource in question. This is non-hierarchical. Under
capitalism, however, use and ownership are divided. Landlords and
capitalists give others access to their property while retaining power
over it and so the people who use it. This is by nature hierarchical.
Little wonder Noam Chomsky argued that a *"consistent anarchist must
oppose private ownership of the means of production and the wage slavery
which is a component of this system as incompatible with the principle
that labour must be freely undertaken and under the control of the
producer."* [*"Notes on Anarchism"*, **For Reasons of State**, p. 158]

Thus a true anarchist must oppose both state and capitalism as they
generate the same hierarchical social relationships (as recognised by
Rothbard but apparently subjected to "doublethink"). As
"anarcho"-capitalists do not oppose capitalist property they cannot be
anarchists -- they support a very specific form of **archy,** that of
the capitalist/landlord over working class people.

Self-styled "anarcho"-capitalists do not oppose government for anarchist
reasons. That is, they oppose it not because it is a manifestation of
hierarchical authority, but because government authority often
**conflicts** with capitalists' authority over the enterprises they
control. By getting rid of government with its minimum wage laws, health
and safety requirements, union rights laws, environmental standards,
child labour laws, and other inconveniences, capitalists would have even
more power to exploit workers than they already do. These consequences
of "anarcho"-capitalism are diametrically opposed to the historically
central objective of the anarchist movement, which is to eliminate
capitalist exploitation.

We must conclude, then, that "anarcho"-capitalists are not anarchists at
all. In reality they are capitalists **posing** as anarchists in order
to attract support for their laissez-faire economic project from those
who are angry at government. This scam is only possible on the basis of
the misunderstanding perpetrated by Caplan: that anarchism means nothing
more than opposition to government.

Better definitions of anarchism can be found in other reference works.
For example, in **Grollier's Online Encyclopedia** we read: *"Anarchism
rejects all forms of hierarchical authority, social and economic as well
as political."* According to this more historically and etymologically
accurate definition, "anarcho"-capitalism is not a form of anarchism,
since it does not reject hierarchical authority in the economic sphere
(which has been the area of prime concern to anarchists since day one).
Hence it is **bogus** anarchism.

2 Anarchism and Equality
------------------------

[5.] On the question "What major subdivisions may be made among
anarchists?" Caplan writes:

> *"Unlike the left-anarchists, anarcho-capitalists generally place
> little or no value on equality, believing that inequalities along all
> dimensions -- including income and wealth -- are not only perfectly
> legitimate so long as they 'come about in the right way,' but are the
> natural consequence of human freedom."*

This statement is not inaccurate as a characterisation of
"anarcho"-capitalist ideas, but its implications need to be made clear.
"Anarcho"-capitalists generally place little or no value on equality --
particularly economic equality -- because they know that under their
system, where capitalists would be completely free to exploit workers to
the hilt, wealth and income inequalities would become even greater than
they are now. Thus their references to "human freedom" as the way in
which such inequalities would allegedly come about means "freedom of
capitalists to exploit workers;" it does not mean "freedom of workers
**from** capitalist exploitation."

But "freedom to exploit workers" has historically been the objective
only of capitalists, not anarchists. Therefore, "anarcho"-capitalism
again shows itself to be nothing more than capitalism attempting to pass
itself off as part of the anarchist movement -- a movement that has been
dedicated since its inception to the destruction of capitalism! One
would have to look hard to find a more audacious fraud.

As we argue in [section 2.1](append132.html#secf21) of the appendix ["Is
'anarcho'-capitalism a type of anarchism?"](append13.html) the claim
that inequalities are irrelevant if they *"come about the right way"*
ignores the reality of freedom and what is required to be free. To see
way we have to repeat part of our argument from that section and look at
Murray Rothbard's (a leading "anarcho"-capitalist icon) analysis of the
situation after the abolition of serfdom in Russia and slavery in
America. He writes:

> *"The **bodies** of the oppressed were freed, but the property which
> they had worked and eminently deserved to own, remained in the hands
> of their former oppressors. With economic power thus remaining in
> their hands, the former lords soon found themselves virtual masters
> once more of what were now free tenants or farm labourers. The serfs
> and slaves had tasted freedom, but had been cruelly derived of its
> fruits."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 74]

However, contrast this with Rothbard's (and Caplan's) claims that if
market forces ("voluntary exchanges") result in the creation of free
tenants or wage-labourers then these labourers and tenants are free
(see, for example, **The Ethics of Liberty**, pp. 221-2 on why "economic
power" within capitalism does not, in fact, exist). But the labourers
dispossessed by market forces are in **exactly** the same situation as
the former serfs and slaves. Rothbard sees the obvious "economic power"
in the later case, but denies it in the former. But the **conditions**
of the people in question are identical and it is these conditions that
horrify us and create social relationships because on subordination,
authority and oppression rather than freedom. It is only ideology that
stops Rothbard and Caplan drawing the obvious conclusion -- identical
conditions produce identical social relationships and so if the formally
"free" ex-serfs are subject to "economic power" and "masters" then so
are the formally "free" labourers within capitalism! Both sets of
workers may be formally free, but their circumstances are such that they
are "free" to "consent" to sell their freedom to others (i.e. economic
power produces relationships of domination and unfreedom between
formally free individuals).

Thus inequalities that *"come about in the right way"* restrict freedom
just as much as inequalities that do not. If the latter restricts
liberty and generate oppressive and exploitative social relationships
then so do the former. Thus, if we are serious about individuality
liberty (rather than property) we must look at inequalities and what
generate them.

One last thing. Caplan states that inequalities in capitalism are *"the
natural consequence of human freedom."* They are not, unless you
subscribe to the idea that capitalist property rights are the basis of
human freedom. However, the assumption that capitalist property rights
are the best means to defend individual liberty can be easily seen to be
flawed just from the example of the ex-slaves and ex-serfs we have just
described. Inequalities resulting from "voluntary exchanges" in the
capitalist market can and do result in the denial of freedom, thus
suggesting that "property" and liberty are not natural consequences of
each other.

To state the obvious, private property (rather than possession) means
that the non-property owner can gain access to the resource in question
only when they agree to submit to the property owner's authority (and
pay tribute for the privilege of being bossed about). This aspect of
property (rightly called *"despotism"* by Proudhon) is one which
right-libertarians continually fail to highlight when they defend it as
the paradigm of liberty.

3 Is anarchism the same thing as socialism?
-------------------------------------------

[7.] In this section ("Is anarchism the same thing as socialism?")
Caplan writes:

> *"Outside of the Anglo-American political culture, there has been a
> long and close historical relationship between the more orthodox
> socialists who advocate a socialist government, and the anarchist
> socialists who desire some sort of decentralised, voluntary socialism.
> The two groups both want to severely limit or abolish private
> property..."*

For Caplan to claim that anarchism is not the same thing as socialism,
he has to ignore anarchist history. For example, the Individualist
anarchists called themselves *"socialists,"* as did social anarchists.
Indeed, Individualist Anarchists like Joseph Labadie stated that
*"Anarchism is voluntary socialism"* [**Anarchism: What it is and What
it is Not**) and wanted to limit private property in many ways (for
example, *"the resources of nature -- land, mines, and so forth --
should not be held as private property and subject to being held by the
individual for speculative purposes, that use of these things shall be
the only valid title, and that each person has an equal right to the use
of all these things."* [**What is Socialism?**]). Therefore, **within**
the *"Anglo-American political culture,"* **all** types of anarchists
considered themselves part of the socialist movement. This can be seen
not only from Kropotkin's or Bakunin's work, but also in Tucker's (see
**Instead of a Book**). So to claim that the *"Anglo-American"*
anarchists did not have *"a long and close historical relationship"*
with the wider socialist movement is simply **false.**

The statement that anarchists want to severely limit or abolish "private
property" is misleading if it is not further explained. For the way it
stands, it sounds like anarchism is just another form of coercive
"state" (i.e. a political entity that forcibly prevents people from
owning private property), whereas this is far from the case.

Firstly, anarchists are **not** against "private property" in the sense
personal belongings. *"Anarchists,"* points out Nicholas Walter, *"are
in favour of the private property which cannot be used by one person to
exploit another -- those personal possessions which we accumulate from
childhood and which become part of ours."* [*"About Anarchism"*, in
**Reinventing Anarchy**, p. 49] Kropotkin makes the anarchist position
clear when he wrote that we *"do not want to rob any one of his coat"*
but expropriation *"must apply to everything that enables any man [or
woman] -- by he financier, mill owner, or landlord -- to appropriate the
product of others' toil."* [**The Conquest of Bread**, p. 61]

In effect, Caplan is confusing two very different kinds of "private
property", of which one rests on usefulness to an individual, the other
on the employment (and so exploitation) of the labour of others. The
latter produces social relations of domination between individuals,
while the former is a relationship between people and things. As
Proudhon argued, possession becomes property only when it also serves as
means of exploitation and subjection of other people. But failing to
distinguish these radically different forms of "private property" Caplan
distorts the anarchist position.

Secondly, it is not that anarchists want to pass laws making private
property (in the second, exploitative, sense) illegal. Rather they want
to restructure society in such a way that the means of production are
freely available for workers to use. This does not mean "anarchist
police" standing around with guns to prohibit people from owning private
property. Rather, it means dismantling the coercive state agencies that
make private property possible, i.e., the departments of real police who
now stand around with guns protecting private property.

Once that occurs, anarchists maintain that capitalism would be
impossible, since capitalism is essentially a monopoly of the means of
production, which can only be maintained by organised coercion. For
suppose that in an anarchist society someone (call him Bob) somehow
acquires certain machinery needed to produce widgets (a doubtful
supposition if widget-making machines are very expensive, as there will
be little wealth disparity in an anarchist society). And suppose Bob
offers to let workers with widget-making skills use his machines if they
will pay him "rent," i.e. allow him to appropriate a certain amount of
the value embodied in the widgets they produce. The workers will simply
refuse, choosing instead to join a widget-making collective where they
have free access to widget-making machinery, thus preventing Bob from
living parasitically on their labour. Thus Kropotkin:

> *"Everywhere you will find that the wealth of the wealthy springs from
> the poverty of the poor. That is why an anarchist society need not
> fear the advent of a Rothschild [or any other millionaire] who would
> settle in its midst. If every member of the community knows that after
> a few hours of productive toil he [or she] will have a right to all
> the pleasures that civilisation procures, and to those deeper sources
> of enjoyment which art and science offer to all who seek them, he [or
> she] will not sell his strength. . . No one will volunteer to work for
> the enrichment of your Rothschild."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 61]

In this scenario, private property was "abolished," but not through
coercion. Indeed, it was precisely the abolition of organised coercion
that allowed private property to be abolished.

4 Anarchism and dissidents
--------------------------

[9.] On the question "How would left-anarchy work?" Caplan writes:

> *"Some other crucial features of the left-anarchist society are quite
> unclear. Whether dissidents who despised all forms of communal living
> would be permitted to set up their own inegalitarian separatist
> societies is rarely touched upon. Occasionally left-anarchists have
> insisted that small farmers and the like would not be forcibly
> collectivised, but the limits of the right to refuse to adopt an
> egalitarian way of life are rarely specified."*

This is a straw man. "Left" (i.e. real) anarchist theory clearly implies
and **explicitly states** the answer to these questions.

Firstly, on the issue of "separatist" societies. Anarchist thinkers have
always acknowledged that there would be multitude of different
communities after a revolution (and not just Caplan's "inegalitarian"
ones). Marx, for example, mocked Bakunin for arguing that only
revolutionary communes would federate together and that this would not
claim any right to govern others (see Bakunin's *"Letter to Albert
Richards"*, **Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 179] Kropotkin
stated that *"the point attained in the socialisation of wealth will not
be everywhere the same"* and *"[s]ide by side with the revolutionised
communes . . . places would remain in an expectant attitude, and would
go on living on the Individualist system."* [**The Conquest of Bread**,
p. 81] While he was hopeful that *"everywhere [would be] more or less
Socialism"* he recognised that the revolution would not conform to *"any
particular rule"* and would differ in different areas -- *"in one
country State Socialist, in another Federation"* and so on. [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 82] Malatesta made the same point, arguing that *"after the
revolution"* there would be *"relations between anarchist groupings and
those living under some kind of authority, between communist collectives
and those living in an individualistic way."* This is because anarchism
*"cannot be imposed"*. [**Life and Ideas**, p. 173, p. 21]

Needless to say, these "separatist societies" (which may or may not be
"inegalitarian") would not be anarchist societies. If a group of people
wanted to set up a capitalist, Marxist, Georgist or whatever kind of
community then their right would be respected (although, of course,
anarchists would seek to convince those who live in such a regime of the
benefits of anarchism!). As Malatesta pointed out, *"free and voluntary
communism is ironical if one has not the right and the possibility to
live in a different regime, collectivist, mutualist, individualist -- as
one wishes, always on condition that there is no oppression or
exploitation of other"* as *"it is clear that all, and only, those ways
of life which respect freedom, and recognise that each individual has an
equal right to the means of production and to the full enjoyment of the
product of his own labour, have anything in common with anarchism."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 103 and p. 33]

Ultimately, *"it is not a question of right and wrong; it is a question
of freedom for everybody. . . None can judge with certainty who is right
and who is wrong, who is nearest to the truth, or which is the best way
to achieve the greatest good for each and everyone. Freedom coupled with
experience, is the only way of discovering the truth and what is best;
and there can be no freedom if there is the denial of the freedom to
err."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 49]

Secondly, regarding *"dissidents"* who wanted to set up their own
*"inegalitarian separatist societies,"* if the term "inegalitarian"
implies economic inequalities due to private property, the answer is
that private property requires some kind of state, if not a public state
then private security forces ("private-state capitalism"), as advocated
by "anarcho"-capitalists, in order to protect private property.
Therefore, "anarcho"-capitalists are asking if an anarchist society will
allow the existence of states. Of course, in the territory that used to
be claimed by a nation state a whole host of communities and societies
will spring up -- but that does not make the non-anarchist ones
anarchist!

Thus suppose that in a hypothetical libertarian socialist society, Bob
tries to set up private security forces to protect certain means of
production, e.g. farmland. By the hypothesis, if Bob merely wanted to
work the land himself, there would be no reason for him go to the
trouble of creating a private state to guard it, because use-rights
guarantee that he has free access to the productive assets he needs to
make a living. Thus, the only plausible reason Bob could have for
claiming and guarding more farmland than he could use himself would be a
desire to create a monopoly of land in order to exact tribute from
others for the privilege of using it. But this would be an attempt to
set up a system of feudal exploitation in the midst of a free community.
Thus the community is justified in disarming this would-be parasite and
ignoring his claims to "own" more land than he can use himself.

In other words, there is no "right" to adopt an "inegalitarian way of
life" within a libertarian community, since such a right would have to
be enforced by the creation of a coercive system of enslavement, which
would mean the end of the "libertarian" community. To the contrary, the
members of such a community have a right, guaranteed by "the people in
arms," to resist such attempts to enslave them.

The statement that "left" anarchists have *"occasionally"* insisted that
small farmers and the like would not be forcibly collectivised is a
distortion of the facts. No responsible left libertarian advocates
forced collectivisation, i.e. compelling others to join collectives.
Self-employment is always an option. This can be seen from Bakunin's
works [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 200], Kropotkin's [**The Conquest of
Bread**, p. 61 and **Act for Yourselves**, pp. 104-5] and Malatesta's
[**Life and Ideas**, p. 99, p. 103]. So the anarchist opposition to
forced collectivisation has always existed and, for anyone familiar with
the ideas of social anarchism, very well know. Thus during the Spanish
Revolution, small farmers who did not wish to join collective farms were
allowed to keep as much land as they could work themselves. After
perceiving the advantages of collectives, however, many joined them
voluntarily (see Sam Dolgoff, ed., **The Anarchist Collectives**).

To claim that social anarchists *"occasionally"* oppose forced
collectivisation is a smear, pure and simple, with little basis in
anarchist activity and even less in anarchist theory. Anyone remotely
familiar with the literature could not make such a mistake.

Finally, we should point out that under "anarcho"-capitalism there would
be, according to Murray Rothbard, a *"basic libertarian law code."*
Which means that under "anarcho"-capitalism, "egalitarian" communities
could only come about within a "inegalitarian" legal framework! Thus,
given that everything would be privatised, dissenters could only
experiment if they could afford it **and** accepted the legal system
based on capitalist property rights (and, of course, survive the
competition of capitalist companies within the capitalist framework). As
we have argued in sections [B.4](secB4.html) and [F.3why should we have
to **pay** the stealers of the earth for the privilege to life our own
lives? Caplan, in effect, ignores the barriers to experimentation in his
system while distorting the anarchist position.](secF3.html)

5 How would anarcho-capitalism work?
------------------------------------

[10.] This section (How would anarcho-capitalism work?) contains
Caplan's summary of arguments for "anarcho"-capitalism, which he
describes as an offshoot of Libertarianism. Thus:

> *"So-called 'minarchist' libertarians such as Nozick have argued that
> the largest justified government was one which was limited to the
> protection of individuals and their private property against physical
> invasion; accordingly, they favour a government limited to supplying
> police, courts, a legal code, and national defence."*

The first thing to note about this argument is that it is stated in such
a way as to prejudice the reader against the left-libertarian critique
of private property. The minarchist right-"libertarian," it is said,
only wants to protect individuals and their private property against
"physical invasion." But, because of the loose way in which the term
"property" is generally used, the "private property" of most
"individuals" is commonly thought of as **personal possessions,** i.e.
cars, houses, clothing, etc. (For the left-libertarian distinction
between private property and possessions, see [section
B.3.1.](secB3.html#secb31)) Therefore the argument makes it appear that
right libertarians are in favour of protecting personal possessions
whereas left-libertarians are not, thus conjuring up a world where, for
example, there would be no protection against one's house being
"physically invaded" by an intruder or a stranger stealing the shirt off
one's back!

By lumping the protection of "individuals" together with the protection
of their "private property," the argument implies that right
libertarians are concerned with the welfare of the vast majority of the
population, whereas in reality, the vast majority of "individuals" **do
not own** any private property (i.e. means of production) -- only a
handful of capitalists do. Moreover, these capitalists use their private
property to exploit the working class, leading to impoverishment,
alienation, etc., and thus **damaging** most individuals rather than
"protecting" them.

Caplan goes on:

> *"This normative theory is closely linked to laissez-faire economic
> theory, according to which private property and unregulated
> competition generally lead to both an efficient allocation of
> resources and (more importantly) a high rate of economic progress."*

Caplan does not mention the obvious problems with this "theory," e.g.
that during the heyday of laissez-faire capitalism in the US there was
vast wealth disparity, with an enormous mass of impoverished people
living in slums in the major cities -- hardly an "efficient" allocation
of resources or an example of "progress." Of course, if one defines
"efficiency" as "the most effective means of exploiting the working
class" and "progress" as "a high rate of profit for investors," then the
conclusion of the "theory" does indeed follow.

And let us not forget that it is general equilibrium theory which
predicts that unregulated competition will produce an efficient
allocation of resources. However, as we noted in [section
C.1](secC1.html), such a model has little to do with any real economy.
This means that there is no real reason to assume an efficient outcome
of capitalist economies. Concentrations of economic power and wealth can
easily skew outcomes to favour the haves over the have-nots (as history
again and again shows).

Moreover, the capitalism can easily lead to resources being allocated to
the most profitable uses rather than those which are most needed by
individuals. A classic example is in the case of famines. Amartya Sen
(who won the 1998 Nobel Prize for economics) developed an
***"entitlement"** approach to the study of famine. This approach starts
with the insight that having food available in a country or region does
not mean everyone living there is "entitled" to it. In market economies,
people are entitled to food according to their ability to produce it for
themselves or to pay or swap for it. In capitalist economies, most
people are entitled to food only if they can sell their labour/liberty
to those who own the means of life (which increases the economic
insecurity of wage workers).*

If some group loses its entitlement to food, whether there is a decline
in the available supply or not, a famine can occur. This may seem
obvious, yet before - and after - Sen, famine studies have remained
fixated on the drop in food available instead of whether specific social
groups are entitled to it. Thus even a relatively success economy can
price workers out of the food market (a depressed economy brings the
contradiction between need and profit -- use value and exchange value --
even more to the forefront). This *"pricing out"* can occur especially
if food can get higher prices (and so profits) elsewhere -- for example
the Irish famine of 1848 and sub-Saharan famines of the 1980s saw food
being exported from famine areas to areas where it could fetch a higher
price. In other words, market forces can skew resource allocation away
from where it is most needed to where it can generate a profit. As
anarchist George Barret noted decades before Sen:

> *"Today the scramble is to compete for the greatest profits. If there
> is more profit to be made in satisfying my lady's passing whim than
> there is in feeding hungry children, then competition brings us in
> feverish haste to supply the former, whilst cold charity or the poor
> law can supply the latter, or leave it unsupplied, just as it feels
> disposed. That is how it works out."* [**Objectives to Anarchism**]

In other words, inequality skews resource allocation towards the
wealthy. While such a situation may be *"efficient allocation of
resources"* from the perspective of the capitalist, it is hardly so from
a social perspective (i.e. one that considers **all** individual needs
rather than "effective demand").

Furthermore, if we look at the stock market (a key aspect of any
capitalist system) we discover a strong tendencies **against** the
efficient allocation of resources. The stock market often experiences
"bubbles" and becomes significantly over-valued. An inflated stock
market badly distorts investment decisions. For example, if Internet
companies are wildly over-valued then the sale of shares of new Internet
companies or the providing of start-up capital will drain away savings
that could be more productively used elsewhere. The real economy will
pay a heavy price from such misdirected investment and, more
importantly, resources are **not** efficiency allocated as the stock
market skews resources into the apparently more profitable areas and
away from where they could be used to satisfy other needs.

The stock market is also a source of other inefficiencies. Supporters of
"free-market" capitalism always argued that the Stalinist system of
central planning created a perverse set of incentives to managers. In
effect, the system penalised honest managers and encouraged the flow of
**dis**-information. This lead to information being distorted and
resources inefficiently allocated and wasted. Unfortunately the stock
market also creates its own set of perverse responses and
mis-information. Doug Henwood argues that *"something like a prisoners'
dilemma prevails in relations between managers and the stock market.
Even if participants are aware of an upward bias to earnings estimates,
and even if they correct for it, managers still have an incentive to try
and fool the market. If you tell the truth, your accurate estimates will
be marked down by a sceptical market. So its entirely rational for
managers to boost profits in the short term, either through accounting
gimmickry or by making only investments with quick paybacks."* He goes
on to note that *"[i]f the markets see high costs as bad, and low costs
as good, then firms may shun expensive investments because they will be
taken as signs of managerial incompetence. Throughout the late 1980s and
early 1990s, the stock market rewarded firms announcing write-offs and
mass firings -- a bulimic strategy of management -- since the cost
cutting was seen as contributing rather quickly to profits. Firms and
economies can't get richer by starving themselves, but stock market
investors can get richer when the companies they own go hungry. As for
the long term, well, that's someone else's problem."* [**Wall Street**,
p. 171]

This means that resources are allocated to short term projects, those
that enrich the investors now rather than produce long term growth and
benefits later. This results in slower and more unstable investment than
less market centred economies, as well as greater instability over the
business cycle [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 174-5] Thus the claim that capitalism
results in the "efficient" allocation of resources is only true if we
assume "efficient" equals highest profits for capitalists. As Henwood
summarises, *"the US financial system performs dismally at its
advertised task, that of efficiently directing society's savings towards
their optimal investment pursuits. The system is stupefyingly expensive,
gives terrible signals, and has surprisingly little to do with real
investment."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 3]

Moreover, the claim that laissez-faire economies produce a high rate of
economic progress can be questioned on the empirical evidence available.
For example, from the 1970s onwards there has been a strong tendency
towards economic deregulation. However, this tendency has been
associated with a **slow down** of economic growth. For example,
*"[g]rowth rates, investment rates and productivity rates are all lower
now than in the [Keynesian post-war] Golden Age, and there is evidence
that the trend rate of growth -- the underlying growth rate -- has also
decreased."* Before the Thatcher pro-market reforms, the British economy
grew by 2.4% in the 1970s. After Thatcher's election in 1979, growth
decreased to 2% in the 1980s and to 1.2% in the 1990s. In the USA, we
find a similar pattern. Growth was 4.4% in the 1960s, 3.2% in the 1970s,
2.8% in the 1980s and 1.9% in the first half of the 1990s [Larry Elliot
and Dan Atkinson, **The Age of Insecurity**, p. 236]. Moreover, in terms
of inflation-adjusted GDP per capita and productivity, the US had the
worse performance out of the US, UK, Japan, Italy, France, Canada and
Australia between 1970 and 1995 [Marc-Anfre Pigeon and L. Randall Wray,
**Demand Constraints and Economic Growth**]. Given that the US is
usually considered the most laissez-faire out of these 7 countries,
Caplan's claim of high progress for deregulated systems seems at odds
with this evidence.

As far as technological innovation goes, it is also not clear that
deregulation has aided that process. Much of our modern technology owns
its origins to the US Pentagon system, in which public money is provided
to companies for military R&D purposes. Once the technology has been
proven viable, the companies involved can sell their public subsidised
products for private profit. The computer industry (as we point out in
[section J.4.7](secJ4.html#secj47)) is a classic example of this --
indeed it is unlikely whether we would have computers or the internet if
we had waited for capitalists to development them. So whether a totally
deregulated capitalism would have as high a rate of technological
progress is a moot point.

So, it seems likely that it is only the **assumption** that the free
capitalist market will generate *"an efficient allocation of resources
and (more importantly) a high rate of economic progress."* Empirical
evidence points the other way -- namely, that state aided capitalism
provides an approximation of these claims. Indeed, if we look at the
example of the British Empire (which pursued a strong free trade and
laissez-faire policy over the areas it had invaded) we can suggest that
the opposite may be true. After 25 prosperous years of fast growth (3.5
per cent), after 1873 Britain had 40 years of slow growth (1.5 per
cent), the last 14 years of which were the worse -- with productivity
declining, GDP stagnant and home investment halved. [Nicholas Kaldor,
**Further Essays on Applied Economics**, p. 239] In comparison, those
countries which embraced protectionism (such as Germany and the USA)
industrialised successfully and become competitors with the UK. Indeed,
these new competitors grew in time to be efficient competitors of
Britain not only in foreign markets but also in Britain's home market.
The result was that *"for fifty years Britain's GDP grew very slowly
relative to the more successful of the newer industrialised countries,
who overtook her, one after another, in the volume of manufacturing
production and in exports and finally in real income per head."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. xxvi] Indeed, *"America's growth and productivity rates were
higher when tariffs were steep than when they came down."* [Larry Elliot
and Dan Atkinson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 277]

It is possible to explain almost everything that has ever happened in
the world economy as evidence not of the failure of markets but rather
of what happens when markets are not able to operate freely. Indeed,
this is the right-libertarian position in a nut shell. However, it does
seem strange that movements towards increased freedom for markets
produce worse results than the old, more regulated, way. Similarly it
seems strange that the country that embraced laissez-faire and free
trade (Britain) did **worse** than those which embraced protectionism
(USA, Germany, etc.).

It could always be argued that the protectionist countries had embraced
free trade their economies would have done even better. This is, of
course, a possibility -- if somewhat unlikely. After all, the argument
for laissez-faire and free trade is that it benefits all parties, even
if it is embraced unilaterally. That Britain obviously did not benefit
suggests a flaw in the theory (and that no country **has**
industrialised without protectionism suggests likewise). Unfortunately,
free-market capitalist economics lends itself to a mind frame that
ensures that nothing could happen in the real world that would could
ever change its supporters minds about anything.

Free trade, it could be argued, benefits only those who have established
themselves in the market -- that is, have market power. Thus Britain
could initially benefit from free trade as it was the only
industrialised nation (and even **its** early industrialisation cannot
be divorced from its initial mercantilist policies). This position of
strength allowed them to dominate and destroy possible competitors (as
Kaldor points out, *"[w]here the British succeeded in gaining free entry
for its goods. . . it had disastrous effects on local manufactures and
employment."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. xxvi]). This would revert the other
country back towards agriculture, an industry with diminishing returns
to scale (manufacturing, in contrast, has increasing returns) and ensure
Britain's position of power.

The use of protection, however, sheltered the home industries of other
countries and gave them the foothold required to compete with Britain.
In addition, Britains continual adherence to free trade meant that a lot
of **new** industries (such as chemical and electrical ones) could not
be properly established. This combination contributed to free trade
leading to stunted growth, in stark contrast to the arguments of
neo-classical economics.

Of course, we will be accused of supporting protectionism by recounting
these facts. That is not the case, as protectionism is used as a means
of "proletarianising" a nation (as we discuss in [section
F.8](secF8.html)). Rather we are presenting evidence to refute a claim
that deregulated capitalism will lead to higher growth. Thus, we
suggest, the history of "actually existing" capitalism indicates that
Caplan's claim that deregulated capitalism will result *"a high rate of
economic progress"* may be little more than an assumption. True, it is
an assumption of neo-classical economics, but empirical evidence
suggests that assumption is as unfounded as the rest of that theory.

Next we get to the meat of the defence of "anarcho"-capitalism:

> *"Now the anarcho-capitalist essentially turns the minarchist's own
> logic against him, and asks why the remaining functions of the state
> could not be turned over to the free market. And so, the
> anarcho-capitalist imagines that police services could be sold by
> freely competitive firms; that a court system would emerge to
> peacefully arbitrate disputes between firms; and that a sensible legal
> code could be developed through custom, precedent, and contract."*

Indeed, the functions in question could certainly be turned over to the
"free" market, as was done in certain areas of the US during the 19th
century, e.g. the coal towns that were virtually owned by private coal
companies. We have already discussed the negative impact of that
experiment on the working class in [section F.6.2](secF6.html#secf62).
Our objection is not that such privatisation cannot be done, but that it
is an error to call it a form of anarchism. In reality it is an extreme
form of laissez-faire capitalism, which is the exact opposite of
anarchism. The defence of private power by private police is hardly a
move towards the end of authority, nor are collections of private states
an example of anarchism.

Indeed, that "anarcho"-capitalism does not desire the end of the state,
just a change in its form, can be seen from Caplan's own arguments. He
states that *"the remaining functions of the state"* should be *"turned
over to the free market."* Thus the state (and its functions, primarily
the defence of capitalist property rights) is **privatised** and not, in
fact, abolished. In effect, the "anarcho"-capitalist seeks to abolish
the state by calling it something else.

Caplan:

> *"The anarcho-capitalist typically hails modern society's increasing
> reliance on private security guards, gated communities, arbitration
> and mediation, and other demonstrations of the free market's ability
> to supply the defensive and legal services normally assumed to be of
> necessity a government monopoly."*

It is questionable that *"modern society"* **as such** has increased its
reliance on *"private security guards, gated communities"* and so on.
Rather, it is the **wealthy** who have increased their reliance on these
forms of private defence. Indeed it is strange to hear a
right-libertarian even use the term "society" as, according to that
ideology, society does not exist! Perhaps the term "society" is used to
hide the class nature of these developments? As for "gated communities"
it is clear that their inhabitants would object if the rest of society
gated themselves from them! But such is the logic of such developments
-- but the gated communities want it both ways. They seek to exclude the
rest of society from their communities while expected to be given access
to that society. Needless to say, Caplan fails to see that liberty for
the rich can mean oppression for the working class -- *"we who belong to
the proletaire class, property excommunicates us!"* [Proudhon, **What is
Property?**, p. 105]

That the law code of the state is being defended by private companies is
hardly a step towards anarchy. This indicates exactly why an "anarcho"-
capitalist system will be a collection of private states united around a
common, capitalistic, and hierarchical law code. In addition, this
system does not abolish the monopoly of government over society
represented by the *"general libertarian law code,"* nor the monopoly of
power that owners have over their property and those who use it. The
difference between public and private statism is that the boss can
select which law enforcement agents will enforce his or her power.

The threat to freedom and justice for the working class is clear. The
thug-like nature of many private security guards enforcing private power
is well documented. For example, the beating of protesters by "private
cops" is a common sight in anti-motorway campaigns or when animal right
activists attempt to disrupt fox hunts. The shooting of strikers during
strikes occurred during the peak period of American laissez-faire
capitalism. However, as most forms of protest involve the violation of
"absolute" property rights, the "justice" system under
"anarcho"-capitalism would undoubtedly fine the victims of such attacks
by private cops.

It is also interesting that the "anarcho"-capitalist "hails" what are
actually symptoms of social breakdown under capitalism. With increasing
wealth disparity, poverty, and chronic high unemployment, society is
becoming polarised into those who can afford to live in secure, gated
communities and those who cannot. The latter are increasingly
marginalised in ghettos and poor neighbourhoods where drug-dealing,
prostitution, and theft become main forms of livelihood, with gangs
offering a feudalistic type of "protection" to those who join or pay
tribute to them. Under "anarcho"-capitalism, the only change would be
that drug-dealing and prostitution would be legalised and gangs could
start calling themselves "defence companies."

Caplan:

> *"In his ideal society, these market alternatives to government
> services would take over **all** legitimate security services. One
> plausible market structure would involve individuals subscribing to
> one of a large number of competing police services; these police
> services would then set up contracts or networks for peacefully
> handling disputes between members of each others' agencies.
> Alternately, police services might be 'bundled' with housing services,
> just as landlords often bundle water and power with rental housing,
> and gardening and security are today provided to residents in gated
> communities and apartment complexes."*

This is a scenario designed with the upper classes in mind and a few
working class people, i.e. those with **some** property (for example, a
house) -- sometimes labelled the "middle class". But under capitalism,
the tendency toward capital concentration leads to increasing wealth
polarisation, which means a shrinking "middle class" (i.e. working class
with decent jobs and their own homes) and a growing "underclass" (i.e.
working class people without a decent job). Ironically enough, America
(with one of the most laissez-faire capitalist systems) is also the
Western nation with the **smallest** "middle class" and wealth
concentration has steadily increased since the 1970s. Thus the number of
people who could afford to buy protection and "justice" from the best
companies would continually decrease. For this reason there would be a
growing number of people at the mercy of the rich and powerful,
particularly when it comes to matters concerning employment, which is
the main way in which the poor would be victimised by the rich and
powerful (as is indeed the case now).

Of course, if landlords **do** "bundle" police services in their
contracts this means that they are determining the monopoly of force
over the property in question. Tenants would "consent" to the police
force and the laws of the landlord in exactly the same way emigrants
"consent" to the laws and government of, say, the USA when they move
there. Rather than show the difference between statism and capitalism,
Caplan has indicated their essential commonality. For the proletarian,
property is but another form of state. For this reason anarchists would
agree with Rousseau when he wrote that:

> *"That a rich and powerful man, having acquired immense possessions in
> lands, should impose laws on those who want to establish themselves
> there, and that he should only allow them to do so on condition that
> they accept his supreme authority and obey all his wishes; that, I can
> still conceive. But how can I conceive such a treaty, which
> presupposes anterior rights, could be the first foundation of law?
> Would not this tyrannical act contain a double usurpation: that on the
> ownership of the land and that on the liberty of the inhabitants?"*
> [**The Social Contract and Discourses**, p. 316]

Caplan:

> *"The underlying idea is that contrary to popular belief, private
> police would have strong incentives to be peaceful and respect
> individual rights. For first of all, failure to peacefully arbitrate
> will yield to jointly destructive warfare, which will be bad for
> profits. Second, firms will want to develop long-term business
> relationships, and hence be willing to negotiate in good faith to
> insure their long-term profitability. And third, aggressive firms
> would be likely to attract only high-risk clients and thus suffer from
> extraordinarily high costs (a problem parallel to the well-known
> 'adverse selection problem' in e.g. medical insurance -- the problem
> being that high-risk people are especially likely to seek insurance,
> which drives up the price when riskiness is hard for the insurer to
> discern or if regulation requires a uniform price regardless of
> risk)."*

The theory that *"failure to peacefully arbitrate will yield to jointly
destructive warfare, which will be bad for profits"* can be faulted in
two ways. Firstly, if warfare would be bad for profits, what is to stop
a large "defence association" from ignoring a smaller one's claim? If
warfare were "bad for business," it would be even worse for a small
company without the capital to survive a conflict, which could give big
"defence associations" the leverage to force compliance with their
business interests. Price wars are often bad for business, but companies
sometimes start them if they think they can win. Needless to say, demand
would exist for such a service (unless you assume a transformation in
the "human nature" generated by capitalism -- an unlikely situation and
one "anarcho"-capitalists usually deny is required for their system to
work). Secondly -- and this is equally, if not more, likely -- a
"balance of power" method to stop warfare has little to recommend it
from history. This can be seen from the First World War and feudal
society.

What the "anarcho"-capitalist is describing is essentially a system of
"industrial feudalism" wherein people contract for "protection" with
armed gangs of their choice. Feudal societies have never been known to
be peaceful, even though war is always "unprofitable" for one side or
the other or both. The argument fails to consider that "defence
companies," whether they be called police forces, paramilitaries or
full-blown armies, tend to attract the "martial" type of authoritarian
personality, and that this type of "macho" personality thrives on and
finds its reason for existence in armed conflict and other forms of
interpersonal violence and intimidation. Hence feudal society is
continually wracked by battles between the forces of opposing warlords,
because such conflicts allow the combatants a chance to "prove their
manhood," vent their aggression, obtain honours and titles, advance in
the ranks, obtain spoils, etc. The "anarcho" capitalist has given no
reason why warfare among legalised gangs would not continue under
industrial feudalism, except the extremely lame reason that it would not
be profitable -- a reason that has never prevented war in any known
feudal society.

It should be noted that the above is not an argument from "original
sin." Feudal societies are characterised by conflict between opposing
"protection agencies" not because of the innate depravity of human
beings but because of a social structure based on private property and
hierarchy, which brings out the latent capacities for violence,
domination, greed, etc. that humans have by creating a financial
incentive to be so. But this is not to say that a different social
structure would not bring out latent capacities for much different
qualities like sharing, peaceableness, and co-operation, which human
beings also have. In fact, as Kropotkin argued in **Mutual Aid** and as
recent anthropologists have confirmed in greater detail, ancient
societies based on communal ownership of productive assets and little
social hierarchy were basically peaceful, with no signs of warfare for
thousands of years.

However, let us assume that such a competitive system does actually work
as described. Caplan, in effect, argues that competition will generate
co-operation. This is due to the nature of the market in question --
defence (and so peace) is dependent on firms working together as the
commodity "peace" cannot be supplied by one firm. However, this
co-operation does not, for some reason, become **collusion** between the
firms in question. According to "anarcho"-capitalists this competitive
system not only produces co-operation, it excludes "defence" firms
making agreements to fix monopoly profits (i.e. co-operation that
benefits the firms in question). Why does the market produce beneficial
co-operation to everyone but not collusion for the firms in question?
Collusion is when firms have "business relationships" and "negotiate in
good faith" to insure their profitability by agreeing not to compete
aggressively against each other in order to exploit the market.
Obviously in "anarcho"-capitalism the firms in question only use their
powers for good!

Needless to say, the "anarcho"-capitalist will object and argue that
competition will ensure that collusion will not occur. However, given
that co-operation is required between all firms in order to provide the
commodity "peace" this places the "anarcho"-capitalist in a bind. As
Caplan notes, "aggressive" firms are *"likely to attract only high-risk
clients and thus suffer from extraordinarily high costs."* From the
perspective of the colluding firms, a new entry into their market is, by
definition, aggressive. If the colluding firms do not co-operate with
the new competitor, then it will suffer from *"extraordinarily high
costs"* and either go out of business or join the co-operators. If the
new entry could survive in the face of the colluding firms hostility
then so could "bad" defence firms, ones that ignored the market
standards.

So the "anarcho"-capitalist faces two options. Either an "aggressive"
firm cannot survive or it can. If it cannot then the very reason why it
cannot ensures that collusion is built into the market and while the
system is peaceful it is based on an effective monopoly of colluding
firms who charge monopoly profits. This, in effect, is a state under the
"anarcho"-capitalist's definition as a property owner cannot freely
select their own "protection" -- they are limited to the firms (and
laws) provided by the co-operating firms. Or an "aggressive" firm can
survive, violence is commonplace and chaos ensures.

Caplan's passing reference to the *"adverse selection problem"* in
medical insurance suggests another problem with "anarcho"-capitalism.
The problem is that high-risk people are especially likely to seek
protection, which drives up the price for, as "anarcho"-capitalists
themselves note, areas with high crime levels "will be bad for profits,"
as hardware and personnel costs will be correspondingly higher. This
means that the price for "protection" in areas which need it most will
be far higher than for areas which do not need it. As poor areas are
generally more crime afflicted than rich areas, "anarcho"-capitalism may
see vast sections of the population not able to afford "protection"
(just as they may not be about to afford health care and other essential
services). Indeed, "protection services" which try to provide cheap
services to "high-risk" areas will be at an competitive disadvantage in
relation to those who do not, as the "high-risk" areas will hurt profits
and companies without "high-risk" "customers" could undercut those that
have.

Caplan:

> *"Anarcho-capitalists generally give little credence to the view that
> their 'private police agencies' would be equivalent to today's Mafia
> -- the cost advantages of open, legitimate business would make
> 'criminal police' uncompetitive. (Moreover, they argue, the Mafia can
> only thrive in the artificial market niche created by the prohibition
> of alcohol, drugs, prostitution, gambling, and other victimless
> crimes. Mafia gangs might kill each other over turf, but liquor-store
> owners generally do not.)"*

As we have pointed out in [section F.6](secF6.html), the "Mafia"
objection to "anarcho"-capitalist defence companies is a red herring.
The biggest problem would not be "criminal police" but the fact that
working people and tenants would subject to the rules, power and laws of
the property owners, the rich would be able to buy better police
protection and "justice" than the poor and that the "general" law code
these companies would defend would be slanted towards the interests and
power of the capitalist class (defending capitalist property rights and
the proprietors power). And as we also noted, such a system has already
been tried in 19th-century and early 20th America, with the result that
the rich reduced the working class to a serf-like existence, capitalist
production undermined independent producers (to the annoyance of
individualist anarchists at the time), and the result was the emergence
of the corporate America that "anarcho"-capitalists say they oppose.

Caplan argues that "liquor-store owners" do not generally kill each
other over turf. This is true (but then again they do not have access to
their own private cops currently so perhaps this could change). But the
company owners who created their own private police forces and armies in
America's past **did** allow their goons to attack and murder union
organisers and strikers. Let us look at Henry Ford's Service Department
(private police force) in action:

> *"In 1932 a hunger march of the unemployed was planned to march up to
> the gates of the Ford plant at Dearborn. . . The machine guns of the
> Dearborn police and the Ford Motor Company's Service Department killed
> [four] and wounded over a score of others. . . Ford was fundamentally
> and entirely opposed to trade unions. The idea of working men
> questioning his prerogatives as an owner was outrageous. . . [T]he
> River Rouge plant. . . was dominated by the autocratic regime of
> Bennett's service men. Bennett . . organise[d] and train[ed] the three
> and a half thousand private policemen employed by Ford. His task was
> to maintain discipline amongst the work force, protect Ford's property
> [and power], and prevent unionisation. . . Frank Murphy, the mayor of
> Detroit, claimed that 'Henry Ford employs some of the worst gangsters
> in our city.' The claim was well based. Ford's Service Department
> policed the gates of his plants, infiltrated emergent groups of union
> activists, posed as workers to spy on men on the line. . . Under this
> tyranny the Ford worker had no security, no rights. So much so that
> any information about the state of things within the plant could only
> be freely obtained from ex-Ford workers."* [Huw Beynon, **Working for
> Ford**, pp. 29-30]

The private police attacked women workers handing out pro-union
handbills and gave them *"a serve beating."* At Kansas and Dallas
*"similar beatings were handed out to the union men."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
34] This use of private police to control the work force was not unique.
General Motors *"spent one million dollars on espionage, employing
fourteen detective agencies and two hundred spies at one time [between
1933 and 1936]. The Pinkerton Detective Agency found anti-unionism its
most lucrative activity."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 32] We must also note that
the Pinkerton's had been selling their private police services for
decades before the 1930s. In the 1870s, they had infiltrated and
destroyed the Molly Maguires (a secret organisation Irish miners had
developed to fight the coal bosses). For over 60 years the Pinkerton
Detective Agency had *"specialised in providing spies, agent
provocateurs, and private armed forces for employers combating labour
organisations."* By 1892 it *"had provided its services for management
in seventy major labour disputes, and its 2 000 active agents and 30 000
reserves totalled more than the standing army of the nation."* [Jeremy
Brecher, **Strike!**, p. 9 and p. 55] With this force available, little
wonder unions found it so hard to survive in the USA. Given that unions
could be considered as "defence" agencies for workers, this suggests a
picture of how "anarcho"-capitalism may work in practice.

It could be argued that, in the end, the union was recognised by the
Ford company. However, this occurred after the New Deal was in place
(which helped the process), after years of illegal activity (by
definition union activism on Ford property was an illegal act) and
extremely militant strikes. Given that the union agreement occurred
nearly 40 years after Ford was formed **and** in a legal situation
violently at odds with "anarcho"-capitalism (or even minimal statist
capitalism), we would be justified in wondering if unionisation would
ever have occurred at Ford and if Ford's private police state would ever
have been reformed.

Of course, from an "anarcho"-capitalist perspective the only limitation
in the Ford workers' liberty was the fact they had to pay taxes to the
US government. The regime at Ford could **not** restrict their liberty
as no one forced them to work for the company. Needless to say, an
"anarcho"-capitalist would reject out of hand the argument that no-one
forced the citizen to entry or remain in the USA and so they consented
to taxation, the government's laws and so on.

This is more than a history lesson. Such private police forces are on
the rise again (see *"Armed and Dangerous: Private Police on the March"*
by Mike Zielinski, **Covert Action Quarterly**, no. 54, Fall, 1995 for
example). This system of private police (as demonstrated by Ford) is
just one of the hidden aspects of Caplan's comment that the
"anarcho"-capitalist *"typically hails modern society's increasing
reliance on private security guards. . . and other demonstrations of the
free market's ability to supply the defensive and legal services
normally assumed to be of necessity a government monopoly."*

Needless to say, private police states are not a step forward in
anarchist eyes.

Caplan:

> *"Unlike some left-anarchists, the anarcho-capitalist has no objection
> to punishing criminals; and he finds the former's claim that
> punishment does not deter crime to be the height of naivete.
> Traditional punishment might be meted out after a conviction by a
> neutral arbitrator; or a system of monetary restitution (probably in
> conjunction with a prison factory system) might exist instead."*

Let us note first that in disputes between the capitalist class and the
working class, there would be no *"neutral arbitrator,"* because the
rich would either own the arbitration company or influence/control it
through the power of the purse (see [section F.6](secF6.html)). In
addition, "successful" arbitrators would also be wealthy, therefore
making neutrality even more unlikely. Moreover, given that the laws the
"neutral arbitrator" would be using are based on capitalist property
rights, the powers and privileges of the owner are built into the system
from the start.

Second, the left-libertarian critique of punishment does not rest, as
"anarcho"-capitalists claim, on the naive view that intimidation and
coercion aren't effective in controlling behaviour. Rather, it rests on
the premise that capitalist societies produce large numbers of
criminals, whereas societies based on equality and community ownership
of productive assets do not.

The argument for this is that societies based on private property and
hierarchy inevitably lead to a huge gap between the haves and the
have-nots, with the latter sunk in poverty, alienation, resentment,
anger, and hopelessness, while at the same time such societies promote
greed, ambition, ruthlessness, deceit, and other aspects of competitive
individualism that destroy communal values like sharing, co-operation,
and mutual aid. Thus in capitalist societies, the vast majority of
"crime" turns out to be so-called "crimes against property," which can
be traced to poverty and the grossly unfair distribution of wealth.
Where the top one percent of the population controls more wealth than
the bottom 90 percent combined, it is no wonder that a considerable
number of those on the bottom should try to recoup illegally some of the
mal-distributed wealth they cannot obtain legally. (In this they are
encouraged by the bad example of the ruling class, whose parasitic ways
of making a living would be classified as criminal if the mechanisms for
defining "criminal behaviour" were not controlled by the ruling class
itself.) And most of the remaining "crimes against persons" can be
traced to the alienation, dehumanisation, frustration, rage, and other
negative emotions produced by the inhumane and unjust economic system.

Thus it is only in our societies like ours, with their wholesale
manufacture of many different kinds of criminals, that punishment
appears to be the only possible way to discourage "crime." From the
left-libertarian perspective, however, the punitive approach is a
band-aid measure that does not get to the real root of the problem -- a
problem that lies in the structure of the system itself. The real
solution is the creation of a non-hierarchical society based on communal
ownership of productive assets, which, by eliminating poverty and the
other negative effects of capitalism, would greatly reduce the incidence
of criminal behaviour and so the need for punitive countermeasures.

Finally, two more points on private prisons. Firstly, as to the
desirability of a "prison factory system," we will merely note that,
given the capitalist principle of "grow-or-die," if punishing crime
becomes a business, one can be sure that those who profit from it will
find ways to ensure that the "criminal" population keeps expanding at a
rate sufficient to maintain a high rate of profit and growth. After all,
the logic of a "prison factory system" is self-defeating. If the aim of
prison is to deter crime (as some claim) and if a private prison system
will meet that aim, then a successful private prison system will stop
crime, which, in turn, will put them out of business! Thus a "prison
factory system" cannot aim to be efficient (i.e. stop crime).

Secondly, Caplan does not mention the effect of prison labour on the
wages, job conditions and market position of workers. Having a sizeable
proportion of the working population labouring in prison would have a
serious impact on the bargaining power of workers. How could workers
outside of prison compete with such a regime of labour discipline
without submitting to prison-like conditions themselves? Unsurprisingly,
US history again presents some insight into this. As Noam Chomsky notes,
the *"rapid industrial development in the southeastern region [of
America] a century ago was based on (Black) convict labour, leased to
the highest bidder."* Chomsky quotes expert Alex Lichtenstein comments
that Southern Industrialists pointed out that convict labour was *"more
reliable and productive than free labour"* and that it overcomes the
problem of labour turnover and instability. It also *"remove[d] all
danger and cost of strikes"* and that it lowers wages for *"free
labour"* (i.e. wage labour). The US Bureau of Labor reported that *"mine
owners [in Alabama] say they could not work at a profit without the
lowering effect in wages of convict-labour competition."* [**The
Umbrella of US Power**, p. 32]

Needless to say, Caplan fails to mention this aspect of
"anarcho"-capitalism (just as he fails to mention the example of Ford's
private police state). Perhaps an "anarcho"-capitalist will say that
prison labour will be less productive than wage labour and so workers
have little to fear, but this makes little sense. If wage labour is more
productive then prison labour will not find a market (and then what for
the prisoners? Will profit-maximising companies **really** invest in an
industry with such high over-heads as maintaining prisoners for free?).
Thus it seems more than likely that any "prison-factory system" will be
as productive as the surrounding wage-labour ones, thus forcing down
their wages and the conditions of labour. For capitalists this would be
ideal, however for the vast majority a different conclusion must be
drawn.

Caplan:

> *"Probably the main division between the anarcho-capitalists stems
> from the apparent differences between Rothbard's natural-law
> anarchism, and David Friedman's more economistic approach. Rothbard
> puts more emphasis on the need for a generally recognised libertarian
> legal code (which he thinks could be developed fairly easily by
> purification of the Anglo-American common law), whereas Friedman
> focuses more intently on the possibility of plural legal systems
> co-existing and responding to the consumer demands of different
> elements of the population. The difference, however, is probably
> overstated. Rothbard believes that it is legitimate for consumer
> demand to determine the philosophically neutral content of the law,
> such as legal procedure, as well as technical issues of property right
> definition such as water law, mining law, etc. And Friedman admits
> that 'focal points' including prevalent norms are likely to
> circumscribe and somewhat standardise the menu of available legal
> codes."*

The argument that "consumer demand" would determine a "philosophically
neutral" content of the law cannot be sustained. Any law code will
reflect the philosophy of those who create it. Under
"anarcho"-capitalism, as we have noted (see [section F.6](secF6.html)),
the values of the capitalist rich will be dominant and will shape the
law code and justice system, as they do now, only more so. The law code
will therefore continue to give priority to the protection of private
property over human values; those who have the most money will continue
being able to hire the best lawyers; and the best (i.e. most highly
paid) judges will be inclined to side with the wealthy and to rule in
their interests, out of class loyalty (and personal interests).

Moreover, given that the law code exists to protect capitalist property
rights, how can it be "philosophically neutral" with that basis? How
would "competing" property frameworks co-exist? If a defence agency
allowed squatting and another (hired by the property owner) did not,
there is no way (bar force) a conflict could be resolved. Then the firm
with the most resources would win. "Anarcho"-capitalism, in effect,
smuggles into the foundation of their system a distinctly
**non**-neutral philosophy, namely capitalism. Those who reject such a
basis may end up sharing the fate of tribal peoples who rejected that
system of property rights, for example, the Native Americans.

In other words, in terms of outcome the whole system would favour
**capitalist** values and so not be "philosophically neutral." The law
would be favourable to employers rather than workers, manufacturers
rather than consumers, and landlords rather than tenants. Indeed, from
the "anarcho"-capitalist perspective the rules that benefit employers,
landlords and manufacturers (as passed by progressive legislatures or
enforced by direct action) simply define liberty and property rights
whereas the rules that benefit workers, tenants and consumers are simply
an interference with liberty. The rules one likes, in other words, are
the foundations of sacred property rights (and so "liberty," as least
for the capitalist and landlord), those one does not like are meddlesome
regulation. This is a very handy trick and would not be worth mentioning
if it was not so commonplace in right-libertarian theory.

We should leave aside the fantasy that the law under
"anarcho"-capitalism is a politically neutral set of universal rules
deduced from particular cases and free from a particular instrumental or
class agenda.

Caplan:

> *"Critics of anarcho-capitalism sometimes assume that communal or
> worker-owned firms would be penalised or prohibited in an
> anarcho-capitalist society. It would be more accurate to state that
> while individuals would be free to voluntarily form communitarian
> organisations, the anarcho-capitalist simply doubts that they would be
> widespread or prevalent."*

There is good reason for this doubt. Worker co-operatives would not be
widespread or prevalent in an "anarcho"-capitalist society for the same
reason that they are not widespread or prevalent now: namely, that the
socio-economic, legal, and political systems would be structured in such
as way as to automatically discourage their growth (in addition,
capitalist firms and the rich would also have an advantage in that they
would still own and control the wealth they currently have which are a
result of previous "initiations of force". This would give them an
obvious advantage on the "free-market" -- an advantage which would be
insurmountable).

As we explain in more detail in [section J.5.11](secJ5.html#secj511),
the reason why there are not more producer co-operatives is partly
structural, based on the fact that co-operatives have a tendency to grow
at a slower rate than capitalist firms. This is a good thing if one's
primary concern is, say, protecting the environment, but fatal if one is
trying to survive in a competitive capitalist environment.

Under capitalism, successful competition for profits is the fundamental
fact of economic survival. This means that banks and private investors
seeking the highest returns on their investments will favour those
companies that grow the fastest. Moreover, in co-operatives returns to
capital are less than in capitalist firms. Under such conditions,
capitalist firms will attract more investment capital, allowing them to
buy more productivity-enhancing technology and thus to sell their
products more cheaply than co-operatives. Even though co-operatives are
at least as efficient (usually more so) than their equivalent capitalist
firms, the effect of market forces (particularly those associated with
capital markets) will select against them. This bias against
co-operatives under capitalism is enough to ensure that, despite their
often higher efficiency, they cannot prosper under capitalism (i.e.
capitalism selects the **least efficient** way of producing). Hence
Caplan's comments hide how the effect of inequalities in wealth and
power under capitalism determine which alternatives are "widespread" in
the "free market"

Moreover, co-operatives within capitalism have a tendency to adapt to
the dominant market conditions rather than undermining them. There will
be pressure on the co-operatives to compete more effectively by adopting
the same cost-cutting and profit-enhancing measures as capitalist firms.
Such measures will include the deskilling of workers; squeezing as much
"productivity" as is humanly possible from them; and a system of pay
differentials in which the majority of workers receive low wages while
the bulk of profits are reinvested in technology upgrades and other
capital expansion that keeps pace with capitalist firms. But this means
that in a capitalist environment, there tend to be few practical
advantages for workers in collective ownership of the firms in which
they work.

This problem can only be solved by eliminating private property and the
coercive statist mechanisms required to protect it (including private
states masquerading as "protection companies"), because this is the only
way to eliminate competition for profits as the driving force of
economic activity. In a libertarian socialist environment, federated
associations of workers in co-operative enterprises would co-ordinate
production for **use** rather than profit, thus eliminating the
competitive basis of the economy and so also the "grow-or-die" principle
which now puts co-operatives at a fatal economic disadvantage. (For more
on how such an economy would be organised and operated, as well as
answers to objections, see [section I](secIcon.html).)

And let us not forget what is implied by Caplan's statement that the
"anarcho"-capitalist does not think that co-operative holding of
"property" "would be widespread or prevalent." It means that the vast
majority would be subject to the power, authority and laws of the
property owner and so would not govern themselves. In other words, it
would a system of private statism rather than anarchy.

Caplan:

> *"However, in theory an 'anarcho-capitalist' society might be filled
> with nothing but communes or worker-owned firms, so long as these
> associations were formed voluntarily (i.e., individuals joined
> voluntarily and capital was obtained with the consent of the owners)
> and individuals retained the right to exit and set up corporations or
> other profit-making, individualistic firms."*

It's interesting that the "anarcho"-capitalists are willing to allow
workers to set up "voluntary" co-operatives so long as the conditions
are retained which ensure that such co-operatives will have difficulty
surviving (i.e. private property and private states), but they are
unwilling to allow workers to set up co-operatives under conditions that
would ensure their success (i.e. the absence of private property and
private states). This reflects the usual vacuousness of the
right-libertarian concepts of "freedom" and "voluntarism."

In other words, these worker-owned firms would exist in and be subject
to the same capitalist *"general libertarian law code"* and work in the
same capitalist market as the rest of society. So, not only are these
co-operatives subject to capitalist market forces, they exist and
operate in a society defined by capitalist laws. As discussed in
[section F.2](secF2.html), such disregard for the social context of
human action shows up the "anarcho" capitalist's disregard for
meaningful liberty.

All Caplan is arguing here is that as long as people remain within the
(capitalist) "law code," they can do whatever they like. However, what
determines the amount of coercion required in a society is the extent to
which people are willing to accept the rules imposed on them. This is as
true of an "anarcho"-capitalist society as it is of any other. In other
words, if more and more people reject the basic assumptions of
capitalism, the more coercion against anarchistic tendencies will be
required. Saying that people would be free to experiment under
"anarcho"-capitalist law (if they can afford it, of course) does not
address the issue of changes in social awareness (caused, by example, by
class struggle) which can make such "laws" redundant. So, when all is
said and done, "anarcho"-capitalism just states that as long as you
accept their rules, you are free to do what you like.

How generous of them!

Thus, while we would be allowed to be collective capitalists or property
owners under "anarcho"-capitalists we would have no choice about living
under laws based on the most rigid and extreme interpretation of
property rights available. In other words, "anarcho"-capitalists
recognise (at least implicitly) that there exists one collective need
that needs collective support -- a law system to define and protects
people's rights. Ultimately, as C.B. Macpherson argues, "Individualism"
implies "collectivism" for the *"notion that individualism and
'collectivism' are the opposite ends of a scale along which states and
theories of the state can be arranged . . . is superficial and
misleading. . . . [I]ndividualism . . . does not exclude but on the
contrary demands the supremacy of the state [or law] over the
individual. It is not a question of the more individualism, the less
collectivism; rather, the more through-going the individualism, the more
complete the collectivism. Of this the supreme illustration is Hobbes's
theory."* [**The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism**, p.256]
Under "anarcho"-capitalism the individual is subject to the laws
regarding private property, laws decided in advance by a small group of
ideological leaders. Then real individuals are expected to live with the
consequences as best they can, with the law being placed ahead of these
consequences for flesh and blood people. The abstraction of the law
dominates and devours real individuals, who are considered below it and
incapable of changing it (except for the worse). This, from one angle,
shares a lot with theocracy and very little with liberty.

Needless to say, Caplan like most (if not all) "anarcho"-capitalists
assume that the current property owners are entitled to their property.
However, as John Stuart Mill pointed out over 100 years ago, the
*"social arrangements"* existing today *"commenced from a distribution
of property which was the result, not of a just partition, or
acquisition by industry, but of conquest and violence . . . [and] the
system still retains many and large traces of its origin."*
[**Principles of Political Economy**, p. 15] Given that (as we point out
in [section F.1](secF1.html)) Murray Rothbard argues that the state
cannot be claimed to own its territory simply because it did not acquire
its property in a "just" manner, this suggests that "anarcho"-capitalism
cannot actually argue against the state. After all, property owners
today cannot be said to have received their property "justly" and **if**
they are entitled to it so is the state to **its** "property"!

But as is so often the case, property owners are exempt from the
analysis the state is subjected to by "anarcho"-capitalists. The state
and property owners may do the same thing (such as ban freedom of speech
and association or regulate individual behaviour) but only the state is
condemned by "anarcho"-capitalism.

Caplan:

> *"On other issues, the anarcho-capitalist differs little if at all
> from the more moderate libertarian. Services should be privatised and
> opened to free competition; regulation of personal AND economic
> behaviour should be done away with."*

The "anarcho"-capitalist's professed desire to "do away" with the
"regulation" of economic behaviour is entirely disingenuous. For, by
giving capitalists the ability to protect their exploitative monopolies
of social capital by the use of coercive private states, one is thereby
"regulating" the economy in the strongest possible way, i.e. ensuring
that it will be channelled in certain directions rather than others. For
example, one is guaranteeing that production will be for profit rather
than use; that there will consequently be runaway growth and an endless
devouring of nature based on the principle of "grow or die;" and that
the alienation and deskilling of the workforce will continue. What the
"anarcho"-capitalist really means by "doing away with the regulation of
economic behaviour" is that ordinary people will have even less
opportunity than now to democratically control the rapacious behaviour
of capitalists. Needless to say, the "regulation of personal" behaviour
would **not** be done away with in the workplace, where the authority of
the bosses would still exist and you would have follow their petty rules
and regulations.

Moreover, regardless of "anarcho"-capitalist claims, they do not, in
fact, support civil liberties or oppose "regulation" of personal
behaviour as such. Rather, they **support** property owners suppressing
civil liberties on their property and the regulation of personal
behaviour by employers and landlords. This they argue is a valid
expression of property rights. Indeed, any attempts to allow workers
civil liberties or restrict employers demands on workers by state or
union action is denounced as a violation of "liberty" (i.e. the power of
the property owner). Those subject to the denial of civil liberties or
the regulation of their personal behaviour by landlords or employees can
"love it or leave it." Of course, the same can be said to any objector
to state oppression -- and frequently is. This is an artificial double
standard, which labels a restraint by one group or person in a
completely different way than the same restraint by others simply
because one is called "the government" and the other is not.

This denial of civil liberties can be seen from these words by Murray
Rothbard:

> *"[I]n the profoundest sense there are no rights but property rights .
> . . Freedom of speech is supposed to mean the right of everyone to say
> whatever he likes. But the neglected question is: Where? Where does a
> man have this right? He certainly does not have it on property on
> which he is trespassing. In short, he has this right only either on
> his own property or on the property of someone who has agreed, as a
> gift or in a rental contract, to allow him in the premises. In fact,
> then, there is no such thing as a separate 'right to free speech';
> there is only a man's property right: the right to do as he wills with
> his own or to make voluntary agreements with other property owners."*
> [Murray Rothbard, **Power and Market**, p. 176]

Of course, Rothbard fails to see that for the property-less such a
regime implies **no** rights whatsoever. It also means the effective end
of free speech and free association as the property owner can censor
those on their property (such as workers or tenants) and ban their
organisations (such as unions). Of course, in his example Rothbard looks
at the "trespasser," **not** the wage worker or the tenant (two far more
common examples in any modern society). Rothbard is proposing the
dictatorship of the property owner and the end of civil liberties and
equal rights (as property is unequally distributed). He gives this utter
denial of liberty an Orwellian twist by proclaiming the end of civil
liberties by property rights as "a new liberty." Perhaps for the
property-owner, but not the wage worker -- *"We who belong to the
proletaire class, property excommunicates us!"* [Proudhon, **What is
Property?**, p. 137]

In effect, right-Libertarians do not care how many restrictions are
placed on you as long as it is not the government doing it. Of course it
will be claimed that workers and tenants "consent" to these controls
(although they reject the notion that citizens "consent" to government
controls by not leaving their state). Here the libertarian case is so
disingenuous as to be offensive. There is no symmetry in the situations
facing workers and firms. To the worker, the loss of a job is often far
more of a threat than the loss of one worker is to the firm. The reality
of economic power leads people to contract into situations that,
although they are indeed the "best" arrangements of those available, are
nonetheless miserable. In any real economy -- and, remember, the
right-libertarian economy lacks any social safety net, making workers'
positions more insecure than now -- the right-libertarian denial of
economic power is a delusion.

Unlike anarchist theory, right-libertarian theory provides **no**
rationale to protest private power (or even state power if we accept the
notion that the state owns its territory). Relations of domination and
subjection are valid expressions of liberty in their system and,
perversely, attempts to resist authority (by strikes, unions,
resistance) are deemed "initiations of force" upon the oppressor! In
contrast, anarchist theory provides a strong rationale for resisting
private and public domination. Such domination violates freedom and any
free association which dominates any within it violates the basis of
that association in self-assumed obligation (see [section
A.2.11](secA2.html#seca211)). Thus Proudhon:

> *"The social contract should increase the well-being and liberty of
> every citizen. -- If any one-sided conditions should slip in; if one
> part of the citizens should find themselves, by the contract,
> subordinated and exploited by others, it would no longer be a
> contract; it would be a fraud, against which annulment might at any
> time by invoked justly."* [**The General Idea of the Revolution**, p.
> 114]

Caplan's claim that right libertarians oppose regulation of individual
behaviour is simply not true. They just oppose state regulation while
supporting private regulation wholeheartedly. Anarchists, in contrast,
reject both public and private domination.

Caplan:

> *"Poverty would be handled by work and responsibility for those able
> to care for themselves, and voluntary charity for those who cannot.
> (Libertarians hasten to add that a deregulated economy would greatly
> increase the economic opportunities of the poor, and elimination of
> taxation would lead to a large increase in charitable giving.)"*

Notice the implication that poverty is now caused by laziness and
irresponsibility rather than by the inevitable workings of an economic
system that **requires** a large *"reserve army of the unemployed"* as a
condition of profitability. The continuous "boom" economy of
"anarcho"-capitalist fantasies is simply incompatible with the
fundamental principles of capitalism. To re-quote Michael Kalecki (from
[section B.4.4](secB4.html#secb44)), *"[l]asting full employment is not
at all to [the] liking [of business leaders]. The workers would 'get out
of hand' and the 'captains of industry' would be anxious 'to teach them
a lesson'"* as *"'discipline in the factories' and \`political
stability' are more appreciated by business leaders than profits. Their
class interest tells them that lasting full employment is unsound from
their point of view and that unemployment is an integral part of the
'normal' capitalist system."*. See section C.7 (["What causes the
capitalist business cycle?"](secC7.html)) for a fuller discussion of
this point.

In addition, the claims that a "deregulated economy" would benefit the
poor do not have much empirical evidence to back them up. If we look at
the last quarter of the twentieth century we discover that a more
deregulated economy has lead to massive increases in inequality and
poverty. If a movement towards a deregulated economy has had the
opposite effect than that predicted by Caplan, why should a totally
deregulated economy have the opposite effect. It is a bit like claiming
that while adding black paint to grey makes it more black, adding the
whole tin will make it white!

The reason for increased inequality and poverty as a result of increased
deregulation is simple. A "free exchange" between two people will
benefit the stronger party. This is obvious as the economy is marked by
power, regardless of "anarcho"-capitalist claims, and any "free
exchange" will reflect difference in power. Moreover, a series of such
exchanges will have an accumulative effect, with the results of previous
exchanges bolstering the position of the stronger party in the current
exchange.

Moreover, the claim that removing taxation will **increase** donations
to charity is someone strange. We doubt that the rich who object to
money being taken from them to pay for welfare will **increase** the
amount of money they give to others if taxation **was** abolished. As
Peter Sabatini points out, "anarcho"-capitalists *"constantly rant and
shriek about how the government, or the rabble, hinders their Lockean
right to amass capital."* [**Social Anarchism**, no. 23, p.101] Caplan
seems to expect them to turn over a new leaf and give **more** to that
same rabble!
