Appendix : Anarchism and Marxism
================================

This appendix exists to refute some of the many anti-anarchist diatribes
produced by Marxists. While we have covered why anarchists oppose
Marxism in [section H](secHcon.html), we thought it would be useful to
reply to Marxist webpages and books whose content is not explicitly
covered in that section. In this way we hope to indicate that Marxism is
a flawed theory, flawed even to the extent of not being able to present
a honest critique of anarchism. This consistent attempt to smear
anarchism and distort its history and ideas is no co-incidence -- rather
it is required in order to present Marxism as the only viable form of
socialism and, more importantly, to hide the fact that much of the
populist Marxist rhetoric was, in fact, said by anarchists first and
latter stolen by Marxists to hide the authoritarian basis of their
politics.

One last point. We are aware that we repeat many of our arguments in
these appendices. That, unfortunately, is avoidable for two reasons.
Firstly, Marxists usually repeat the same false assertions against
anarchism and so we have to answer them each time they appear. Marxists
seem to subscribe to the point of view that repeating an error often
enough makes it true. Secondly, we have tried to make each appendix as
self-contained as possible and that meant repeating certain material and
arguments to achieve this. We hope the reader understands.

[Reply to errors and distortions in David McNally's pamphlet *"Socialism
from Below"*](append3.html#app31)

[Marxists and Spanish Anarchism](append3.html#app32)

[Reply to errors and distortions in Phil Mitchinson's *"Marxism and
direct action"*](append3.html#app33)

[Reply to errors and distortions in the SWP's ***"Marxism and
Anarchism"***](append3.html#app34)

[Reply to errors and distortions in John Fisher's *"Why we must further
Marxism and not Anarchism"*](append3.html#app35)

* * * * *

[Reply to errors and distortions in David McNally's pamphlet *"Socialism
from Below"*](append31.html)

[Marxists and Spanish Anarchism](append32.html)

Reply to errors and distortions in Phil Mitchinson's *"Marxism and
direct action"*

Reply to errors and distortions in the SWP's *"Marxism and Anarchism"*

Reply to errors and distortions in John Fisher's *"Why we must further
Marxism and not Anarchism"*


