2 What do "anarcho"-capitalists mean by "freedom"?
==================================================

For "anarcho"-capitalists, the concept of freedom is limited to the idea
of *"freedom from."* For them, freedom means simply freedom from the
*"initiation of force,"* or the *"non-aggression against anyone's person
and property."* [Murray Rothbard, **For a New Liberty**, p. 23] The
notion that real freedom must combine both freedom *"to"* **and**
freedom *"from"* is missing in their ideology, as is the social context
of the so-called freedom they defend.

Before starting, it is useful to quote Alan Haworth when he notes that
*"[i]n fact, it is surprising how **little** close attention the concept
of freedom receives from libertarian writers. Once again **Anarchy,
State, and Utopia** is a case in point. The word 'freedom' doesn't even
appear in the index. The word 'liberty' appears, but only to refer the
reader to the 'Wilt Chamberlain' passage. In a supposedly 'libertarian'
work, this is more than surprising. It is truly remarkable."*
[**Anti-Libertarianism**, p. 95]

Why this is the case can be seen from how the "anarcho"-capitalist
defines freedom.

In a right-libertarian or "anarcho"-capitalist society, freedom is
considered to be a product of property. As Murray Rothbard puts it,
*"the libertarian defines the concept of 'freedom' or 'liberty'. . .[as
a] condition in which a person's ownership rights in his body and his
legitimate material property rights are not invaded, are not aggressed
against. . . . Freedom and unrestricted property rights go hand in
hand."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.41]

This definition has some problems, however. In such a society, one
cannot (legitimately) do anything with or on another's property if the
owner prohibits it. This means that an individual's only **guaranteed**
freedom is determined by the amount of property that he or she owns.
This has the consequence that someone with no property has no guaranteed
freedom at all (beyond, of course, the freedom not to be murdered or
otherwise harmed by the deliberate acts of others). In other words, a
distribution of property is a distribution of freedom, as the
right-libertarians themselves define it. It strikes anarchists as
strange that an ideology that claims to be committed to promoting
freedom entails the conclusion that some people should be more free than
others. However, this is the logical implication of their view, which
raises a serious doubt as to whether "anarcho"-capitalists are actually
interested in freedom.

Looking at Rothbard's definition of "liberty" quoted above, we can see
that freedom is actually no longer considered to be a fundamental,
independent concept. Instead, freedom is a derivative of something more
fundamental, namely the *"legitimate rights"* of an individual, which
are identified as property rights. In other words, given that
"anarcho"-capitalists and right libertarians in general consider the
right to property as "absolute," it follows that freedom and property
become one and the same. This suggests an alternative name for the right
Libertarian, namely ***"Propertarian."*** And, needless to say, if we do
not accept the right-libertarians' view of what constitutes "legitimate"
"rights," then their claim to be defenders of liberty is weak.

Another important implication of this "liberty as property" concept is
that it produces a strangely alienated concept of freedom. Liberty, as
we noted, is no longer considered absolute, but a derivative of property
-- which has the important consequence that you can "sell" your liberty
and still be considered free by the ideology. This concept of liberty
(namely "liberty as property") is usually termed "self-ownership." But,
to state the obvious, I do not "own" myself, as if were an object
somehow separable from my subjectivity -- I **am** myself. However, the
concept of "self-ownership" is handy for justifying various forms of
domination and oppression -- for by agreeing (usually under the force of
circumstances, we must note) to certain contracts, an individual can
"sell" (or rent out) themselves to others (for example, when workers
sell their labour power to capitalists on the "free market"). In effect,
"self-ownership" becomes the means of justifying treating people as
objects -- ironically, the very thing the concept was created to stop!
As L. Susan Brown notes, *"[a]t the moment an individual 'sells' labour
power to another, he/she loses self-determination and instead is treated
as a subjectless instrument for the fulfilment of another's will."*
[**The Politics of Individualism**, p. 4]

Given that workers are paid to obey, you really have to wonder which
planet Murray Rothbard is on when he argues that a person's *"labour
service is alienable, but his **will** is not"* and that he [sic!]
*"cannot alienate his **will**, more particularly his control over his
own mind and body."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 40, p. 135] He
contrasts private property and self-ownership by arguing that *"[a]ll
physical property owned by a person is alienable . . . I can give away
or sell to another person my shoes, my house, my car, my money, etc. But
there are certain vital things which, in natural fact and in the nature
of man, are **in**alienable . . . [his] will and control over his own
person are inalienable."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 134-5]

But *"labour services"* are unlike the private possessions Rothbard
lists as being alienable. As we argued in section B.1 (["Why do
anarchists oppose hierarchy"](secB1.html)) a person's *"labour
services"* and *"will"* cannot be divided -- if you sell your labour
services, you also have to give control of your body and mind to another
person! If a worker does not obey the commands of her employer, she is
fired. That Rothbard denies this indicates a total lack of common-sense.
Perhaps Rothbard will argue that as the worker can quit at any time she
does not alienate their will (this seems to be his case against slave
contracts -- see [section 2.6](append132.html#secf26)). But this ignores
the fact that between the signing and breaking of the contract and
during work hours (and perhaps outside work hours, if the boss has
mandatory drug testing or will fire workers who attend union or
anarchist meetings or those who have an "unnatural" sexuality and so on)
the worker **does** alienate his will and body. In the words of Rudolf
Rocker, *"under the realities of the capitalist economic form . . .
there can be no talk of a 'right over one's own person,' for that ends
when one is compelled to submit to the economic dictation of another if
he does not want to starve."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 17]

Ironically, the rights of property (which are said to flow from an
individual's self-ownership of themselves) becomes the means, under
capitalism, by which self-ownership of non-property owners is denied.
The foundational right (self-ownership) becomes denied by the derivative
right (ownership of things). Under capitalism, a lack of property can be
just as oppressive as a lack of legal rights because of the
relationships of domination and subjection this situation creates.

So Rothbard's argument (as well as being contradictory) misses the point
(and the reality of capitalism). Yes, **if** we define freedom as *"the
absence of coercion"* then the idea that wage labour does not restrict
liberty is unavoidable, but such a definition is useless. This is
because it hides structures of power and relations of domination and
subordination. As Carole Pateman argues, *"the contract in which the
worker allegedly sells his labour power is a contract in which, since he
cannot be separated from his capacities, he sells command over the use
of his body and himself. . . To sell command over the use of oneself for
a specified period . . . is to be an unfree labourer."* [**The Sexual
Contract**, p. 151]

In other words, contracts about property in the person inevitably create
subordination. "Anarcho"-capitalism defines this source of unfreedom
away, but it still exists and has a major impact on people's liberty.
Therefore freedom is better described as "self-government" or
"self-management" -- to be able to govern ones own actions (if alone) or
to participate in the determination of join activity (if part of a
group). Freedom, to put it another way, is not an abstract legal
concept, but the vital concrete possibility for every human being to
bring to full development all their powers, capacities, and talents
which nature has endowed them. A key aspect of this is to govern one own
actions when within associations (self-management). If we look at
freedom this way, we see that coercion is condemned but so is hierarchy
(and so is capitalism for during working hours, people are not free to
make their own plans and have a say in what affects them. They are order
takers, **not** free individuals).

It is because anarchists have recognised the authoritarian nature of
capitalist firms that they have opposed wage labour and capitalist
property rights along with the state. They have desired to replace
institutions structured by subordination with institutions constituted
by free relationships (based, in other words, on self-management) in
**all** areas of life, including economic organisations. Hence
Proudhon's argument that the *"workmen's associations . . . are full of
hope both as a protest against the wage system, and as an affirmation of
**reciprocity**"* and that their importance lies *"in their denial of
the rule of capitalists, money lenders and governments."* [**The General
Idea of the Revolution**, pp. 98-99]

Unlike anarchists, the "anarcho"-capitalist account of freedom allows an
individual's freedom to be rented out to another while maintaining that
the person is still free. It may seem strange that an ideology
proclaiming its support for liberty sees nothing wrong with the
alienation and denial of liberty but, in actual fact, it is
unsurprising. After all, contract theory is a *"theoretical strategy
that justifies subjection by presenting it as freedom"* and nothing
more. Little wonder, then, that contract *"creates a relation of
subordination"* and not of freedom [Carole Pateman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 39,
p. 59]

Any attempt to build an ethical framework starting from the abstract
individual (as Rothbard does with his *"legitimate rights"* method) will
result in domination and oppression between people, **not** freedom.
Indeed, Rothbard provides an example of the dangers of idealist
philosophy that Bakunin warned about when he argued that while
*"[m]aterialism denies free will and ends in the establishment of
liberty; idealism, in the name of human dignity, proclaims free will,
and on the ruins of every liberty founds authority."* [**God and the
State**, p. 48] This is the case with "anarcho"-capitalism can be seen
from Rothbard's wholehearted support for wage labour and the rules
imposed by property owners on those who use, but do not own, their
property. Rothbard, basing himself on abstract individualism, cannot
help but justify authority over liberty.

Overall, we can see that the logic of the right-libertarian definition
of "freedom" ends up negating itself, because it results in the creation
and encouragement of **authority,** which is an **opposite** of freedom.
For example, as Ayn Rand points out, *"man has to sustain his life by
his own effort, the man who has no right to the product of his effort
has no means to sustain his life. The man who produces while others
dispose of his product, is a slave."* [**The Ayn Rand Lexicon:
Objectivism from A to Z**, pp. 388-9] But, as was shown in [section
C](secCcon.html), capitalism is based on, as Proudhon put it, workers
working *"for an entrepreneur who pays them and keeps their products,"*
and so is a form of **theft.** Thus, by "libertarian" capitalism's
**own** logic, capitalism is based not on freedom, but on (wage)
slavery; for interest, profit and rent are derived from a worker's
**unpaid** labour, i.e. *"others dispose of his [sic] product."*

And if a society **is** run on the wage- and profit-based system
suggested by the "anarcho" and "libertarian" capitalists, freedom
becomes a commodity. The more money you have, the more freedom you get.
Then, since money is only available to those who earn it, Libertarianism
is based on that classic saying *"work makes one free!"* (***Arbeit
macht frei!***), which the Nazis placed on the gates of their
concentration camps. Of course, since it is capitalism, this motto is
somewhat different for those at the top. In this case it is *"other
people's work makes one free!"* -- a truism in any society based on
private property and the authority that stems from it.

Thus it is debatable that a libertarian or "anarcho" capitalist society
would have less unfreedom or coercion in it than "actually existing
capitalism." In contrast to anarchism, "anarcho"-capitalism, with its
narrow definitions, restricts freedom to only a few aspects of social
life and ignores domination and authority beyond those aspects. As Peter
Marshall points out, the right-libertarian's *"definition of freedom is
entirely negative. It calls for the absence of coercion but cannot
guarantee the positive freedom of individual autonomy and
independence."* [**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 564] By confining
freedom to such a narrow range of human action, "anarcho"-capitalism is
clearly **not** a form of anarchism. Real anarchists support freedom in
every aspect of an individual's life.

2.1 What are the implications of defining liberty in terms of (property) rights?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The change from defending liberty to defending (property) rights has
important implications. For one thing, it allows right libertarians to
imply that private property is similar to a "fact of nature," and so to
conclude that the restrictions on freedom produced by it can be ignored.
This can be seen in Robert Nozick's argument that decisions are
voluntary if the limitations on one's actions are not caused by human
action which infringe the rights of others. Thus, in a "pure" capitalist
society the restrictions on freedom caused by wage slavery are not
really restrictions because the worker voluntarily consents to the
contract. The circumstances that drive a worker to make the contract are
irrelevant because they are created by people exercising their rights
and not violating other peoples' ones (see the section on *"Voluntary
Exchange"* in **Anarchy, State, and Utopia**, pp. 262-265).

This means that within a society *"[w]hether a person's actions are
voluntary depends on what limits his alternatives. If facts of nature do
so, the actions are voluntary. (I may voluntarily walk to someplace I
would prefer to fly to unaided)."* [**Anarchy, State, and Utopia**, p.
262] Similarly, the results of voluntary actions and the transference of
property can be considered alongside the "facts of nature" (they are,
after all, the resultants of "natural rights"). This means that the
circumstances created by the existence and use of property can be
considered, in essence, as a "natural" fact and so the actions we take
in response to these circumstances are therefore "voluntary" and we are
"free" (Nozick presents the example [p. 263] of someone who marries the
only available person -- all the more attractive people having already
chosen others -- as a case of an action that is voluntary despite
removal of all but the least attractive alternative through the
legitimate actions of others. Needless to say, the example can be -- and
is -- extended to workers on the labour market -- although, of course,
you do not starve to death if you decide not to marry).

However, such an argument fails to notice that property is different
from gravity or biology. Of course not being able to fly does not
restrict freedom. Neither does not being able to jump 10 feet into the
air. But unlike gravity (for example), private property has to be
protected by laws and the police. No one stops you from flying, but laws
and police forces must exist to ensure that capitalist property (and the
owners' authority over it) is respected. The claim, therefore, that
private property in general, and capitalism in particular, can be
considered as "facts of nature," like gravity, ignores an important
fact: namely that the people involved in an economy must accept the
rules of its operation -- rules that, for example, allow contracts to be
enforced; forbid using another's property without his or her consent
("theft," trespass, copyright infringement, etc.); prohibit
"conspiracy," unlawful assembly, rioting, and so on; and create
monopolies through regulation, licensing, charters, patents, etc. This
means that capitalism has to include the mechanisms for deterring
property crimes as well as mechanisms for compensation and punishment
should such crimes be committed. In other words, capitalism is in fact
far more than "voluntary bilateral exchange," because it **must**
include the policing, arbitration, and legislating mechanisms required
to ensure its operation. Hence, like the state, the capitalist market is
a social institution, and the distributions of goods that result from
its operation are therefore the distributions sanctioned by a capitalist
society. As Benjamin Franklin pointed out, *"Private property . . . is a
Creature of Society, and is subject to the Calls of that Society."*

Thus, to claim with Sir Isaiah Berlin (the main, modern, source of the
concepts of *"negative"* and *"positive"* freedom -- although we must
add that Berlin was not a right-Libertarian), that *"[i]f my poverty
were a kind of disease, which prevented me from buying bread . . . as
lameness prevents me from running, this inability would not naturally be
described as a lack of freedom"* totally misses the point [*"Two
Concepts of Liberty"*, in **Four Essays on Liberty**, p. 123]. If you
are lame, police officers do not come round to stop you running. They do
not have to. However, they **are** required to protect property against
the dispossessed and those who reject capitalist property rights.

This means that by using such concepts as "negative" liberty and
ignoring the social nature of private property, right-libertarians are
trying to turn the discussion away from liberty toward "biology" and
other facts of nature. And conveniently, by placing property rights
alongside gravity and other natural laws, they also succeed in reducing
debate even about rights.

Of course, coercion and restriction of liberty **can** be resisted,
unlike "natural forces" like gravity. So if, as Berlin argues,
*"negative"* freedom means that you *"lack political freedom only if you
are prevented from attaining a goal by human beings,"* then capitalism
is indeed based on such a lack, since property rights need to be
enforced by human beings (*"I am prevented by others from doing what I
could otherwise do"*). After all, as Proudhon long ago noted, the market
is manmade, hence any constraint it imposes is the coercion of man by
man and so economic laws are not as inevitable as natural ones [see Alan
Ritter's **The Political Thought of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 122].
Or, to put it slightly differently, capitalism requires coercion in
order to work, and hence, is **not** similar to a "fact of nature,"
regardless of Nozick's claims (i.e. property rights have to be defined
and enforced by human beings, although the nature of the labour market
resulting from capitalist property definitions is such that direct
coercion is usually not needed). This implication is actually recognised
by right-libertarians, because they argue that the rights-framework of
society should be set up in one way rather than another. In other words,
they recognise that society is not independent of human interaction, and
so can be changed.

Perhaps, as seems the case, the "anarcho"-capitalist or
right-Libertarian will claim that it is only **deliberate** acts which
violate your (libertarian defined) rights by other humans beings that
cause unfreedom (*"we define freedom . . . as the **absence of
invasion** by another man of an man's person or property"* [Rothbard,
**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 41]) and so if no-one deliberately coerces
you then you are free. In this way the workings of the capitalist market
can be placed alongside the "facts of nature" and ignored as a source of
unfreedom. However, a moments thought shows that this is not the case.
Both deliberate and non-deliberate acts can leave individuals lacking
freedom.

Let us assume (in an example paraphrased from Alan Haworth's excellent
book **Anti-Libertarianism**, p. 49) that someone kidnaps you and places
you down a deep (naturally formed) pit, miles from anyway, which is
impossible to climb up. No one would deny that you are unfree. Let us
further assume that another person walks by and accidentally falls into
the pit with you.

According to right-libertarianism, while you are unfree (i.e. subject to
deliberate coercion) your fellow pit-dweller is perfectly free for they
have subject to the "facts of nature" and not human action (deliberate
or otherwise). Or, perhaps, they "voluntarily choose" to stay in the
pit, after all, it is "only" the "facts of nature" limiting their
actions. But, obviously, both of you are in **exactly the same
position,** have **exactly the same choices** and so are **equally**
unfree! Thus a definition of "liberty" that maintains that only
deliberate acts of others -- for example, coercion -- reduces freedom
misses the point totally.

Why is this example important? Let us consider Murray Rothbard's
analysis of the situation after the abolition of serfdom in Russia and
slavery in America. He writes:

> *"The **bodies** of the oppressed were freed, but the property which
> they had worked and eminently deserved to own, remained in the hands
> of their former oppressors. With economic power thus remaining in
> their hands, the former lords soon found themselves virtual masters
> once more of what were now free tenants or farm labourers. The serfs
> and slaves had tasted freedom, but had been cruelly derived of its
> fruits."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 74]

However, contrast this with Rothbard's claims that if market forces
("voluntary exchanges") result in the creation of free tenants or
labourers then these labourers and tenants are free (see, for example,
**The Ethics of Liberty**, pp. 221-2 on why "economic power" within
capitalism does not exist). But the labourers dispossessed by market
forces are in **exactly** the same situation as the former serfs and
slaves. Rothbard sees the obvious *"economic power"* in the later case,
but denies it in the former. But the **conditions** of the people in
question are identical and it is these conditions that horrify us. It is
only his ideology that stops Rothbard drawing the obvious conclusion --
identical conditions produce identical social relationships and so if
the formally "free" ex-serfs are subject to *"economic power"* and
*"masters"* then so are the formally "free" labourers within capitalism!
Both sets of workers may be formally free, but their circumstances are
such that they are "free" to "consent" to sell their freedom to others
(i.e. economic power produces relationships of domination and unfreedom
between formally free individuals).

Thus Rothbard's definition of liberty in terms of rights fails to
provide us with a realistic and viable understanding of freedom. Someone
can be a virtual slave while still having her rights non-violated
(conversely, someone can have their property rights violated and still
be free; for example, the child who enters your backyard without your
permission to get her ball hardly violates your liberty -- indeed, you
would never know that she has entered your property unless you happened
to see her do it). So the idea that freedom means non-aggression against
person and their legitimate material property justifies extensive
**non-freedom** for the working class. The non-violation of property
rights does **not** imply freedom, as Rothbard's discussion of the
former slaves shows. Anyone who, along with Rothbard, defines freedom
*"as the **absence of invasion** by another man of any man's person or
property"* in a deeply inequality society is supporting, and justifying,
capitalist and landlord domination. As anarchists have long realised, in
an unequal society, a contractarian starting point implies an absolutist
conclusion.

Why is this? Simply because freedom is a result of **social**
interaction, not the product of some isolated, abstract individual
(Rothbard uses the model of Robinson Crusoe to construct his ideology).
But as Bakunin argued, *"the freedom of the individual is a function of
men in society, a necessary consequence of the collective development of
mankind."* He goes on to argue that *"man in isolation can have no
awareness of his liberty . . . Liberty is therefore a feature not of
isolation but of interaction, not of exclusion but rather of
connection."* [**Selected Writings**, p. 146, p. 147] Right
Libertarians, by building their definition of freedom from the isolated
person, end up by supporting restrictions of liberty due to a neglect of
an adequate recognition of the actual interdependence of human beings,
of the fact what each person does is effected by and affects others.
People become aware of their humanity (liberty) in society, not outside
it. It is the **social relationships** we take part in which determine
how free we are and any definition of freedom which builds upon an
individual without social ties is doomed to create relations of
domination, not freedom, between individuals -- as Rothbard's theory
does (to put it another way, voluntary association is a necessary, but
not sufficient, condition for freedom. Which is why anarchists have
always stressed the importance of equality -- see [section
3](append133.html) for details).

So while facts of nature can restrict your options and freedom, it is
the circumstances within which they act and the options they limit that
are important (a person trapped at the bottom of a pit is unfree as the
options available are so few; the lame person is free because their
available options are extensive). In the same manner, the facts of
society can and do restrict your freedom because they are the products
of human action and are defined and protected by human institutions, it
is the circumstances within which individuals make their decisions and
the social relationships these decisions produce that are important (the
worker driven by poverty to accept a slave contract in a sweat shop is
unfree because the circumstances he faces have limited his options and
the relations he accepts are based upon hierarchy; the person who
decides to join an anarchist commune is free because the commune is
non-hierarchical and she has the option of joining another commune,
working alone and so forth).

All in all, the right-Libertarian concept of freedom is lacking. For an
ideology that takes the name "Libertarianism" it is seems happy to
ignore actual liberty and instead concentrate on an abstract form of
liberty which ignores so many sources of unfreedom as to narrow the
concept until it becomes little more than a justification for
authoritarianism. This can be seen from right-Libertarian attitudes
about private property and its effects on liberty (as discussed in the
[next section](append132.html#secf22)).

2.2 How does private property affect freedom?
---------------------------------------------

The right-libertarian does not address or even acknowledge that the
(absolute) right of private property may lead to extensive control by
property owners over those who use, but do not own, property (such as
workers and tenants). Thus a free-market capitalist system leads to a
very selective and class-based protection of "rights" and "freedoms."
For example, under capitalism, the "freedom" of employers inevitably
conflicts with the "freedom" of employees. When stockholders or their
managers exercise their "freedom of enterprise" to decide how their
company will operate, they violate their employee's right to decide how
their labouring capacities will be utilised. In other words, under
capitalism, the "property rights" of employers will conflict with and
restrict the "human right" of employees to manage themselves. Capitalism
allows the right of self-management only to the few, not to all. Or,
alternatively, capitalism does not recognise certain human rights as
**universal** which anarchism does.

This can be seen from Austrian Economist W. Duncan Reekie's defence of
wage labour. While referring to *"intra-firm labour markets"* as
*"hierarchies"*, Reekie (in his best *ex cathedra* tone) states that
*"[t]here is nothing authoritarian, dictatorial or exploitative in the
relationship. Employees order employers to pay them amounts specified in
the hiring contract just as much as employers order employees to abide
by the terms of the contract."* [**Markets, Entrepreneurs and Liberty**,
p. 136, p. 137]. Given that *"the terms of contract"* involve the worker
agreeing to obey the employers orders and that they will be fired if
they do not, its pretty clear that the ordering that goes on in the
*"intra-firm labour market"* is decidedly **one way**. Bosses have the
power, workers are paid to obey. And this begs the question, **if** the
employment contract creates a free worker, why must she abandon her
liberty during work hours?

Reekie actually recognises this lack of freedom in a "round about" way
when he notes that *"employees in a firm at any level in the hierarchy
can exercise an entrepreneurial role. The area within which that role
can be carried out increases the more authority the employee has."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 142] Which means workers **are** subject to control
from above which restricts the activities they are allowed to do and so
they are **not** free to act, make decisions, participate in the plans
of the organisation, to create the future and so forth within working
hours. And it is strange that while recognising the firm as a hierarchy,
Reekie tries to deny that it is authoritarian or dictatorial -- as if
you could have a hierarchy without authoritarian structures or an
unelected person in authority who is not a dictator. His confusion is
shared by Austrian guru Ludwig von Mises, who asserts that the
*"entrepreneur and capitalist are not irresponsible autocrats"* because
they are *"unconditionally subject to the sovereignty of the consumer"*
while, **on the next page**, admitting there is a *"managerial
hierarchy"* which contains *"the average subordinate employee."*
[**Human Action**, p. 809 and p. 810] It does not enter his mind that
the capitalist may be subject to some consumer control while being an
autocrat to their subordinated employees. Again, we find the
right-"libertarian" acknowledging that the capitalist managerial
structure is a hierarchy and workers are subordinated while denying it
is autocratic to the workers! Thus we have "free" workers within a
relationship distinctly **lacking** freedom (in the sense of
self-government) -- a strange paradox. Indeed, if your personal life
were as closely monitored and regulated as the work life of millions of
people across the world, you would rightly consider it oppression.

Perhaps Reekie (like most right-libertarians) will maintain that workers
voluntarily agree ("consent") to be subject to the bosses dictatorship
(he writes that *"each will only enter into the contractual agreement
known as a firm if each believes he will be better off thereby. The firm
is simply another example of mutually beneficial exchange"* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 137]). However, this does not stop the relationship being
authoritarian or dictatorial (and so exploitative as it is **highly**
unlikely that those at the top will not abuse their power). And as we
argue further in the [next section](append132.html#secf23) (and also see
sections [B.4](secB4.html), [3.1](append133.html#secf31) and
[10.2](append1310.html#secf102)), in a capitalist society workers have
the option of finding a job or facing abject poverty and/or starvation.

Little wonder, then, that people "voluntarily" sell their labour and
"consent" to authoritarian structures! They have little option to do
otherwise. So, **within** the labour market, workers **can** and **do**
seek out the best working conditions possible, but that does not mean
that the final contract agreed is "freely" accepted and not due to the
force of circumstances, that both parties have equal bargaining power
when drawing up the contract or that the freedom of both parties is
ensured. Which means to argue (as many right-libertarians do) that
freedom cannot be restricted by wage labour because people enter into
relationships they consider will lead to improvements over their initial
situation totally misses the points. As the initial situation is not
considered relevant, their argument fails. After all, agreeing to work
in a sweatshop 14 hours a day **is** an improvement over starving to
death -- but it does not mean that those who so agree are free when
working there or actually **want** to be there. They are not and it is
the circumstances, created and enforced by the law, that have ensured
that they "consent" to such a regime (given the chance, they would
desire to **change** that regime but cannot as this would violate their
bosses property rights and they would be repressed for trying).

So the right-wing "libertarian" right is interested only in a narrow
concept of freedom (rather than in "freedom" or "liberty" as such). This
can be seen in the argument of Ayn Rand (a leading ideologue of
"libertarian" capitalism) that *"**Freedom**, in a political context,
means freedom from government coercion. It does **not** mean freedom
from the landlord, or freedom from the employer, or freedom from the
laws of nature which do not provide men with automatic prosperity. It
means freedom from the coercive power of the state -- and nothing
else!"* [**Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal**, p. 192] By arguing in this
way, right libertarians ignore the vast number of authoritarian social
relationships that exist in capitalist society and, as Rand does here,
imply that these social relationships are like "the laws of nature."
However, if one looks at the world without prejudice but with an eye to
maximising freedom, the major coercive institution is seen to be not the
state but capitalist social relationships (as indicated in [section
B.4](secB4.html)).

The right "libertarian," then, far from being a defender of freedom, is
in fact a keen defender of certain forms of authority and domination. As
Peter Kropotkin noted, the *"modern Individualism initiated by Herbert
Spencer is, like the critical theory of Proudhon, a powerful indictment
against the dangers and wrongs of government, but its practical solution
of the social problem is miserable -- so miserable as to lead us to
inquire if the talk of 'No force' be merely an excuse for supporting
landlord and capitalist domination."* [**Act For Yourselves**, p. 98]

To defend the "freedom" of property owners is to defend authority and
privilege -- in other words, statism. So, in considering the concept of
liberty as "freedom from," it is clear that by defending private
property (as opposed to possession) the "anarcho"-capitalist is
defending the power and authority of property owners to govern those who
use "their" property. And also, we must note, defending all the petty
tyrannies that make the work lives of so many people frustrating,
stressful and unrewarding.

However, anarchism, by definition, is in favour of organisations and
social relationships which are non-hierarchical and non-authoritarian.
Otherwise, some people are more free than others. Failing to attack
hierarchy leads to massive contradiction. For example, since the British
Army is a volunteer one, it is an "anarchist" organisation! (see [next
section](append132.html#secf23) for a discussion on why the
"anarcho"-capitalism concept of freedom also allows the state to appear
"libertarian").

In other words, "full capitalist property rights" do not protect
freedom, in fact they actively deny it. But this lack of freedom is only
inevitable if we accept capitalist private property rights. If we reject
them, we can try and create a world based on freedom in all aspects of
life, rather than just in a few.

2.3 Can "anarcho"-capitalist theory justify the state?
------------------------------------------------------

Ironically enough, "anarcho"-capitalist ideology actually allows the
state to be justified along with capitalist hierarchy. This is because
the reason why capitalist authority is acceptable to the
"anarcho"-capitalist is because it is "voluntary" -- no one forces the
worker to join or remain within a specific company (force of
circumstances are irrelevant in this viewpoint). Thus capitalist
domination is not really domination at all. But the same can be said of
all democratic states as well. Few such states bar exit for its citizens
-- they are free to leave at any time and join any other state that will
have them (exactly as employees can with companies). Of course there
**are** differences between the two kinds of authority -- anarchists do
not deny that -- but the similarities are all too clear.

The "anarcho"-capitalist could argue that changing jobs is easier than
changing states and, sometimes, this is correct -- but not always. Yes,
changing states does require the moving of home and possessions over
great distances but so can changing job (indeed, if a worker has to move
half-way across a country or even the world to get a job
"anarcho"-capitalists would celebrate this as an example of the benefits
of a "flexible" labour market). Yes, states often conscript citizens and
send them into dangerous situations but bosses often force their
employees to accept dangerous working environments on pain of firing.
Yes, many states do restrict freedom of association and speech, but so
do bosses. Yes, states tax their citizens but landlords and companies
only let others use their property if they get money in return (i.e.
rent or profits). Indeed, if the employee or tenant does not provide the
employer or landlord with enough profits, they will quickly be shown the
door. Of course employees can start their own companies but citizens can
start their own state if they convince an existing state (the owner of a
set of resources) to sell/give land to them. Setting up a company also
requires existing owners to sell/give resources to those who need them.
Of course, in a democratic state citizens can influence the nature of
laws and orders they obey. In a capitalist company, this is not the
case.

This means that, logically, "anarcho"-capitalism must consider a series
of freely exitable states as "anarchist" and not a source of domination.
If consent (not leaving) is what is required to make capitalist
domination not domination then the same can be said of statist
domination. Stephen L. Newman makes the same point:

> *"The emphasis [right-wing] libertarians place on the opposition of
> liberty and political power tends to obscure the role of authority in
> their worldview . . . the authority exercised in private
> relationships, however -- in the relationship between employer and
> employee, for instance -- meets with no objection. . . . [This]
> reveals a curious insensitivity to the use of private authority as a
> means of social control. Comparing public and private authority, we
> might well ask of the [right-wing] libertarians: When the price of
> exercising one's freedom is terribly high, what practical difference
> is there between the commands of the state and those issued by one's
> employer? . . . Though admittedly the circumstances are not identical,
> telling disgruntled empowers that they are always free to leave their
> jobs seems no different in principle from telling political dissidents
> that they are free to emigrate."* [**Liberalism at Wit's End**, pp.
> 45-46]

Murray Rothbard, in his own way, agrees:

> *"**If** the State may be said too properly **own** its territory,
> then it is proper for it to make rules for everyone who presumes to
> live in that area. It can legitimately seize or control private
> property because there **is** no private property in its area, because
> it really owns the entire land surface. **So long** as the State
> permits its subjects to leave its territory, then, it can be said to
> act as does any other owner who sets down rules for people living on
> his property."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 170]

Rothbard's argues that this is **not** the case simply because the state
did not acquire its property in a *"just"* manner and that it claims
rights over virgin land (both of which violates Rothbard's
"homesteading" theory of property -- see [section
4.1](append134.html#secf41) for details and a critique). Rothbard argues
that this defence of statism (the state as property owner) is
unrealistic and ahistoric, but his account of the origins of property is
equally unrealistic and ahistoric and that does not stop him supporting
capitalism. People in glass houses should not throw stones!

Thus he claims that the state is evil and its claims to authority/power
false simply because it acquired the resources it claims to own
*"unjustly"* -- for example, by violence and coercion (see **The Ethics
of Liberty**, pp. 170-1, for Rothbard's attempt to explain why the state
should not be considered as the owner of land). And even **if** the
state **was** the owner of its territory, it cannot appropriate virgin
land (although, as he notes elsewhere, the *"vast"* US frontier no
longer exists *"and there is no point crying over the fact"* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 240]).

So what makes hierarchy legitimate for Rothbard is whether the property
it derives from was acquired justly or unjustly. Which leads us to a few
**very** important points.

Firstly, Rothbard is explicitly acknowledging the similarities between
statism and capitalism. He is arguing that **if** the state had
developed in a *"just"* way, then it is perfectly justifiable in
governing (*"set[ting] down rules"*) those who "consent" to live on its
territory in **exactly** the same why a property owner does. In other
words, private property can be considered as a "justly" created state!
These similarities between property and statism have long been
recognised by anarchists and that is why we reject private property
along with the state (Proudhon did, after all, note that *"property is
despotism"* and well as *"theft"*). But, according to Rothbard,
something can look like a state (i.e. be a monopoly of decision making
over an area) and act like a state (i.e. set down rules for people,
govern them, impose a monopoly of force) but not be a state. But if it
looks like a duck and sounds like a duck, it is a duck. Claiming that
the origins of the thing are what counts is irrelevant -- for example, a
cloned duck is just as much a duck as a naturally born one. A statist
organisation is authoritarian whether it comes from *"just"* or
*"unjust"* origins. Does transforming the ownership of the land from
states to capitalists **really** make the relations of domination
created by the dispossession of the many less authoritarian and unfree?
Of course not.

Secondly, much property in "actually existing" capitalism is the product
(directly or indirectly) of state laws and violence (*"the emergence of
both agrarian and industrial capitalism in Britain [and elsewhere, we
must add] . . . could not have got off the ground without resources to
state violence -- legal or otherwise"* [Brian Morris, **Ecology &
Anarchism**, p. 190]). If state claims of ownership are invalid due to
their history, then so are many others (particularly those which claim
to own land). As the initial creation was illegitimate, so are the
transactions which have sprung from it. Thus if state claims of property
rights are invalid, so are most (if not all) capitalist claims. If the
laws of the state are illegitimate, so are the rules of the capitalist.
If taxation is illegitimate, then so are rent, interest and profit.
Rothbard's "historical" argument against the state can also be applied
to private property and if the one is unjustified, then so is the other.

Thirdly, **if** the state had evolved "justly" then Rothbard would
actually have nothing against it! A strange position for an anarchist to
take. Logically this means that if a system of corporate states evolved
from the workings of the capitalist market then the "anarcho"-capitalist
would have nothing against it. This can be seen from
"anarcho"-capitalist support for company towns even though they have
correctly been described as *"industrial feudalism"* (see [section
6](append136.html) for more on this).

Fourthly, Rothbard's argument implies that similar circumstances
producing similar relationships of domination and unfreedom are somehow
different if they are created by *"just"* and *"unjust"* means. Rothbard
claims that because the property is *"justly"* acquired it means the
authority a capitalist over his employees is totally different from that
of a state over its subject. But such a claim is false -- both the
subject/citizen and the employee are in a similar relationship of
domination and authoritarianism. As we argued in [section
2.2](append132.html#secf22), how a person got into a situation is
irrelevant when considering how free they are. Thus, the person who
"consents" to be governed by another because all available resources are
privately owned is in exactly the same situation as a person who has to
join a state because all available resources are owned by one state or
another. Both are unfree and are part of authoritarian relationships
based upon domination.

And, lastly, while "anarcho"-capitalism may be a "just" society, it is
definitely **not** a free one. It will be marked by extensive hierarchy,
unfreedom and government, but these restrictions of freedom will be of a
private nature. As Rothbard indicates, the property owner and the state
create/share the same authoritarian relationships. If statism is unfree,
then so is capitalism. And, we must add, how "just" is a system which
undermines liberty. Can "justice" ever be met in a society in which one
class has more power and freedom than another. If one party is in an
inferior position, then they have little choice but to agree to the
disadvantageous terms offered by the superior party (see [section
3.1](append133.html#secf31)). In such a situation, a "just" outcome will
be unlikely as any contract agreed will be skewed to favour one side
over the other.

The implications of these points are important. We can easily imagine a
situation within "anarcho"-capitalism where a few companies/people start
to buy up land and form company regions and towns. After all, this
**has** happened continually throughout capitalism. Thus a "natural"
process may develop where a few owners start to accumulate larger and
larger tracks of land "justly". Such a process does not need to result
in **one** company owning the world. It is likely that a few hundred,
perhaps a few thousand, could do so. But this is not a cause for
rejoicing -- after all the current "market" in "unjust" states also has
a few hundred competitors in it. And even if there is a large multitude
of property owners, the situation for the working class is exactly the
same as the citizen under current statism! Does the fact that it is
"justly" acquired property that faces the worker really change the fact
she must submit to the government and rules of another to gain access to
the means of life?

When faced with anarchist criticisms that **circumstances** force
workers to accept wage slavery the "anarcho"-capitalist claims that
these are to be considered as objective facts of nature and so wage
labour is not domination. However, the same can be said of states -- we
are born into a world where states claim to own all the available land.
If states are replaced by individuals or groups of individuals does this
change the essential nature of our dispossession? Of course not.

Rothbard argues that *"[o]bviously, in a free society, Smith has the
ultimate decision-making power over his own just property, Jones over
his, etc."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 173] and, equally obviously, this
ultimate-decision making power extends to those who **use,** but do not
own, such property. But how "free" is a free society where the majority
have to sell their liberty to another in order to live? Rothbard
(correctly) argues that the State *"uses its monopoly of force . . . to
control, regulate, and coerce its hapless subjects. Often it pushes its
way into controlling the morality and the very lives of its subjects."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 171] However he fails to note that employers do
exactly the same thing to their employees. This, from an anarchist
perspective, is unsurprising, for (after all) the employer **is** *"the
ultimate decision-making power over his just property"* just as the
state is over its "unjust" property. That similar forms of control and
regulation develop is not a surprise given the similar hierarchical
relations in both structures.

That there is a choice in available states does not make statism any
less unjust and unfree. Similarly, just because we have a choice between
employers does not make wage labour any less unjust or unfree. But
trying to dismiss one form of domination as flowing from "just" property
while attacking the other because it flows from "unjust" property is not
seeing the wood for the trees. If one reduces liberty, so does the
other. Whether the situation we are in resulted from "just" or "unjust"
steps is irrelevant to the restrictions of freedom we face because of
them (and as we argue in [section 2.5](append132.html#secf25), "unjust"
situations can easily flow from "just" steps).

The "anarcho"-capitalist insistence that the voluntary nature of an
association determines whether it is anarchistic is deeply flawed -- so
flawed in fact that states and state-like structures (such as capitalist
firms) can be considered anarchistic! In contrast, anarchists think that
the hierarchical nature of the associations we join is equally as
important as its voluntary nature when determining whether it is
anarchistic or statist. However this option is not available to the
"anarcho"-capitalist as it logically entails that capitalist companies
are to be opposed along with the state as sources of domination,
oppression and exploitation.

2.4 But surely transactions on the market are voluntary?
--------------------------------------------------------

Of course, it is usually maintained by "anarcho"-capitalists that no-one
puts a gun to a worker's head to join a specific company. Yes, indeed,
this is true -- workers can apply for any job they like. But the point
is that the vast majority cannot avoid having to sell their liberty to
others (self-employment and co-operatives **are** an option, but they
account for less than 10% of the working population and are unlikely to
spread due to the nature of capitalist market forces -- see sections
[J.5.11](secJ5.html#secj511) and [J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512) for
details). And as Bob Black pointed out, right libertarians argue that
*"'one can at least change jobs.' but you can't avoid having a job --
just as under statism one can at least change nationalities but you
can't avoid subjection to one nation-state or another. But freedom means
more than the right to change masters."* [**The Libertarian as
Conservative**]

So why do workers agree to join a company? Because circumstances force
them to do so - circumstances created, we must note, by **human**
actions and institutions and not some abstract "fact of nature." And if
the world that humans create by their activity is detrimental to what we
should value most (individual liberty and individuality) then we should
consider how to **change that world for the better.** Thus
"circumstances" (current "objective reality") is a valid source of
unfreedom and for human investigation and creative activity --
regardless of the claims of right-Libertarians.

Let us look at the circumstances created by capitalism. Capitalism is
marked by a class of dispossessed labourers who have nothing to sell by
their labour. They are legally barred from access to the means of life
and so have little option but to take part in the labour market. As
Alexander Berkman put it:

> *"The law says your employer does not sell anything from you, because
> it is done with your consent. You have agreed to work for your boss
> for certain pay, he to have all that you produce . . .*
>
> "But did you really consent?
>
> "When the highway man holds his gun to your head, you turn your
> valuables over to him. You 'consent' all right, but you do so because
> you cannot help yourself, because you are **compelled** by his gun.
>
> "Are you not **compelled** to work for an employer? Your need compels
> you just as the highwayman's gun. You must live. . . You can't work
> for yourself . . .The factories, machinery, and tools belong to the
> employing class, so you **must** hire yourself out to that class in
> order to work and live. Whatever you work at, whoever your employer
> may be, it is always comes to the same: you must work **for him**. You
> can't help yourself. You are **compelled**." [**What is Communist
> Anarchism?**, p. 9]

Due to this class monopoly over the means of life, workers (usually) are
at a disadvantage in terms of bargaining power -- there are more workers
than jobs (see sections [B.4.3](secB4.html#secb43) and
[10.2](append1310.html#secf102) for a discussion why this is the normal
situation on the labour market).

As was indicated in section B.4 ([How does capitalism affect
liberty?](secB4.html)), within capitalism there is no equality between
owners and the dispossessed, and so property is a source of **power.**
To claim that this power should be "left alone" or is "fair" is *"to the
anarchists. . . preposterous. Once a State has been established, and
most of the country's capital privatised, the threat of physical force
is no longer necessary to coerce workers into accepting jobs, even with
low pay and poor conditions. To use Ayn Rand's term, 'initial force' has
**already taken place,** by those who now have capital against those who
do not. . . . In other words, if a thief died and willed his 'ill-gotten
gain' to his children, would the children have a right to the stolen
property? Not legally. So if 'property is theft,' to borrow Proudhon's
quip, and the fruit of exploited labour is simply legal theft, then the
only factor giving the children of a deceased capitalist a right to
inherit the 'booty' is the law, the State. As Bakunin wrote, 'Ghosts
should not rule and oppress this world, which belongs only to the
living'"* [Jeff Draughn, **Between Anarchism and Libertarianism**].

Or, in other words, right-Libertarianism fails to *"meet the charge that
normal operations of the market systematically places an entire class of
persons (wage earners) in circumstances that compel them to accept the
terms and conditions of labour dictated by those who offer work. While
it is true that individuals are formally free to seek better jobs or
withhold their labour in the hope of receiving higher wages, in the end
their position in the market works against them; they cannot live if
they do not find employment. When circumstances regularly bestow a
relative disadvantage on one class of persons in their dealings with
another class, members of the advantaged class have little need of
coercive measures to get what they want."* [Stephen L. Newman,
**Liberalism at Wit's End**, p. 130]

To ignore the circumstances which drive people to seek out the most
"beneficial exchange" is to blind yourself to the power relationships
inherent within capitalism -- power relationships created by the unequal
bargaining power of the parties involved (also see [section
3.1](append133.html#secf31)). And to argue that "consent" ensures
freedom is false; if you are "consenting" to be join a dictatorial
organisation, you "consent" **not** to be free (and to paraphrase
Rousseau, a person who renounces freedom renounces being human).

Which is why circumstances are important -- if someone truly wants to
join an authoritarian organisation, then so be it. It is their life. But
if circumstances ensure their "consent" then they are not free. The
danger is, of course, that people become **accustomed** to authoritarian
relationships and end up viewing them as forms of freedom. This can be
seen from the state, which the vast majority support and "consent" to.
And this also applies to wage labour, which many workers today accept as
a "necessary evil" (like the state) but, as we indicate in [section
8.6](append138.html#secf86), the first wave of workers viewed with
horror as a form of (wage) slavery and did all that they could to avoid.
In such situations all we can do is argue with them and convince them
that certain forms of organisations (such as the state and capitalist
firms) are an evil and urge them to change society to ensure their
extinction.

So due to this lack of appreciation of circumstances (and the fact that
people become accustomed to certain ways of life) "anarcho"-capitalism
actively supports structures that restrict freedom for the many. And how
is "anarcho"-capitalism **anarchist** if it generates extensive amounts
of archy? It is for this reason that all anarchists support
self-management within free association -- that way we maximise freedom
both inside **and** outside organisations. But only stressing freedom
outside organisations, "anarcho"-capitalism ends up denying freedom as
such (after all, we spend most of our waking hours at work). If
"anarcho"-capitalists **really** desired freedom, they would reject
capitalism and become anarchists -- only in a libertarian socialist
society would agreements to become a wage worker be truly voluntary as
they would not be driven by circumstances to sell their liberty.

This means that while right-Libertarianism appears to make "choice" an
ideal (which sounds good, liberating and positive) in practice it has
become a "dismal politics," a politics of choice where most of the
choices are bad. And, to state the obvious, the choices we are "free" to
make are shaped by the differences in wealth and power in society (see
[section 3.1](append133.html#secf31)) as well as such things as
"isolation paradoxes" (see [section B.6](secB6.html)) and the laws and
other human institutions that exist. If we ignore the context within
which people make their choices then we glorify abstract processes at
the expense of real people. And, as importantly, we must add that many
of the choices we make under capitalism (shaped as they are by the
circumstances within which they are made), such as employment contracts,
result in our "choice" being narrowed to "love it or leave it" in the
organisations we create/join as a result of these "free" choices.

This ideological blind spot flows from the "anarcho"-capitalist
definition of "freedom" as "absence of coercion" -- as workers "freely
consent" to joining a specific workplace, their freedom is unrestricted.
But to defend **only** "freedom from" in a capitalist society means to
defend the power and authority of the few against the attempts of the
many to claim their freedom and rights. To requote Emma Goldman,
*"'Rugged individualism' has meant all the 'individualism' for the
masters . . . , in whose name political tyranny and social oppression
are defended and held up as virtues' while every aspiration and attempt
of man to gain freedom . . . is denounced as . . . evil in the name of
that same individualism."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 112]

In other words, its all fine and well saying (as right-libertarians do)
that you aim to abolish force from human relationships but if you
support an economic system which creates hierarchy (and so domination
and oppression) by its very workings, "defensive" force will always be
required to maintain and enforce that domination. Moreover, if one class
has extensive power over another due to the systematic (and normal)
workings of the market, any force used to defend that power is
**automatically** "defensive". Thus to argue against the use of force
and ignore the power relationships that exist within and shape a society
(and so also shape the individuals within it) is to defend and justify
capitalist and landlord domination and denounce any attempts to resist
that domination as "initiation of force."

Anarchists, in contrast, oppose **hierarchy** (and so domination within
relationships -- bar S&M personal relationships, which are a totally
different thing altogether; they are truly voluntary and they also do
not attempt to hide the power relationships involved by using economic
jargon). This opposition, while also including opposition to the use of
force against equals (for example, anarchists are opposed to forcing
workers and peasants to join a self-managed commune or syndicate), also
includes support for the attempts of those subject to domination to end
it (for example, workers striking for union recognition are not
"initiating force", they are fighting for their freedom).

In other words, apparently "voluntary" agreements can and do limit
freedom and so the circumstances that drive people into them **must** be
considered when deciding whether any such limitation is valid. By
ignoring circumstances, "anarcho"-capitalism ends up by failing to
deliver what it promises -- a society of free individuals -- and instead
presents us with a society of masters and servants. The question is,
what do we feel moved to insist that people enjoy? Formal, abstract
(bourgeois) self-ownership ("freedom") or a more substantive control
over one's life (i.e. autonomy)?

2.5 But surely circumstances are the result of liberty and so cannot be objected to?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is often argued by right-libertarians that the circumstances we face
within capitalism are the result of individual decisions (i.e.
individual liberty) and so we must accept them as the expressions of
these acts (the most famous example of this argument is in Nozick's
**Anarchy, State, and Utopia** pp. 161-163 where he maintains that
*"liberty upsets patterns"*). This is because whatever situation evolves
from a just situation by just (i.e. non-coercive steps) is also (by
definition) just.

However, it is not apparent that adding just steps to a just situation
will result in a just society. We will illustrate with a couple of banal
examples. If you add chemicals which are non-combustible together you
can create a new, combustible, chemical (i.e. X becomes not-X by adding
new X to it). Similarly, if you have an odd number and add another odd
number to it, it becomes even (again, X becomes not-X by adding a new X
to it). So it **is** very possible to go from an just state to an unjust
state by just step (and it is possible to remain in an unjust state by
just acts; for example if we tried to implement "anarcho"-capitalism on
the existing -- unjustly created -- situation of "actually existing"
capitalism it would be like having an odd number and adding even numbers
to it). In other words, the outcome of "just" steps can increase
inequality within society and so ensure that some acquire an
unacceptable amount of power over others, via their control over
resources. Such an inequality of power would create an "unjust"
situation where the major are free to sell their liberty to others due
to inequality in power and resources on the "free" market.

Ignoring this objection, we could argue (as many "anarcho"-capitalists
and right-libertarians do) that the unforeseen results of human action
are fine unless we assume that these human actions are in themselves bad
(i.e. that individual choice is evil).

Such an argument is false for three reasons.

First, when we make our choices the aggregate impact of these choices
are unknown to us -- and not on offer when we make our choices. Thus we
cannot be said to "choose" these outcomes, outcomes which we may
consider deeply undesirable, and so the fact that these outcomes are the
result of individual choices is besides the point (if we knew the
outcome we could refrain from doing them). The choices themselves,
therefore, do not validate the outcome as the outcome was not part of
the choices when they where made (i.e. the means do not justify the
ends). In other words, private acts often have important public
consequences (and "bilateral exchanges" often involve externalities for
third parties). Secondly, if the outcome of individual choices is to
deny or restrict individual choice on a wider scale at a later stage,
then we are hardly arguing that individual choice is a bad thing. We
want to arrange it so that the decisions we make now do not result in
them restricting our ability to make choices in important areas of life
at a latter stage. Which means we are in favour of individual choices
and so liberty, not against them. Thirdly, the unforeseen or unplanned
results of individual actions are not necessarily a good thing. If the
aggregate outcome of individual choices harms individuals then we have a
right to modify the circumstances within which choices are made and/or
the aggregate results of these choices.

An example will show what we mean (again drawn from Haworth's excellent
**Anti-Libertarianism**, p. 35). Millions of people across the world
bought deodorants which caused a hole to occur in the ozone layer
surrounding the Earth. The resultant of these acts created a situation
in which individuals and the eco-system they inhabited were in great
danger. The actual acts themselves were by no means wrong, but the
aggregate impact was. A similar argument can apply to any form of
pollution. Now, unless the right-Libertarian argues that skin cancer or
other forms of pollution related illness are fine, its clear that the
resultant of individual acts can be harmful to individuals.

The right-Libertarian could argue that pollution is an "initiation of
force" against an individual's property-rights in their person and so
individuals can sue the polluters. But hierarchy also harms the
individual (see [section B.1](secB1.html)) -- and so can be considered
as an infringement of their "property-rights" (i.e. liberty, to get away
from the insane property fetish of right-Libertarianism). The loss of
autonomy can be just as harmful to an individual as lung cancer although
very different in form. And the differences in wealth resulting from
hierarchy is well known to have serious impacts on life-span and health.

As noted in [section 2.1](append132.html#secf21), the market is just as
man-made as pollution. This means that the "circumstances" we face are
due to aggregate of millions of individual acts and these acts occur
within a specific framework of rights, institutions and ethics.
Anarchists think that a transformation of our society and its rights and
ideals is required so that the resultant of individual choices does not
have the ironic effect of limiting individual choice (freedom) in many
important ways (such as in work, for example).

In other words, the **circumstances** created by capitalist rights and
institutions requires a **transformation** of these rights and
institutions in such a way as to maximise individual choice for all --
namely, to abolish these rights and replace them with new ones (for
example, replace property rights with use rights). Thus Nozick's claims
that *"Z does choose voluntarily if the other individuals A through Y
each acted voluntarily and within their rights"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 263]
misses the point -- it is these rights that are in question (given that
Nozick **assumes** these rights then his whole thesis is begging the
question).

And we must add (before anyone points it out) that, yes, we are aware
that many decisions will unavoidably limit current and future choices.
For example, the decision to build a factory on a green-belt area will
make it impossible for people to walk through the woods that are no
longer there. But such "limitations" (if they can be called that) of
choice are different from the limitations we are highlighting here,
namely the lose of freedom that accompanies the circumstances created
via exchange in the market. The human actions which build the factory
modify reality but do not generate social relationships of domination
between people in so doing. The human actions of market exchange, in
contrast, modify the relative strengths of everyone in society and so
has a distinct impact on the social relationships we "voluntarily" agree
to create. Or, to put it another way, the decision to build on the
green-belt site does "limit" choice in the abstract but it does **not**
limit choice in the kind of relationships we form with other people nor
create authoritarian relationships between people due to inequality
influencing the content of the associations we form. However, the
profits produced from using the factory increases inequality (and so
market/economic power) and so weakens the position of the working class
in respect to the capitalist class within society. This increased
inequality will be reflected in the "free" contracts and working regimes
that are created, with the weaker "trader" having to compromise far more
than before.

So, to try and defend wage slavery and other forms of hierarchy by
arguing that "circumstances" are created by individual liberty runs
aground on its own logic. If the circumstances created by individual
liberty results in pollution then the right-Libertarian will be the
first to seek to change those circumstances. They recognise that the
right to pollute while producing is secondary to our right to be
healthy. Similarly, if the circumstances created by individual liberty
results in hierarchy (pollution of the mind and our relationships with
others as opposed to the body, although it affects that to) then we are
entitled to change these circumstances too and the means by which we get
there (namely the institutional and rights framework of society). Our
right to liberty is more important than the rights of property -- sadly,
the right-Libertarian refuses to recognise this.

2.6 Do Libertarian-capitalists support slavery?
-----------------------------------------------

Yes. It may come as a surprise to many people, but right-Libertarianism
is one of the few political theories that justifies slavery. For
example, Robert Nozick asks whether *"a free system would allow [the
individual] to sell himself into slavery"* and he answers *"I believe
that it would."* [**Anarchy, State and Utopia**, p. 371] While some
right-Libertarians do not agree with Nozick, there is no logical basis
in their ideology for such disagreement.

The logic is simple, you cannot really own something unless you can sell
it. Self-ownership is one of the cornerstones of laissez-faire
capitalist ideology. Therefore, since you own yourself you can sell
yourself.

(For Murray Rothbard's claims of the *"unenforceability, in libertarian
theory, of voluntary slave contracts"* see **The Ethics of Liberty**,
pp. 134-135 -- of course, **other** libertarian theorists claim the
exact opposite so *"libertarian theory"* makes no such claims, but
nevermind! Essentially, his point revolves around the assertion that a
person *"cannot, in nature, sell himself into slavery and have this sale
enforced - for this would mean that his future will over his own body
was being surrendered in advance"* and that if a *"labourer remains
totally subservient to his master's will voluntarily, he is not yet a
slave since his submission is voluntary."* [p. 40] However, as we noted
in [section 2](append132.html), Rothbard emphasis on quitting fails to
recognise that actual denial of will and control over ones own body that
is explicit in wage labour. It is this failure that pro-slave contract
"libertarians" stress -- as we will see, they consider the slave
contract as an extended wage contract. Moreover, a modern slave contract
would likely take the form of a *"performance bond"* [p. 136] in which
the slave agrees to perform X years labour or pay their master
substantial damages. The threat of damages that enforces the contract
and such a "contract" Rothbard does agree is enforceable -- along with
*"conditional exchange"* [p. 141] which could be another way of creating
slave contracts.)

Nozick's defence of slavery should not come as a surprise to any one
familiar with classical liberalism. An elitist ideology, its main
rationale is to defend the liberty and power of property owners and
justify unfree social relationships (such as government and wage labour)
in terms of "consent." Nozick just takes it to its logical conclusion, a
conclusion which Rothbard, while balking at the label used, does not
actually disagree with.

This is because Nozick's argument is not new but, as with so many
others, can be found in John Locke's work. The key difference is that
Locke refused the term *"slavery"* and favoured *"drudgery"* as, for
him, slavery mean a relationship *"between a lawful conqueror and a
captive"* where the former has the power of life and death over the
latter. Once a *"compact"* is agreed between them, *"an agreement for a
limited power on the one side, and obedience on the other . . . slavery
ceases."* As long as the master could not kill the slave, then it was
*"drudgery."* Like Nozick, he acknowledges that *"men did sell
themselves; but, it is plain, this was only to drudgery, not to slavery:
for, it is evident, the person sold was not under an absolute,
arbitrary, despotical power: for the master could not have power to kill
him, at any time, whom, at a certain time, he was obliged to let go free
out of his service."* [Locke, **Second Treatise of Government**, Section
24] In other words, like Rothbard, voluntary slavery was fine but just
call it something else.

Not that Locke was bothered by involuntary slavery. He was heavily
involved in the slave trade. He owned shares in the "Royal Africa
Company" which carried on the slave trade for England, making a profit
when he sold them. He also held a significant share in another slave
company, the "Bahama Adventurers." In the *"Second Treatise"*, Locke
justified slavery in terms of *"Captives taken in a just war."* [Section
85] In other words, a war waged against aggressors. That, of course, had
nothing to do with the **actual** slavery Locke profited from (slave
raids were common, for example). Nor did his "liberal" principles stop
him suggesting a constitution that would ensure that *"every freeman of
Carolina shall have absolute power and authority over his Negro
slaves."* The constitution itself was typically autocratic and
hierarchical, designed explicitly to *"avoid erecting a numerous
democracy."* [**The Works of John Locke**, vol. X, p. 196]

So the notion of contractual slavery has a long history within
right-wing liberalism, although most refuse to call it by that name. It
is of course simply embarrassment that stops Rothbard calling a spade a
spade. He incorrectly assumes that slavery has to be involuntary. In
fact, historically, voluntary slave contracts have been common (David
Ellerman's **Property and Contract in Economics** has an excellent
overview). Any new form of voluntary slavery would be a "civilised" form
of slavery and could occur when an individual would "agree" to sell
themselves to themselves to another (as when a starving worker would
"agree" to become a slave in return for food). In addition, the contract
would be able to be broken under certain conditions (perhaps in return
for breaking the contract, the former slave would have pay damages to
his or her master for the labour their master would lose - a sizeable
amount no doubt and such a payment could result in debt slavery, which
is the most common form of "civilised" slavery. Such damages may be
agreed in the contract as a "performance bond" or "conditional
exchange").

In summary, right-Libertarians are talking about "civilised" slavery
(or, in other words, civil slavery) and not forced slavery. While some
may have reservations about calling it slavery, they agree with the
basic concept that since people own themselves they can sell themselves
as well as selling their labour for a lifetime.

We must stress that this is no academic debate. "Voluntary" slavery has
been a problem in many societies and still exists in many countries
today (particularly third world ones where bonded labour -- i.e. where
debt is used to enslave people -- is the most common form). With the
rise of sweat shops and child labour in many "developed" countries such
as the USA, "voluntary" slavery (perhaps via debt and bonded labour) may
become common in all parts of the world -- an ironic (if not surprising)
result of "freeing" the market and being indifferent to the actual
freedom of those within it.

And it is interesting to note that even Murray Rothbard is not against
the selling of humans. He argued that children are the property of their
parents. They can (bar actually murdering them by violence) do whatever
they please with them, even sell them on a *"flourishing free child
market."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 102] Combined with a whole
hearted support for child labour (after all, the child can leave its
parents if it objects to working for them) such a "free child market"
could easily become a "child slave market" -- with entrepreneurs making
a healthy profit selling infants to other entrepreneurs who could make
profits from the toil of "their" children (and such a process did occur
in 19th century Britain). Unsurprisingly, Rothbard ignores the possible
nasty aspects of such a market in human flesh (such as children being
sold to work in factories, homes and brothels). And, of course, such a
market could see women "specialising" in producing children for it (the
use of child labour during the Industrial Revolution actually made it
economically sensible for families to have more children) and, perhaps,
gluts and scarcities of babies due to changing market conditions. But
this is besides the point.

Of course, this theoretical justification for slavery at the heart of an
ideology calling itself "libertarianism" is hard for many
right-Libertarians to accept. Some of the "anarcho"-capitalist type
argue that such contracts would be very hard to enforce in their system
of capitalism. This attempt to get out of the contradiction fails simply
because it ignores the nature of the capitalist market. If there is a
demand for slave contracts to be enforced, then companies will develop
to provide that "service" (and it would be interesting to see how two
"protection" firms, one defending slave contracts and another not, could
compromise and reach a peaceful agreement over whether slave contracts
were valid). Thus we could see a so-called "anarchist" or "free" society
producing companies whose specific purpose was to hunt down escaped
slaves (i.e. individuals in slave contracts who have not paid damages to
their owners for freedom). Of course, perhaps Rothbard would claim that
such slave contracts would be "outlawed" under his "general libertarian
law code" but this is a denial of market "freedom". If slave contracts
**are** "banned" then surely this is paternalism, stopping individuals
from contracting out their "labour services" to whom and however long
they "desire". You cannot have it both ways.

So, ironically, an ideology proclaiming itself to support "liberty" ends
up justifying and defending slavery. Indeed, for the right-libertarian
the slave contract is an exemplification, not the denial, of the
individual's liberty! How is this possible? How can slavery be supported
as an expression of liberty? Simple, right-Libertarian support for
slavery is a symptom of a **deeper** authoritarianism, namely their
uncritical acceptance of contract theory. The central claim of contract
theory is that contract is the means to secure and enhance individual
freedom. Slavery is the antithesis to freedom and so, in theory,
contract and slavery must be mutually exclusive. However, as indicated
above, some contract theorists (past and present) have included slave
contracts among legitimate contracts. This suggests that contract theory
cannot provide the theoretical support needed to secure and enhance
individual freedom. Why is this?

As Carole Pateman argues, *"contract theory is primarily about a way of
creating social relations constituted by subordination, not about
exchange."* Rather than undermining subordination, contract theorists
justify modern subjection -- *"contract doctrine has proclaimed that
subjection to a master -- a boss, a husband -- is freedom."* [**The
Sexual Contract**, p. 40 and p. 146] The question central to contract
theory (and so right-Libertarianism) is not "are people free" (as one
would expect) but "are people free to subordinate themselves in any
manner they please." A radically different question and one only fitting
to someone who does not know what liberty means.

Anarchists argue that not all contracts are legitimate and no free
individual can make a contract that denies his or her own freedom. If an
individual is able to express themselves by making free agreements then
those free agreements must also be based upon freedom internally as
well. Any agreement that creates domination or hierarchy negates the
assumptions underlying the agreement and makes itself null and void. In
other words, voluntary government is still government and the defining
chararacteristic of an anarchy must be, surely, "no government" and "no
rulers."

This is most easily seen in the extreme case of the slave contract. John
Stuart Mill stated that such a contract would be "null and void." He
argued that an individual may voluntarily choose to enter such a
contract but in so doing *"he abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any
future use of it beyond that single act. He therefore defeats, in his
own case, the very purpose which is the justification of allowing him to
dispose of himself. . .The principle of freedom cannot require that he
should be free not to be free. It is not freedom, to be allowed to
alienate his freedom."* He adds that *"these reasons, the force of which
is so conspicuous in this particular case, are evidently of far wider
application."* [quoted by Pateman, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 171-2]

And it is such an application that defenders of capitalism fear (Mill
did in fact apply these reasons wider and unsurprisingly became a
supporter of a market syndicalist form of socialism). If we reject slave
contracts as illegitimate then, logically, we must also reject **all**
contracts that express qualities similar to slavery (i.e. deny freedom)
including wage slavery. Given that, as David Ellerman points out, *"the
voluntary slave . . . and the employee cannot in fact take their will
out of their intentional actions so that they could be 'employed' by the
master or employer"* we are left with *"the rather implausible assertion
that a person can vacate his or her will for eight or so hours a day for
weeks, months, or years on end but cannot do so for a working
lifetime."* [**Property and Contract in Economics**, p. 58]

The implications of supporting voluntary slavery is quite devastating
for all forms of right-wing "libertarianism." This was proven by
Ellerman when he wrote an extremely robust defence of it under the
pseudonym "J. Philmore" called **The Libertarian Case for Slavery**
(first published in **The Philosophical Forum**, xiv, 1982). This
classic rebuttal takes the form of "proof by contradiction" (or
**reductio ad absurdum**) whereby he takes the arguments of
right-libertarianism to their logical end and shows how they reach the
memorably conclusion that the *"time has come for liberal economic and
political thinkers to stop dodging this issue and to critically
re-examine their shared prejudices about certain voluntary social
institutions . . . this critical process will inexorably drive
liberalism to its only logical conclusion: libertarianism that finally
lays the true moral foundation for economic and political slavery."*

Ellerman shows how, from a right-"libertarian" perspective there is a
*"fundamental contradiction"* in a modern liberal society for the state
to prohibit slave contracts. He notes that there *"seems to be a basic
shared prejudice of liberalism that slavery is inherently involuntary,
so the issue of genuinely voluntary slavery has received little
scrutiny. The perfectly valid liberal argument that involuntary slavery
is inherently unjust is thus taken to include voluntary slavery (in
which case, the argument, by definition, does not apply). This has
resulted in an abridgment of the freedom of contract in modern liberal
society."* Thus it is possible to argue for a *"civilised form of
contractual slavery."* ["J. Philmore,", **Op. Cit.**]

So accurate and logical was Ellerman's article that many of its readers
were convinced it **was** written by a right-libertarian (including, we
have to say, us!). One such writer was Carole Pateman, who correctly
noted that *"[t]here is a nice historical irony here. In the American
South, slaves were emancipated and turned into wage labourers, and now
American contractarians argue that all workers should have the
opportunity to turn themselves into civil slaves."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
63]).

The aim of Ellerman's article was to show the problems that employment
(wage labour) presents for the concept of self-government and how
contract need not result in social relationships based on freedom. As
"Philmore" put it, *"[a]ny thorough and decisive critique of voluntary
slavery or constitutional nondemocratic government would carry over to
the employment contract -- which is the voluntary contractual basis for
the free-market free-enterprise system. Such a critique would thus be a
**reductio ad absurdum**."* As *"contractual slavery"* is an *"extension
of the employer-employee contract,"* he shows that the difference
between wage labour and slavery is the time scale rather than the
principle or social relationships involved. [**Op. Cit.**] This
explains, firstly, the early workers' movement called capitalism
***"wage slavery"*** (anarchists still do) and, secondly, why
capitalists like Rothbard support the concept but balk at the name. It
exposes the unfree nature of the system they support! While it is
possible to present wage labour as "freedom" due to its "consensual"
nature, it becomes much harder to do so when talking about slavery or
dictatorship. Then the contradictions are exposed for all to see and be
horrified by.

All this does not mean that we must reject free agreement. Far from it!
Free agreement is **essential** for a society based upon individual
dignity and liberty. There are a variety of forms of free agreement and
anarchists support those based upon co-operation and self-management
(i.e. individuals working together as equals). Anarchists desire to
create relationships which reflect (and so express) the liberty that is
the basis of free agreement. Capitalism creates relationships that deny
liberty. The opposition between autonomy and subjection can only be
maintained by modifying or rejecting contract theory, something that
capitalism cannot do and so the right-wing Libertarian rejects autonomy
in favour of subjection (and so rejects socialism in favour of
capitalism).

The real contrast between anarchism and right-Libertarianism is best
expressed in their respective opinions on slavery. Anarchism is based
upon the individual whose individuality depends upon the maintenance of
free relationships with other individuals. If individuals deny their
capacities for self-government from themselves through a contract the
individuals bring about a qualitative change in their relationship to
others - freedom is turned into mastery and subordination. For the
anarchist, slavery is thus the paradigm of what freedom is **not**,
instead of an exemplification of what it is (as right-Libertarians
state). As Proudhon argued:

> *"If I were asked to answer the following question: What is slavery?
> and I should answer in one word, It is murder, my meaning would be
> understood at once. No extended argument would be required to show
> that the power to take from a man his thought, his will, his
> personality, is a power of life and death; and that to enslave a man
> is to kill him."* [**What is Property?**, p. 37]

In contrast, the right-Libertarian effectively argues that "I support
slavery because I believe in liberty." It is a sad reflection of the
ethical and intellectual bankruptcy of our society that such an
"argument" is actually taken seriously by (some) people. The concept of
"slavery as freedom" is far too Orwellian to warrant a critique - we
will leave it up to right Libertarians to corrupt our language and
ethical standards with an attempt to prove it.

From the basic insight that slavery is the opposite of freedom, the
anarchist rejection of authoritarian social relations quickly follows
(the right-wing Libertarians fear):

> *"Liberty is inviolable. I can neither sell nor alienate my liberty;
> every contract, every condition of a contract, which has in view the
> alienation or suspension of liberty, is null: the slave, when he
> plants his foot upon the soil of liberty, at that moment becomes a
> free man. . . Liberty is the original condition of man; to renounce
> liberty is to renounce the nature of man: after that, how could we
> perform the acts of man?"* [P.J. Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 67]

The employment contract (i.e. wage slavery) abrogates liberty. It is
based upon inequality of power and *"exploitation is a consequence of
the fact that the sale of labour power entails the worker's
subordination."* [Carole Pateman, **Op. Cit.**, P. 149] Hence Proudhon's
(and Mill's) support of self-management and opposition to capitalism -
any relationship that resembles slavery is illegitimate and no contract
that creates a relationship of subordination is valid. Thus in a truly
anarchistic society, slave contracts would be unenforceable -- people in
a truly free (i.e. non-capitalist) society would **never** tolerate such
a horrible institution or consider it a valid agreement. If someone was
silly enough to sign such a contract, they would simply have to say they
now rejected it in order to be free -- such contracts are made to be
broken and without the force of a law system (and private defence firms)
to back it up, such contracts will stay broken.

The right-Libertarian support for slave contracts (and wage slavery)
indicates that their ideology has little to do with liberty and far more
to do with justifying property and the oppression and exploitation it
produces. Their support and theoretical support for slavery indicates a
deeper authoritarianism which negates their claims to be libertarians.

2.7 But surely abolishing capitalism would restrict liberty?
------------------------------------------------------------

Many "anarcho"-capitalists and other supporters of capitalism argue that
it would be "authoritarian" to restrict the number of alternatives that
people can choose between by abolishing capitalism. If workers become
wage labourers, so it is argued, it is because they "value" other things
more -- otherwise they would not agree to the exchange. But such an
argument ignores that reality of capitalism.

By **maintaining** capitalist private property, the options available to
people **are** restricted. In a fully developed capitalist economy the
vast majority have the "option" of selling their labour or
starving/living in poverty -- self-employed workers account for less
than 10% of the working population. Usually, workers are at a
disadvantage on the labour market due to the existence of unemployment
and so accept wage labour because otherwise they would starve (see
[section 10.2](append1310.html#secf102) for a discussion on why this is
the case). And as we argue in sections [J.5.11](secJ5.html#secj511) and
[J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512), even **if** the majority of the working
population desired co-operative workplaces, a capitalist market will not
provide them with that outcome due to the nature of the capitalist
workplace (also see Juliet C. Schor's excellent book **The Overworked
American** for a discussion of why workers desire for more free time is
not reflected in the labour market). In other words, it is a myth to
claim that wage labour exists or that workplaces are hierarchical
because workers value other things -- they are hierarchical because
bosses have more clout on the market than workers and, to use Schor's
expression, workers end up wanting what they get rather than getting
what they want.

Looking at the reality of capitalism we find that because of inequality
in resources (protected by the full might of the legal system, we should
note) those with property get to govern those without it during working
hours (and beyond in many cases). If the supporters of capitalism were
actually concerned about liberty (as opposed to property) that situation
would be abhorrent to them -- after all, individuals can no longer
exercise their ability to make decisions, choices, and are reduced to
being order takers. If choice and liberty are the things we value, then
the ability to make choices in all aspects of life automatically follows
(including during work hours). However, the authoritarian relationships
and the continual violation of autonomy wage labour implies are
irrelevant to "anarcho"-capitalists (indeed, attempts to change this
situation are denounced as violations of the autonomy of the property
owner!). By purely concentrating on the moment that a contract is signed
they blind themselves to the restricts of liberty that wage contracts
create.

Of course, anarchists have no desire to **ban** wage labour -- we aim to
create a society within which people are not forced by circumstances to
sell their liberty to others. In order to do this, anarchists propose a
modification of property and property rights to ensure true freedom of
choice (a freedom of choice denied to us by capitalism). As we have
noted many times, "bilateral exchanges" can and do adversely effect the
position of third parties if they result in the build-up of power/money
in the hands of a few. And one of these adverse effects can be the
restriction of workers options due to economic power. Therefore it is
the supporter of capitalist who restricts options by supporting an
economic system and rights framework that by their very workings reduce
the options available to the majority, who then are "free to choose"
between those that remain (see also [section B.4](secB4.html)).
Anarchists, in contrast, desire to expand the available options by
abolishing capitalist private property rights and removing inequalities
in wealth and power that help restrict our options and liberties
artificially.

So does an anarchist society have much to fear from the spread of wage
labour within it? Probably not. If we look at societies such as the
early United States or the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution in
Britain, for example, we find that, given the choice, most people
preferred to work for themselves. Capitalists found it hard to find
enough workers to employ and the amount of wages that had to be offered
to hire workers were so high as to destroy any profit margins. Moreover,
the mobility of workers and their "laziness" was frequently commented
upon, with employers despairing at the fact workers would just work
enough to make end meet and then disappear. Thus, left to the actions of
the "free market," it is doubtful that wage labour would have spread.
But it was not left to the "free market".

In response to these "problems", the capitalists turned to the state and
enforced various restrictions on society (the most important being the
land, tariff and money monopolies -- see sections [B.3](secB3.html) and
[8](append138.html)). In free competition between artisan and wage
labour, wage labour only succeeded due to the use of state action to
create the required circumstances to discipline the labour force and to
accumulate enough capital to give capitalists an edge over artisan
production (see [section 8](append138.html) for more details).

Thus an anarchist society would not have to fear the spreading of wage
labour within it. This is simply because would-be capitalists (like
those in the early United States) would have to offer such excellent
conditions, workers' control and high wages as to make the possibility
of extensive profits from workers' labour nearly impossible. Without the
state to support them, they will not be able to accumulate enough
capital to give them an advantage within a free society. Moreover, it is
somewhat ironic to hear capitalists talking about anarchism denying
choice when we oppose wage labour considering the fact workers were not
given any choice when the capitalists used the state to develop wage
labour in the first place!

2.8 Why should we reject the "anarcho"-capitalist definitions of freedom and justice?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Simply because they lead to the creation of authoritarian social
relationships and so to restrictions on liberty. A political theory
which, when consistently followed, has evil or iniquitous consequences,
is a bad theory.

For example, any theory that can justify slavery is obviously a bad
theory - slavery does not cease to stink the moment it is seen to follow
your theory. As right-Libertarians can justify slave contracts as a type
of wage labour (see [section 2.6](append132.html#secf26)) as well as
numerous other authoritarian social relationships, it is obviously a bad
theory.

It is worth quoting Noam Chomsky at length on this subject:

> *"Consider, for example, the 'entitlement theory of justice'. . .
> [a]ccording to this theory, a person has a right to whatever he has
> acquired by means that are just. If, by luck or labour or ingenuity, a
> person acquires such and such, then he is entitled to keep it and
> dispose of it as he wills, and a just society will not infringe on
> this right.*
>
> "One can easily determine where such a principle might lead. It is
> entirely possible that by legitimate means - say, luck supplemented by
> contractual arrangements 'freely undertaken' under pressure of need -
> one person might gain control of the necessities of life. Others are
> then free to sell themselves to this person as slaves, if he is
> willing to accept them. Otherwise, they are free to perish. Without
> extra question-begging conditions, the society is just.
>
> "The argument has all the merits of a proof that 2 + 2 = 5. . .
> Suppose that some concept of a 'just society' is advanced that fails
> to characterise the situation just described as unjust. . . Then one
> of two conclusions is in order. We may conclude that the concept is
> simply unimportant and of no interest as a guide to thought or action,
> since it fails to apply properly even in such an elementary case as
> this. Or we may conclude that the concept advanced is to be dismissed
> in that it fails to correspond to the pretheorectical notion that it
> intends to capture in clear cases. If our intuitive concept of justice
> is clear enough to rule social arrangements of the sort described as
> grossly unjust, then the sole interest of a demonstration that this
> outcome might be 'just' under a given 'theory of justice' lies in the
> inference by **reductio ad absurdum** to the conclusion that the
> theory is hopelessly inadequate. While it may capture some partial
> intuition regarding justice, it evidently neglects others.
>
> "The real question to be raised about theories that fail so completely
> to capture the concept of justice in its significant and intuitive
> sense is why they arouse such interest. Why are they not simply
> dismissed out of hand on the grounds of this failure, which is
> striking in clear cases? Perhaps the answer is, in part, the one given
> by Edward Greenberg in a discussion of some recent work on the
> entitlement theory of justice. After reviewing empirical and
> conceptual shortcomings, he observes that such work 'plays an
> important function in the process of . . . 'blaming the victim,' and
> of protecting property against egalitarian onslaughts by various
> non-propertied groups.' An ideological defence of privileges,
> exploitation, and private power will be welcomed, regardless of its
> merits.
>
> "These matters are of no small importance to poor and oppressed people
> here and elsewhere." [**The Chomsky Reader**, pp. 187-188]

It may be argued that the reductions in liberty associated with
capitalism is not really an iniquitous outcome, but such an argument is
hardly fitting for a theory proclaiming itself "libertarian." And the
results of these authoritarian social relationships? To quote Adam
Smith, under the capitalist division of labour the worker *"has no
occasion to exert his understanding, or exercise his invention"* and
*"he naturally loses, therefore, the habit of such exercise and
generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human
creature to become."* The worker's mind falls *"into that drowsy
stupidity, which, in a civilised society, seems to benumb the
understanding of almost all of the inferior [sic!] ranks of people."*
[cited by Chomsky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 186]

Of course, it may be argued that these evil effects of capitalist
authority relations on individuals are also not iniquitous (or that the
very real domination of workers by bosses is not really domination) but
that suggests a desire to sacrifice real individuals, their hopes and
dreams and lives to an abstract concept of liberty, the accumulative
effect of which would be to impoverish all our lives. The kind of
relationships we create **within** the organisations we join are of as
great an importance as their voluntary nature. Social relations
**shape** the individual in many ways, restricting their freedom, their
perceptions of what freedom is and what their interests actually are.
This means that, in order not to be farcical, any relationships we
create must reflect in their internal workings the critical evaluation
and self-government that created them in the first place. Sadly
capitalist individualism masks structures of power and relations of
domination and subordination within seemingly "voluntary" associations
-- it fails to note the relations of domination resulting from private
property and so *"what has been called 'individualism' up to now has
been only a foolish egoism which belittles the individual. Foolish
because it was not individualism at all. It did not lead to what was
established as a goal; that is the complete, broad, and most perfectly
attainable development of individuality."* [Peter Kropotkin, **Selected
Writings**, p. 297]

This right-Libertarian lack of concern for concrete individual freedom
and individuality is a reflection of their support for "free markets"
(or "economic liberty" as they sometimes phrase it). However, as Max
Stirner noted, this fails to understand that *"[p]olitical liberty means
that the **polis,** the State, is free; . . . not, therefore, that I am
free of the State. . . It does not mean **my** liberty, but the liberty
of a power that rules and subjugates me; it means that one of my
**despots** . . . is free."* [**The Ego and Its Own**, p. 107] Thus the
desire for "free markets" results in a blindness that while the market
may be "free" the individuals within it may not be (as Stirner was well
aware, *"[u]nder the **regime** of the commonality the labourers always
fall into the hands of the possessors . . . of the capitalists,
therefore."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 115])

In other words, right-libertarians give the greatest importance to an
abstract concept of freedom and fail to take into account the fact that
real, concrete freedom is the outcome of self-managed activity,
solidarity and voluntary co-operation. For liberty to be real it must
exist in all aspects of our daily life and cannot be contracted away
without seriously effecting our minds, bodies and lives. Thus, the
right-Libertarian's *"defence of freedom is undermined by their
insistence on the concept of negative liberty, which all too easily
translates in experience as the negation of liberty."* [Stephan L.
Newman, **Liberalism as Wit's End**, p. 161]

Thus right-Libertarian's fundamental fallacy is that "contract" does not
result in the end of power or domination (particularly when the
bargaining power or wealth of the would-be contractors is not equal). As
Carole Pateman notes, *"[i]ronically, the contractarian ideal cannot
encompass capitalist employment. Employment is not a continual series of
discrete contracts between employer and worker, but . . . one contract
in which a worker binds himself to enter an enterprise and follow the
directions of the employer for the duration of the contract. As Huw
Benyon has bluntly stated, 'workers are paid to obey.'"* [**The Sexual
Contract**, p. 148] This means that *"the employment contract (like the
marriage contract) is not an exchange; both contracts create social
relations that endure over time - social relations of subordination."*
[**Ibid.**]

Authority impoverishes us all and must, therefore, be combated wherever
it appears. That is why anarchists oppose capitalism, so that there
shall be *"no more government of man by man, by means of accumulation of
capital."* [P-J Proudhon, cited by Woodcock in **Anarchism**, p. 110]
If, as Murray Bookchin point it, *"the object of anarchism is to
increase choice"* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 70] then this applies
both to when we are creating associations/relationships with others and
when we are **within** these associations/relationships -- i.e. that
they are consistent with the liberty of all, and that implies
participation and self-management **not** hierarchy.
"Anarcho"-capitalism fails to understand this essential point and by
concentrating purely on the first condition for liberty ensures a
society based upon domination, oppression and hierarchy and not freedom.

It is unsurprising, therefore, to find that the basic unit of analysis
of the "anarcho"-capitalist/right-libertarian is the transaction (the
"trade," the "contract"). The freedom of the individual is seen as
revolving around an act, the contract, and **not** in our relations with
others. All the social facts and mechanisms that precede, surround and
result from the transaction are omitted. In particular, the social
relations that result from the transaction are ignored (those, and the
circumstances that make people contract, are the two unmentionables of
right-libertarianism).

For anarchists it seems strange to concentrate on the moment that a
contract is signed and ignore the far longer time the contract is active
for (as we noted in [section A.2.14](secA2.html#seca214), if the worker
is free when they sign a contract, slavery soon overtakes them). Yes,
the voluntary nature of a decision is important, but so are the social
relationships we experience due to those decisions.

For the anarchist, freedom is based upon the insight that other people,
apart from (indeed, **because** of) having their own intrinsic value,
also are "means to my end", that it is through their freedom that I gain
my own -- so enriching my life. As Bakunin put it:

> *"I who want to be free cannot be because all the men around me do not
> yet want to be free, and consequently they become tools of oppression
> against me."* [quoted by Errico Malatesta in **Anarchy**, p. 27]

Therefore anarchists argue that we must reject the right-Libertarian
theories of freedom and justice because they end up supporting the
denial of liberty as the expression of liberty. What this fails to
recognise is that freedom is a product of social life and that (in
Bakunin's words) *"[n]o man can achieve his own emancipation without at
the same time working for the emancipation of all men around him. My
freedom is the freedom of all since I am not truly free in thought and
in fact, except when my freedom and my rights are confirmed and approved
in the freedom and rights of all men who are my equals."* [**Ibid.**]

Other people give us the possibilities to develop our full human
potentiality and thereby our freedom, so when we destroy the freedom of
others we limit our own. *"To treat others and oneself as property,"*
argues anarchist L. Susan Brown, *"objectifies the human individual,
denies the unity of subject and object and is a negation of individual
will . . . even the freedom gained by the other is compromised by this
relationship, for to negate the will of another to achieve one's own
freedom destroys the very freedom one sought in the first place."*
[**The Politics of Individualism**, p. 3]

Fundamentally, it is for this reason that anarchists reject the
right-Libertarian theories of freedom and justice -- it just does not
ensure individual freedom or individuality.
