3 Why do anarcho"-capitalists place little or no value on "equality"?
=====================================================================

Murray Rothbard argues that *"the 'rightist' libertarian is not opposed
to inequality."* [**For a New Liberty**, p. 47] In contrast, "leftist"
libertarians oppose inequality because it has harmful effects on
individual liberty.

Part of the reason "anarcho"-capitalism places little or no value on
"equality" derives from their definition of that term. Murray Rothbard
defines equality as:

> *"A and B are 'equal' if they are identical to each other with respect
> to a given attribute... There is one and only one way, then, in which
> any two people can really be 'equal' in the fullest sense: they must
> be identical in **all** their attributes."*

He then points out the obvious fact that *"men are not uniform,. . . .
the species, mankind, is uniquely characterised by a high degree of
variety, diversity, differentiation: in short, inequality."*
[**Egalitarianism as a Revolt against Nature and Other Essays**, p. 4,
p.5]

In others words, every individual is unique. Something no egalitarian
has ever denied. On the basis of this amazing insight, he concludes that
equality is impossible (except "equality of rights") and that the
attempt to achieve "equality" is a "revolt against nature" -- as if any
anarchist had ever advocated such a notion of equality as being
identical!

And so, because we are all unique, the outcome of our actions will not
be identical and so social inequality flows from natural differences and
not due to the economic system we live under. Inequality of endowment
implies inequality of outcome and so social inequality. As individual
differences are a fact of nature, attempts to create a society based on
"equality" (i.e. making everyone identical in terms of possessions and
so forth) is impossible and "unnatural."

Before continuing, we must note that Rothbard is destroying language to
make his point and that he is not the first to abuse language in this
particular way. In George Orwell's **1984**, the expression *"all men
are created equal"* could be translated into Newspeak, but it would make
as much sense as saying *"all men have red hair,"* an obvious falsehood
(see *"The Principles of Newspeak"* Appendix). It's nice to know that
"Mr. Libertarian" is stealing ideas from Big Brother, and for the same
reason: to make critical thought impossible by restricting the meaning
of words.

"Equality," in the context of political discussion, does not mean
"identical," it usually means equality of rights, respect, worth, power
and so forth. It does not imply treating everyone identically (for
example, expecting an eighty year old man to do identical work to an
eighteen violates treating both with respect as unique individuals). For
anarchists, as Alexander Berkman writes, *"equality does not mean an
equal amount but equal **opportunity**. . . Do not make the mistake of
identifying equality in liberty with the forced equality of the convict
camp. True anarchist equality implies freedom, not quantity. It does not
mean that every one must eat, drink, or wear the same things, do the
same work, or live in the same manner. Far from it: the very reverse, in
fact. Individual needs and tastes differ, as appetites differ. It is
**equal** opportunity to satisfy them that constitutes true equality.
Far from levelling, such equality opens the door for the greatest
possible variety of activity and development. For human character is
diverse, and only the repression of this free diversity results in
levelling, in uniformity and sameness. Free opportunity and acting out
your individuality means development of natural dissimilarities and
variations. . . . Life in freedom, in anarchy will do more than liberate
man merely from his present political and economic bondage. That will be
only the first step, the preliminary to a truly human existence."*
[**The ABC of Anarchism**, p. 25]

Thus anarchists reject the Rothbardian-Newspeak definition of equality
as meaningless within political discussion. No two people are identical
and so imposing "identical" equality between them would mean treating
them as **unequals**, i.e. not having equal worth or giving them equal
respect as befits them as human beings and fellow unique individuals.

So what should we make of Rothbard's claim? It is tempting just to quote
Rousseau when he argued *"it is . . . useless to inquire whether there
is any essential connection between the two inequalities [social and
natural]; for this would be only asking, in other words, whether those
who command are necessarily better than those who obey, and if strength
of body or of mind, wisdom, or virtue are always found in particular
individuals, in proportion to their power or wealth: a question fit
perhaps to be discussed by slaves in the hearing of their masters, but
highly unbecoming to reasonable and free men in search of the truth."*
[**The Social Contract and Discourses**, p. 49] But a few more points
should be raised.

The uniqueness of individuals has always existed but for the vast
majority of human history we have lived in very egalitarian societies.
If social inequality did, indeed, flow from natural inequalities then
**all** societies would be marked by it. This is not the case. Indeed,
taking a relatively recent example, many visitors to the early United
States noted its egalitarian nature, something that soon changed with
the rise of wage labour and industrial capitalism (a rise dependent upon
state action, we must add, -- see section [8](append138.html)). This
implies that the society we live in (its rights framework, the social
relationships it generates and so forth) has a far more of a decisive
impact on inequality than individual differences. Thus certain rights
frameworks will tend to magnify "natural" inequalities (assuming that is
the source of the initial inequality, rather than, say, violence and
force). As Noam Chomsky argues:

> *"Presumably it is the case that in our 'real world' some combination
> of attributes is conducive to success in responding to 'the demands of
> the economic system' . . . One might suppose that some mixture of
> avarice, selfishness, lack of concern for others, aggressiveness, and
> similar characteristics play a part in getting ahead [in capitalism].
> . . Whatever the correct collection of attributes may be, we may ask
> what follows from the fact, if it is a fact, that some partially
> inherited combination of attributes tends to material success? All
> that follows . . . is a comment on our particular social and economic
> arrangements . . . The egalitarian might responds, in all such cases,
> that the social order should be changes so that the collection of
> attributes that tends to bring success no longer do so . . . "* [**The
> Chomsky Reader**, p. 190]

So, perhaps, if we change society then the social inequalities we see
today would disappear. It is more than probable that natural difference
has been long ago been replaced with **social** inequalities, especially
inequalities of property (which will tend to increase, rather than
decrease, inequality). And as we argue in section [8](append138.html)
these inequalities of property were initially the result of force,
**not** differences in ability. Thus to claim that social inequality
flows from natural differences is false as most social inequality has
flown from violence and force. This initial inequality has been
magnified by the framework of capitalist property rights and so the
inequality within capitalism is far more dependent upon, say, the
existence of wage labour, rather than "natural" differences between
individuals.

If we look at capitalism, we see that in workplaces and across
industries many, if not most, unique individuals receive identical wages
for identical work (although this often is not the case for women and
blacks, who receive less wages than male, white workers). Similarly,
capitalists have deliberately introduced wage inequalities and
hierarchies for no other reason that to divide (and so rule) the
workforce (see section [D.10](secD10.html)). Thus, if we assume
egalitarianism **is** a revolt against nature, then much of capitalist
economic life is in such a revolt (and when it is not, the "natural"
inequalities have been imposed artificially by those in power).

Thus "natural" differences do not necessarily result in inequality as
such. Given a different social system, "natural" differences would be
encouraged and celebrated far wider than they are under capitalism
(where, as we argued in section [B.1](secB1.html), hierarchy ensures the
crushing of individuality rather than its encouragement) without any
change in social equality. The claim that "natural" differences
generates social inequalities is question begging in the extreme -- it
takes the rights framework of society as a given and ignores the initial
source of inequality in property and power. Indeed, inequality of
outcome or reward is more likely to be influenced by social conditions
rather than individual differences (as would be the case in a society
based on wage labour or other forms of exploitation).

Another reason for "anarcho"-capitalist lack of concern for equality is
that they think that *"liberty upsets patterns"* (see section
[2.5](append132.html#secf25), for example). It is argued that equality
can only be maintained by restricting individual freedom to make
exchanges or by taxation of income. However, what this argument fails to
acknowledge is that inequality also restricts individual freedom (see
[next section](append133.html#secf31), for example) and that the
capitalist property rights framework is not the only one possible. After
all, money is power and inequalities in terms of power easily result in
restrictions of liberty and the transformation of the majority into
order takers rather than free producers. In other words, once a certain
level of inequality is reached, property does not promote, but actually
conflicts with, the ends which render private property legitimate.
Moreover, Nozick (in his "liberty upsets patterns" argument) *"has
produced . . . an argument for unrestricted private property using
unrestricted private property, and thus he begs the question he tries to
answer."* [Andrew Kerhohan, *"Capitalism and Self-Ownership"*, from
**Capitalism**, p. 71] For example, a worker employed by a capitalist
cannot freely exchange the machines or raw materials they have been
provided with to use but Nozick does not class this distribution of
"restricted" property rights as infringing liberty (nor does he argue
that wage slavery itself restricts freedom, of course).

So in response to the claim that equality could only be maintained by
continuously interfering with people's lives, anarchists would say that
the inequalities produced by capitalist property rights also involve
extensive and continuous interference with people's lives. After all, as
Bob Black notes *"[y]our foreman or supervisor gives you more or-else
orders in a week than the police do in a decade"* nevermind the other
effects of inequality such as stress, ill health and so on
[**Libertarian as Conservative**]. Thus claims that equality involves
infringing liberty ignores the fact that inequality also infringes
liberty. A reorganisation of society could effectively minimise
inequalities by eliminating the major source of such inequalities (wage
labour) by self-management (see section [I.5.12](secI5.html#seci512) for
a discussion of "capitalistic acts" within an anarchist society). We
have no desire to restrict free exchanges (after all, most anarchists
desire to see the "gift economy" become a reality sooner or later) but
we argue that free exchanges need not involve the unrestricted property
rights Nozick assumes. As we argue in sections [2](append132.html) and
[3.1](append133.html#secf31), inequality can easily led to the situation
where self-ownership is used to justify its own negation and so
unrestricted property rights may undermine the meaningful
self-determination (what anarchists would usually call "freedom" rather
than self-ownership) which many people intuitively understand by the
term "self-ownership".

Thus, for anarchists, the "anarcho"-capitalist opposition to equality
misses the point and is extremely question begging. Anarchists do not
desire to make humanity "identical" (which would be impossible and a
total denial of liberty **and** equality) but to make the social
relationships between individuals equal in **power.** In other words,
they desire a situation where people interact together without
institutionalised power or hierarchy and are influenced by each other
"naturally," in proportion to how the (individual) **differences**
between (social) **equals** are applicable in a given context. To quote
Michael Bakunin, *"[t]he greatest intelligence would not be equal to a
comprehension of the whole. Thence results. . . the necessity of the
division and association of labour. I receive and I give -- such is
human life. Each directs and is directed in his turn. Therefore there is
no fixed and constant authority, but a continual exchange of mutual,
temporary, and, above all, voluntary authority and subordination."*
[**God and the State**, p. 33]

Such an environment can only exist within self-managed associations, for
capitalism (i.e. wage labour) creates very specific relations and
institutions of authority. It is for this reason anarchists are
socialists (i.e. opposed to wage labour, the existence of a proletariat
or working class). In other words, anarchists support equality precisely
**because** we recognise that everyone is unique. If we are serious
about "equality of rights" or "equal freedom" then conditions must be
such that people can enjoy these rights and liberties. If we assume the
right to develop one's capacities to the fullest, for example, then
inequality of resources and so power within society destroys that right
simply because people do not have the means to freely exercise their
capacities (they are subject to the authority of the boss, for example,
during work hours).

So, in direct contrast to anarchism, right-Libertarianism is unconcerned
about any form of equality except "equality of rights". This blinds them
to the realities of life; in particular, the impact of economic and
social power on individuals within society and the social relationships
of domination they create. Individuals may be "equal" before the law and
in rights, but they may not be free due to the influence of social
inequality, the relationships it creates and how it affects the law and
the ability of the oppressed to use it. Because of this, all anarchists
insist that equality is essential for freedom, including those in the
Individualist Anarchist tradition the "anarcho"-capitalist tries to
co-opt -- *"Spooner and Godwin insist that inequality corrupts freedom.
Their anarchism is directed as much against inequality as against
tyranny"* and *"[w]hile sympathetic to Spooner's individualist
anarchism, they [Rothbard and David Friedman] fail to notice or
conveniently overlook its egalitarian implications."* [Stephen L.
Newman, **Liberalism at Wit's End**, p. 74, p. 76]

Why equality is important is discussed more fully in the [next
section](append133.html#secf31). Here we just stress that without social
equality, individual freedom is so restricted that it becomes a mockery
(essentially limiting freedom of the majority to choosing **which**
employer will govern them rather than being free within and outside
work).

Of course, by defining "equality" in such a restrictive manner,
Rothbard's own ideology is proved to be nonsense. As L.A. Rollins notes,
*"Libertarianism, the advocacy of 'free society' in which people enjoy
'equal freedom' and 'equal rights,' is actually a specific form of
egalitarianism. As such, Libertarianism itself is a revolt against
nature. If people, by their very biological nature, are unequal in all
the attributes necessary to achieving, and preserving 'freedom' and
'rights'. . . then there is no way that people can enjoy 'equal freedom'
or 'equal rights'. If a free society is conceived as a society of 'equal
freedom,' then there ain't no such thing as 'a free society'."* [**The
Myth of Natural Law**, p. 36]

Under capitalism, freedom is a commodity like everything else. The more
money you have, the greater your freedom. "Equal" freedom, in the
Newspeak-Rothbardian sense, **cannot** exist! As for "equality before
the law", its clear that such a hope is always dashed against the rocks
of wealth and market power (see [next section](append133.html#secf31)
for more on this). As far as rights go, of course, both the rich and the
poor have an "equal right" to sleep under a bridge (assuming the
bridge's owner agrees of course!); but the owner of the bridge and the
homeless have **different** rights, and so they cannot be said to have
"equal rights" in the Newspeak-Rothbardian sense either. Needless to
say, poor and rich will not "equally" use the "right" to sleep under a
bridge, either.

Bob Black observes in **The Libertarian as Conservative** that *"[t]he
time of your life is the one commodity you can sell but never buy back.
Murray Rothbard thinks egalitarianism is a revolt against nature, but
his day is 24 hours long, just like everybody else's."*

By twisting the language of political debate, the vast differences in
power in capitalist society can be "blamed" not on an unjust and
authoritarian system but on "biology" (we are all unique individuals,
after all). Unlike genes (although biotechnology corporations are
working on this, too!), human society **can** be changed, by the
individuals who comprise it, to reflect the basic features we all share
in common -- our humanity, our ability to think and feel, and our need
for freedom.

3.1 Why is this disregard for equality important?
-------------------------------------------------

Simply because a disregard for equality soon ends with liberty for the
majority being negated in many important ways. Most
"anarcho"-capitalists and right-Libertarians deny (or at best ignore)
market power. Rothbard, for example, claims that economic power does not
exist; what people call *"economic power"* is *"simply the right under
freedom to refuse to make an exchange"* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p.
222] and so the concept is meaningless.

However, the fact is that there are substantial power centres in society
(and so are the source of hierarchical power and authoritarian social
relations) which are **not the state.** The central fallacy of
"anarcho"-capitalism is the (unstated) assumption that the various
actors within an economy have relatively equal power. This assumption
has been noted by many readers of their works. For example, Peter
Marshall notes that *"'anarcho-capitalists' like Murray Rothbard assume
individuals would have equal bargaining power in a [capitalist]
market-based society"* [**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 46] George
Walford also makes this clear in his comments on David Friedman's **The
Machinery of Freedom**:

> *"The private ownership envisages by the anarcho-capitalists would be
> very different from that which we know. It is hardly going too far to
> say that while the one is nasty, the other would be nice. In
> anarcho-capitalism there would be no National Insurance, no Social
> Security, no National Health Service and not even anything
> corresponding to the Poor Laws; there would be no public safety-nets
> at all. It would be a rigorously competitive society: work, beg or
> die. But as one reads on, learning that each individual would have to
> buy, personally, all goods and services needed, not only food,
> clothing and shelter but also education, medicine, sanitation,
> justice, police, all forms of security and insurance, even permission
> to use the streets (for these also would be privately owned), as one
> reads about all this a curious feature emerges: everybody always has
> enough money to buy all these things.*
>
> "There are no public casual wards or hospitals or hospices, but
> neither is there anybody dying in the streets. There is no public
> educational system but no uneducated children, no public police
> service but nobody unable to buy the services of an efficient security
> firm, no public law but nobody unable to buy the use of a private
> legal system. Neither is there anybody able to buy much more than
> anybody else; no person or group possesses economic power over others.
>
> "No explanation is offered. The anarcho-capitalists simply take it for
> granted that in their favoured society, although it possesses no
> machinery for restraining competition (for this would need to exercise
> authority over the competitors and it is an **anarcho**- capitalist
> society) competition would not be carried to the point where anybody
> actually suffered from it. While proclaiming their system to be a
> competitive one, in which private interest rules unchecked, they show
> it operating as a co-operative one, in which no person or group
> profits at the cost of another." [**On the Capitalist Anarchists**]

This assumption of (relative) equality comes to the fore in Murray
Rothbard's "Homesteading" concept of property (discussed in section
[4.1](append134.html#secf41)). "Homesteading" paints a picture of
individuals and families doing into the wilderness to make a home for
themselves, fighting against the elements and so forth. It does **not**
invoke the idea of transnational corporations employing tens of
thousands of people or a population without land, resources and selling
their labour to others. Indeed, Rothbard argues that economic power does
not exist (at least under capitalism; as we saw in section
[2.1](append132.html#secf21) he does make -- highly illogical --
exceptions). Similarly, David Friedman's example of a pro-death penalty
and anti-death penalty "defence" firm coming to an agreement (see
section [6.3](append136.html#secf63)) assumes that the firms have equal
bargaining powers and resources -- if not, then the bargaining process
would be very one-sided and the smaller company would think twice before
taking on the larger one in battle (the likely outcome if they cannot
come to an agreement on this issue) and so compromise.

However, the right-libertarian denial of market power is unsurprising.
The necessity, not the redundancy, of equality is required if the
inherent problems of contract are not to become too obvious. If some
individuals **are** assumed to have significantly more power than
others, and if they are always self-interested, then a contract that
creates equal partners is impossible -- the pact will establish an
association of masters and servants. Needless to say, the strong will
present the contract as being to the advantage of both: the strong no
longer have to labour (and become rich, i.e. even stronger) and the weak
receive an income and so do not starve.

If freedom is considered as a function of ownership then it is very
clear that individuals lacking property (outside their own body, of
course) loses effective control over their own person and labour (which
was, lets not forget, the basis of their equal natural rights). When
ones bargaining power is weak (which is typically the case in the labour
market) exchanges tend to magnify inequalities of wealth and power over
time rather than working towards an equalisation.

In other words, "contract" need not replace power if the bargaining
position and wealth of the would-be contractors are not equal (for, if
the bargainers had equal power it is doubtful they would agree to sell
control of their liberty/time to another). This means that "power" and
"market" are not antithetical terms. While, in an abstract sense, all
market relations are voluntary in practice this is not the case within a
capitalist market. For example, a large company has a comparative
advantage over small ones and communities which will definitely shape
the outcome of any contract. For example, a large company or rich person
will have access to more funds and so stretch out litigations and
strikes until their opponents resources are exhausted. Or, if a local
company is polluting the environment, the local community may put up
with the damage caused out of fear that the industry (which it depends
upon) would relocate to another area. If members of the community
**did** sue, then the company would be merely exercising its property
rights when it threatened to move to another location. In such
circumstances, the community would "freely" consent to its conditions or
face massive economic and social disruption. And, similarly, *"the
landlords' agents who threaten to discharge agricultural workers and
tenants who failed to vote the reactionary ticket"* in the 1936 Spanish
election were just exercising their legitimate property rights when they
threatened working people and their families with economic uncertainty
and distress. [Murray Bookchin, **The Spanish Anarchists**, p. 260]

If we take the labour market, it is clear that the "buyers" and
"sellers" of labour power are rarely on an equal footing (if they were,
then capitalism would soon go into crisis -- see section
[10.2](append1310.html#secf102)). In fact, competition *"in labour
markets is typically skewed in favour of employers: it is a buyer's
market. And in a buyer's, it is the sellers who compromise."* [Juliet B.
Schor, **The Overworked American**, p. 129] Thus the ability to refuse
an exchange weights most heavily on one class than another and so
ensures that "free exchange" works to ensure the domination (and so
exploitation) of one party by the other.

Inequality in the market ensures that the decisions of the majority of
within it are shaped in accordance with that needs of the powerful, not
the needs of all. It was for this reason that the Individual Anarchist
J.K. Ingalls opposed Henry George's proposal of nationalising the land.
Ingalls was well aware that the rich could outbid the poor for leases on
land and so the dispossession of the working classes would continue.

The market, therefore, does not end power or unfreedom -- they are still
there, but in different forms. And for an exchange to be truly
voluntary, both parties must have equal power to accept, reject, or
influence its terms. Unfortunately, these conditions are rarely meet on
the labour market or within the capitalist market in general. Thus
Rothbard's argument that economic power does not exist fails to
acknowledge that the rich can out-bid the poor for resources and that a
corporation generally has greater ability to refuse a contract (with an
individual, union or community) than vice versa (and that the impact of
such a refusal is such that it will encourage the others involved to
"compromise" far sooner). And in such circumstances, formally free
individuals will have to "consent" to be unfree in order to survive.

As Max Stirner pointed out in the 1840s, free competition *"is not
'free,' because I lack the **things** for competition."* [**The Ego and
Its Own**, p. 262] Due to this basic inequality of wealth (of "things")
we find that *"[u]nder the **regime** of the commonality the labourers
always fall into the hands of the possessors . . . of the capitalists,
therefore. The labourer cannot **realise** on his labour to the extent
of the value that it has for the customer."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 115] Its
interesting to note that even Stirner recognises that capitalism results
in exploitation. And we may add that value the labourer does not
*"realise"* goes into the hands of the capitalists, who invest it in
more "things" and which consolidates and increases their advantage in
"free" competition.

To quote Stephan L. Newman:

> *"Another disquieting aspect of the libertarians' refusal to
> acknowledge power in the market is their failure to confront the
> tension between freedom and autonomy. . . Wage labour under capitalism
> is, of course, formally free labour. No one is forced to work at gun
> point. Economic circumstance, however, often has the effect of force;
> it compels the relatively poor to accept work under conditions
> dictated by owners and managers. The individual worker retains freedom
> [i.e. negative liberty] but loses autonomy [positive liberty]."*
> [**Liberalism at Wit's End**, pp. 122-123]

(As an aside, we should point out that the full Stirner quote cited
above is *"[u]nder the **regime** of the commonality the labourers
always fall into the hands of the possessors, of those who have at their
disposal some bit of the state domains (and everything possessible in
State domain belongs to the State and is only a fief of the individual),
especially money and land; of the capitalists, therefore. The labourer
cannot **realise** on his labour to the extent of the value that it has
for the customer."*

It could be argued that we misrepresenting Stirner by truncating the
quote, but we feel that such a claim this is incorrect. Its clear from
his book that Stirner is considering the "minimal" state (*"The State is
a - commoners' State . . . It protects man . . .according to whether the
rights entrusted to him by the State are enjoyed and managed in
accordance with the will, that is, laws, of the State."* The State
*"looks on indifferently as one grows poor and the other rich, unruffled
by this alternation. As **individuals** they are really equal before its
face."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 115, p. 252]). As "anarcho"-capitalists
consider their system to be one of rights and laws (particularly
property rights), we feel that its fair to generalise Stirner's comments
into capitalism **as such** as opposed to "minimum state" capitalism. If
we replace "State" by "libertarian law code" you will see what we mean.
We have included this aside before any right-libertarians claim that we
are misrepresenting Stirner' argument.)

If we consider "equality before the law" it is obvious that this also
has limitations in an (materially) unequal society. Brian Morris notes
that for Ayn Rand, *"[u]nder capitalism . . . politics (state) and
economics (capitalism) are separated . . . This, of course, is pure
ideology, for Rand's justification of the state is that it 'protects'
private property, that is, it supports and upholds the economic power of
capitalists by coercive means."* [**Ecology & Anarchism**, p. 189] The
same can be said of "anarcho"-capitalism and its "protection agencies"
and "general libertarian law code." If within a society a few own all
the resources and the majority are dispossessed, then any law code which
protects private property **automatically** empowers the owning class.
Workers will **always** be initiating force if act against the code and
so "equality before the law" reinforces inequality of power and wealth.

This means that a system of property rights protects the liberties of
some people in a way which gives them an unacceptable degree of power
over others. And this cannot be met merely by reaffirming the rights in
question, we have to assess the relative importance of various kinds of
liberty and other values we how dear.

Therefore right-libertarian disregard for equality is important because
it allows "anarcho"-capitalism to ignore many important restrictions of
freedom in society. In addition, it allows them to brush over the
negative effects of their system by painting an unreal picture of a
capitalist society without vast extremes of wealth and power (indeed,
they often construe capitalist society in terms of an ideal -- namely
artisan production -- that is really **pre**-capitalist and whose social
basis has been eroded by capitalist development). Inequality shapes the
decisions we have available and what ones we make:

> *"An 'incentive' is always available in conditions of substantial
> social inequality that ensure that the 'weak' enter into a contract.
> When social inequality prevails, questions arises about what counts as
> voluntary entry into a contract . . . Men and women . . . are now
> juridically free and equal citizens, but, in unequal social
> conditions, the possibility cannot be ruled out that some or many
> contracts create relationships that bear uncomfortable resemblances to
> a slave contract."* [Carole Pateman, **The Sexual Contract**, p. 62]

This ideological confusion of right-libertarianism can also be seen from
their opposition to taxation. On the one hand, they argue that taxation
is wrong because it takes money from those who "earn" it and gives it to
the poor. On the other hand, "free market" capitalism is assumed to be a
more equal society! If taxation takes from the rich and gives to the
poor, how will "anarcho"-capitalism be more egalitarian? That
equalisation mechanism would be gone (of course, it could be claimed
that all great riches are purely the result of state intervention
skewing the "free market" but that places all their "rags to riches"
stories in a strange position). Thus we have a problem, either we have
relative equality or we do not. Either we have riches, and so market
power, or we do not. And its clear from the likes of Rothbard,
"anarcho"-capitalism will not be without its millionaires (there is,
after all, apparently nothing un-libertarian about *"organisation,
hierarchy, wage-work, granting of funds by libertarian millionaires, and
a libertarian party"*). And so we are left with market power and so
extensive unfreedom.

Thus, for a ideology that denounces egalitarianism as a *"revolt against
nature"* it is pretty funny that they paint a picture of
"anarcho"-capitalism as a society of (relative) equals. In other words,
their propaganda is based on something that has never existed, and never
will, namely an egalitarian capitalist society.

3.2 But what about "anarcho"-capitalist support for charity?
------------------------------------------------------------

Yes, while being blind to impact of inequality in terms of economic and
social power and influence, most right-libertarians **do** argue that
the very poor could depend on charity in their system. But such a
recognition of poverty does not reflect an awareness of the need for
equality or the impact of inequality on the agreements we make. Quite
the reverse in fact, as the existence of extensive inequality is assumed
-- after all, in a society of relative equals, poverty would not exist,
nor would charity be needed.

Ignoring the fact that their ideology hardly promotes a charitable
perspective, we will raise four points. Firstly, charity will not be
enough to countermand the existence and impact of vast inequalities of
wealth (and so power). Secondly, it will be likely that charities will
be concerned with "improving" the moral quality of the poor and so will
divide them into the "deserving" (i.e. obedient) and "undeserving" (i.e.
rebellious) poor. Charity will be forthcoming to the former, those who
agree to busy-bodies sticking their noses into their lives. In this way
charity could become another tool of economic and social power (see
Oscar Wilde's **The Soul of Man Under Socialism** for more on charity).
Thirdly, it is unlikely that charity will be able to replace all the
social spending conducted by the state -- to do so would require a
ten-fold increase in charitable donations (and given that most
right-libertarians denounce the government for making them pay taxes to
help the poor, it seems unlikely that they will turn round and
**increase** the amount they give). And, lastly, charity is an implicate
recognition that, under capitalism, no one has the right of life -- its
a privilege you have to pay for. That in itself is enough to reject the
charity option. And, of course, in a system designed to secure the life
and liberty of each person, how can it be deemed acceptable to leave the
life and protection of even one individual to the charitable whims of
others? (Perhaps it will be argued that individual's have the right to
life, but not a right to be a parasite. This ignores the fact some
people **cannot** work -- babies and some handicapped people -- and
that, in a functioning capitalist economy, many people cannot find work
all the time. Is it this recognition of that babies cannot work that
prompts many right-libertarians to turn them into property? Of course,
rich folk who have never done a days work in their lives are never
classed as parasites, even if they inherited all their money). All
things considered, little wonder that Proudhon argued that:

> *"Even charitable institutions serve the ends of those in authority
> marvellously well.*
>
> "Charity is the strongest chain by which privilege and the Government,
> bound to protect them, holds down the lower classes. With charity,
> sweeter to the heart of men, more intelligible to the poor man than
> the abstruse laws of Political Economy, one may dispense with
> justice." [**The General Idea of the Revolution**, pp. 69-70]

As noted, the right-libertarian (passing) acknowledgement of poverty
does not mean that they recognise the existence of market power. They
never ask themselves how can someone be free if their social situation
is such that they are drowning in a see of usury and have to sell their
labour (and so liberty) to survive.
