Reply to errors and distortions in David McNally's pamphlet *"Socialism from Below"*
====================================================================================

Since this appendix was first written, David McNally has distanced
himself from his pamphlet's critique of anarchism. In an end-note in his
book **Another World Is Possible: Globalization & Anti-Capitalism** he
wrote:

> *"I dissent from Draper's one-sided critique of anarchism . . . Draper
> is not fair to some of the currents within social anarchism. I also
> reject my own restatement of Draper's interpretation in the first
> edition of my booklet **Socialism from Below**"* [David McNally,
> **Another World Is Possible**, p. 393]

While it seems unlikely this was in response to reading our critique, it
does show that it was correct. Unfortunately it took McNally over 20
years to acknowledge that his 1980 essay gave a distinctly distorted
account of anarchism. Perhaps significantly, McNally no longer seems to
be associated with the sister organisations of the British **Socialist
Workers Party** (a group whose distortions of anarchism are infamous).

McNally now argues that *"it may be more helpful to try and defend a
common political vision -- such as socialism from below or libertarian
socialism -- as a point of reference"* rather than fixate over labels
like "Marxism" or "anarchism." [**Op. Cit.**, p. 347] As we noted in our
critique of his 1980 pamphlet, the term *"socialism from below"* has a
distinctly anarchist feel to it, a feel distinctly at odds with Leninist
ideology and practice. Moreover, as shown below, Lenin explicitly
denounced *"from below"* as an anarchist idea -- and his practice once
in power showed that *"from above"* is part and parcel of Leninism in
action.

[AFAQ Blog has a
posting](http://anarchism.pageabode.com/afaq/afaq-critique-of-marxist-vindicated)
on this issue. In addition, many of the issues discussed in this
appendix are also explored in [section H](secHcon.html) of the FAQ and
that should also be consulted. This is particularly the case as that
section has been completed and revised after this appendix was
completed.

1. Introduction
---------------

In chapter three of his pamphlet *[Socialism from
Below](http://www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/contemp/pamsetc/socfrombel/sfb_main.htm)*,
David McNally decides to expose (what he calls) *"The Myth Of Anarchist
Libertarianism."* In reality, his account is so distorted and, indeed,
dishonest that all it proves is that Marxists will go to extreme lengths
to attack anarchist ideas. As Brain Morris points out, defending the
Leninist tradition and ideology *"implies . . . a compulsive need to
rubbish anarchism."* [**Ecology & Anarchism**, p. 128] McNally's
pamphlet is a classic example of this. As we will prove, his "case" is a
mish-mash of illogical assertions, lies and, when facts do appear, their
use is simply a means of painting a false picture of reality.

He begins by noting that *"Anarchism is often considered to represent
[a] current of radical thought that is truly democratic and libertarian.
It is hailed in some quarters as the only true political philosophy [of]
freedom."* Needless to say, he thinks that the *"reality is quite
different."* He argues that *"[f]rom its inception anarchism has been a
profoundly anti-democratic doctrine. Indeed the two most important
founders of anarchism, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Michael Bakunin,
developed theories that were elitist and authoritarian to the core."* We
will discover the truth of this assertion later. However, we must note
that McNally uses the typical Marxist approach to attacking anarchism --
namely to attack anarchists rather than anarchism as such. Indeed, he
lamely notes that *"[w]hile later anarchists may have abandoned some of
the excesses' of their founding fathers their philosophy remains hostile
to ideas of mass democracy and workers' power."* Thus, we have the
acknowledgement that not all anarchists share the same ideas and that
anarchist theory has developed since 1876 (the year of Bakunin's death).
This is to be expected as anarchists are not Proudhonists or Bakuninists
-- we do not name ourselves after one person, rather we take what is
useful from libertarian writers and ignore the rubbish. In Malatesta's
words, *"[w]e follow ideas and not men, and rebel against this habit of
embodying a principle in a man."* [**Life and Ideas**, p. 199] However,
this is beside the point as McNally's account of the anarchism of
Proudhon and Bakunin is simply false -- indeed, so false as to make you
wonder if he is simply incompetent as a scholar or seeks to present a
patchwork of lies as fact and "theory."

2. Is anarchism the politics of the *"small property owner"*?
-------------------------------------------------------------

McNally does start out by acknowledging that *"anarchism developed in
opposition to the growth of capitalist society. What's more, anarchist
hostility to capitalism centred on defence of the liberty of the
individual."* However, he then distorts this actual historical
development by arguing that *"the liberty defended by the anarchists was
not the freedom of the working class to make collectively a new society.
Rather, anarchism defended the freedom of the small property owner --
the shopkeeper, artisan and tradesman -- against the encroachments of
large-scale capitalist enterprise."*

Such a position is, to say the least, a total distortion of the facts of
the situation. Proudhon, for example, addressed himself to both the
peasant/artisan and the proletariat. He argued in **What is Property?**
that he *"preach[ed] emancipation to the proletaires; association to the
labourers."* [p. 137] Thus Proudhon addressed himself to both the
peasant/artisan and the "working class" (i.e. wage slaves). This is to
be expected from a **libertarian** form of socialism as, at the time of
his writing, the majority of working people **were** peasants and
artisans . Indeed, this predominance of artisan/peasant workers in the
French economy lasted until the turn of the century. Not to take into
account the artisan/peasant would have meant the dictatorship of a
minority of working people over the rest of them. Given that in chapter
4 of his pamphlet McNally states that Marxism aims for a *"democratic
and collective society . . . based upon the fullest possible political
democracy"* his attack on Proudhon's concern for the artisan and peasant
is doubly strange. Either you support the *"fullest possible political
democracy"* (and so your theory must take into account artisans and
peasants) or you restrict political democracy and replace it with rule
by the few.

Thus Proudhon **did** support the *"the freedom of the working class to
make collectively a new society."* His ideas were aimed at both
artisan/peasant and proletarian. Moreover, this position was a
distinctly sensible and radical position to take:

> "While Marx was correct in predicting the eventual predominance of the
> industrial proletariat vis-à-vis skilled workers, such predominance
> was neither obvious nor a foregone conclusion in France during the
> nineteenth century. The absolute number of small industries even
> increased during most of the century. . .
> Nor does Marx seem to have been correct concerning the revolutionary
> nature of the industrial proletariat. It has become a cliché of French
> labour history that during the nineteenth century artisans were much
> oftener radical than industrial workers. Some of the most militant
> action of workers in late nineteenth century France seems to have
> emerged from the co-operation of skilled, urbanised artisanal workers
> with less highly skilled and less urbanised industrial workers." [K.
> Steven Vincent, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and the Rise of French
> Republican Socialism**, pp. 282-3]

The fruits of this union included the Paris Commune (an event both
McNally and Marx praise -- see [section 12](append31.html#app12) for
more discussion on this). In addition, as we will see, Proudhon's
proposals for a mutualist society included workers self-management and
collective ownership of large scale workplaces as well as artisan and
peasant production. This proposal existed **explicitly** for the
proletariat, for wage slaves, and **explicitly** aimed to end wage
labour and replace it by association and self-management (Proudhon
stated that he aimed for *"the complete emancipation of the worker . . .
the abolition of the wage worker."* [quoted by Vincent, **Op. Cit.**, p.
222]). Thus, rather than being backward looking and aimed at the
artisan/peasant, Proudhon's ideas looked to the present (and so the
future) and to both the artisan/peasant **and** proletariat (i.e. to the
**whole** of the working class in France at the time).

In the words of Gustav Landauer, Proudhon's *"socialism . . . of the
years 1848 to 1851 was the socialism of the French people in the years
1848 to 1851. It was the socialism that was possible and necessary at
that moment. Proudhon was not a Utopian and a prophet; not a Fourier and
not a Marx. He was a man of action and realisation."* [**For
Socialism**, p. 108] Vincent makes the same point, arguing that
Proudhon's *"social theories may not be reduced to a socialism for only
the peasant class, nor was it a socialism only for the petite bourgeois;
it was a socialism of and for French workers. And in the mid-nineteenth
century . . . most French workers were still artisans. . . French labour
ideology largely resulted from the real social experiences and
aspirations of skilled workers . . . Proudhon's thought was rooted in
the same fundamental reality, and therefore understandably shared many
of the same hopes and ideals."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 5-6] It is no
coincidence, therefore, that when he was elected to the French
Parliament in 1848 most of the votes cast for him were from *"working
class districts of Paris -- a fact which stands in contrast to the
claims of some Marxists, who have said he was representative only of the
petite bourgeoisie."* [Robert L. Hoffman, quoted by Robert Graham,
*"Introduction"*, P-J Proudhon, **General Idea of the Revolution**, p.
xv]

Given that his proposals were aimed at the whole working class, it is
unsurprising that Proudhon saw social change as coming from *"below"* by
the collective action of the working class:

> *"If you possess social science, you know that the problem of
> association consists in organising . . . the producers, and by this
> organisation subjecting capital and subordinating power. Such is the
> war that you have to sustain: a war of labour against capital; a war
> of liberty against authority; a war of the producer against the
> non-producer; a war of equality against privilege . . . to conduct the
> war to a successful conclusion, . . . it is of no use to change the
> holders of power or introduce some variation into its workings: an
> agricultural and industrial combination must be found by means of
> which power, today the ruler of society, shall become its slave."*
> [**System of Economical Contradictions**, pp. 397-8]

In the same work he continues his discussion of proletarian
self-organisation as the means of social change:

> *"Thus power [i.e. the state] . . . finds itself inevitably enchained
> to capital and directed against the proletariat. . . The problem
> before the labouring classes, then, consists, not in capturing, but in
> subduing both power and monopoly, -- that is, in generating from the
> bowels of the people, from the depths of labour, a greater authority,
> a more potent fact, which shall envelop capital and the State and
> subjugate them. Every proposition of reform which does not satisfy
> this condition is simply one scourge more . . . which threatens the
> proletariat."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 399]

Little wonder Proudhon saw the validity of his mutualist vision from the
self-activity of French workers (see [section A.1.5](secA1.html#seca15)
for details). Where Proudhon differs from later anarchists like Bakunin,
Kropotkin, Malatesta and Goldman is that this self-activity is reformist
in nature, that is seeking alternatives to capitalism which can reform
it away rather than alternatives that can fight and destroy it. Thus
Proudhon places his ideas firmly in the actions of working people
resisting wage slavery (i.e. the proletariat, **not** the *"small
property owner"*).

Similarly with Bakunin. He argued that *"revolution is only sincere,
honest and real in the hands of the masses"* and so socialism can be
achieved *"by the development and organisation, not of the political but
of the social (and, by consequence, anti-political) power of the working
masses . . . . organise[d] and federate[d] spontaneously, freely, from
the bottom up, by their own momentum according to their real interest,
but never according to any plan laid down in advance and imposed upon
the **ignorant masses** by some superior intellects."* Such a socialist
society would be based on *"the collective ownership of producers'
associations, freely organised and federated in the communes, and by the
equally spontaneous federation of these communes."* Thus *"the land, the
instruments of work and all other capital [will] become the collective
property of the whole of society and be utilised only by the workers, in
other words by the agricultural and industrial associations."* And the
means to this socialist society? Trade unionism (*"the complete
solidarity of individuals, sections and federations in the economic
struggle of the workers of all countries against their exploiters."*)
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 237, pp. 197-8, p. 197, p.
174 and p. 177] Indeed, he considered trade unions (organised from the
bottom up, of course) as *"the natural organisation of the masses"* and
thought that *"workers' solidarity in their struggle against the bosses
. . . [by] **trades-unions, organisation, and the federation of
resistance funds**"* was the means by which workers could emancipate
itself *"**through practical action.**"* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 139
and p. 103]

And McNally asserts that *"the liberty defended by the anarchists was
not the freedom of the working class to make collectively a new
society"*! Only someone ignorant of anarchist theory or with a desire to
deceive could make such an assertion.

Needless to say, McNally's claim that anarchism is the politics of the
*"small property owner"* would be even harder to justify if he mentioned
Kropotkin's **communist** anarchism. However, like Proudhon's and
Bakunin's support for collective ownership by workers associations it
goes unmentioned -- for obvious reasons.

3. Does anarchism *"glorify values from the past"*?
---------------------------------------------------

McNally continues. He asserts, regardless of the facts, that anarchism
*"represented the anguished cry of the small property owner against the
inevitable advance of capitalism. For that reason, it glorified values
from the past: individual property, the patriarchal family, racism."*

Firstly, we should note that unlike Marx, anarchists did not think that
capitalism was inevitable or an essential phase society had to go
through before we could reach a free society. They did not share Marx's
viewpoint that socialism (and the struggle for socialism) had to be
postponed until capitalism had developed sufficiently so that the
*"centralisation of the means of production and the socialisation [sic!]
of labour reach a point at which they become incompatible with their
capitalist integument."* [Karl Marx, **Capital**, vol. 1, p. 929] As
McNally states, socialism was once the *"banner under which millions of
working people resisted the horrors of the factory system and demanded a
new society of equality, justice, freedom and prosperity."*
Unfortunately, the Marxist tradition viewed such horrors as essential,
unavoidable and inevitable and any form of working class struggle --
such as the Luddites -- which resisted the development of capitalism was
denounced. So much for Marxism being in favour of working class
*"self-emancipation"* -- if working class resistance to oppression and
exploitation which does not fit into its scheme for "working class
self-emancipation" then it is the product of ignorance or non-working
class influences.

Thus, rather than representing *"the anguished cry of the small property
owner against the inevitable advance of capitalism"* anarchism is rather
the cry of the oppressed against capitalism and the desire to create a
free society in the here and now and not some time in the future. To
quote Landauer again:

> *"Karl Marx and his successors thought they could make no worse
> accusation against the greatest of all socialists, Proudhon, than to
> call him a petit-bourgeois and petit-peasant socialist, which was
> neither incorrect nor insulting, since Proudhon showed splendidly to
> the people of his nation and his time, predominately small farmers and
> craftsmen, how they could achieve socialism immediately without
> waiting for the tidy process of big capitalism."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
> 61]

Thus McNally confuses a desire to achieve socialism with backward
looking opposition to capitalism. As we will see, Proudhon looked at the
current state of society, not backwards, as McNally suggests, and his
theory reflected both artisan/peasant interests and those of wage slaves
-- as would be expected from a socialist aiming to transform his society
to a free one. The disastrous results of Bolshevik rule in Russia should
indicate the dangers of ignoring the vast bulk of a nation (i.e. the
peasants) when trying to create a revolutionary change in society.

Secondly, it is not really true that Proudhon or Bakunin "glorified"
"individual property" as such. Proudhon argued that *"property is
theft"* and that *"property is despotism."* He was well aware of the
negative side effects of individual property. Rather he wanted to
abolish property and replace it with possession. We doubt that McNally
wants to socialise **all** *"property"* (including individual
possessions and such like). We are sure that he, like Marx and Engels,
wants to retain individual possessions in a socialist society. Thus they
state that the *"distinguishing feature of Communism is not the
abolition of property generally, but the abolition of bourgeois
property"* and that *"Communism deprives no man of the power to
appropriate the products of society; all that it does is to deprive him
of the power to subjugate the labour of others by means of such
appropriation."* [**The Manifesto of the Communist Party**, p.47 and p.
49] Later Marx argued that the Paris Commune *"wanted to make individual
property a truth by transforming the means of production, land and
capital . . . into mere instruments of free and associated labour."*
[**Selected Writings**, pp. 290-1]

Thus support for *"individual property"* is not confined to Proudhon
(and we must note that Proudhon desired to turn capital over to
associated labour as well -- see [section A.5.1](secA5.html#seca51) for
Proudhon's influence in the economic measures made during the Commune to
create co-operatives).

Indeed, initially Marx had nothing but praise for Proudhon's critique of
Property contained in his classic work **What is Property?**:

> *"Not only does Proudhon write in the interest of the proletarians he
> is himself a proletarian, an ouvrier. His work is a scientific
> manifesto of the French proletariat."* [quoted by Rudolf Rocker,
> **Marx and Anarchism**]

As Rocker argues, Marx changed his tune simply to *"conceal from
everyone just what he owed to Proudhon and any means to that end was
admissible."* This can be seen from the comments we quote above which
clearly show a Proudhonian influence in their recognition that
possession replaces property in a socialist society and that associated
labour is its economic basis. However, it is still significant that
Proudhon's analysis initially provoked such praise by Marx -- an
analysis which McNally obviously does not understand.

It is true that Proudhon did oppose the socialisation of artisan and
peasant workplaces. He considered having control over the means of
production, housing, etc. by those who use it as a key means of
maintaining freedom and independence. However, Proudhon also called for
*"democratically organised workers' associations"* to run large-scale
industry in his 1848 Election Manifesto. [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol.
1, p. 62] This aspect of his ideas is continual throughout his political
works and played a central role in his social theory. Thus to say that
Proudhon "glorified" "individual property" distorts his position. And as
the experience of workers under Lenin indicates, collective ownership by
the state does not end wage labour, exploitation and oppression.
Proudhon's arguments in favour of possession and against capitalist
**and** state ownership were proven right by Bolshevik Russia --state
ownership did lead to *"more wage slavery."* [**Ibid.**] As the forced
collectivisation of the peasantry under Stalin shows, Proudhon's respect
for artisan/peasant possessions was a very sensible and humane position
to take. Unless McNally supports the forced collectivisation of peasants
and artisans, Proudhon's solution is one of the few positions a
socialist can take.

Moving on from Proudhon, we discover even less support for "individual
property." Bakunin, for example, was totally in favour of collective
property and opposed individual property in the means of life. As he put
it, *"the land, the instruments of work and all other capital [will]
become the collective property of society and by utilised only by the
workers, in other words by the agricultural and industrial
associations."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 174] With
regards to peasants and artisans Bakunin desired **voluntary**
collectivisation. *"In a free community,"* he argued, *"collectivism can
only come about through the pressure of circumstances, not by imposition
from above but by a free spontaneous movement from below."* [**Bakunin
on Anarchism**, p. 200]). Thus, rather than being a defender of
"individual property" Bakunin was in fact a supporter of **collective**
property (as organised in workers' associations and communes) and
supported peasant and artisan property only in the sense of being
against forced collectivisation (which would result in *"propelling [the
peasants] into the camp of reaction."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 197]).

Hence Daniel Guerin's comments:

> *"Proudhon and Bakunin were 'collectivists,' which is to say they
> declared themselves without equivocation in favour of the common
> exploitation, not by the State but by associated workers of the
> large-scale means of production and of the public services. Proudhon
> has been quite wrongly presented as an exclusive enthusiast of private
> property. . . At the Bale congress [of the First International] in
> 1869, Bakunin . . . all[ied] himself with the statist Marxists . . .
> to ensure the triumph of the principle of collective property."*
> [*"From Proudhon to Bakunin"*, **The Radical Papers**, Dimitrios I.
> Roussopoulos (ed.), p.32]

Similarly, while it is true that Proudhon **did** glorify the
patriarchal family, the same cannot be said of Bakunin. Unlike Proudhon,
Bakunin argued that *"[e]qual rights must belong to both men and
women,"* that women must *"become independent and free to forge their
own way of life"* and that *"[o]nly when private property and the State
will have been abolished will the authoritarian juridical family
disappear."* He opposed the *"absolute domination of the man"* in
marriage, urged *"the full sexual freedom of women"* and argued that the
cause of women's liberation was *"indissolubly tied to the common cause
of all the exploited workers -- men and women."* [**Bakunin on
Anarchism**, pp. 396-7] Hardly what would be considered as the
glorification of the patriarchal family -- and a position shared by
Kropotkin, Malatesta, Berkman, Goldman, Chomsky and Ward. Thus to state
that "anarchism" glorifies the patriarchal family simply staggers
belief. Only someone ignorant of both logic and anarchist theory could
make such an assertion. We could make similar remarks with regards to
the glorification of racism (as Robert Graham points out *"anti-semitism
formed no part of Proudhon's revolutionary programme."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. xxxvi] The same can be said of Bakunin).

4. Why are McNally's comments on Proudhon a distortion of his ideas?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

McNally now attempts to provide some evidence for his remarks. He turns
to Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, *"widely proclaimed 'the father of
anarchism.'"* As he correctly notes, he was a *"printer by vocation"*
and that he *"strongly opposed the emergence of capitalism in France."*
However, McNally claims that Proudhon's *"opposition to capitalism was
largely backward-looking in character"* as he *"did not look forward to
a new society founded upon communal property which would utilise the
greatest inventions of the industrial revolution. Instead, Proudhon
considered small, private property the basis of his utopia. His was a
doctrine designed not for the emerging working class, but for the
disappearing petit bourgeoisie of craftsmen, small traders and rich
peasants."* Unfortunately McNally has got his facts wrong. It is well
known that this was not the case (which is why McNally used the words
*"largely backward-looking"* -- he is aware of facts but instead
downplays them).

If you look at Proudhon's writings, rather than what Marx and Engels
**claimed** he wrote, it will soon be discovered that Proudhon in fact
**favoured** collective ownership of large scale industry by workers'
associations. He argued for *"the mines, canals, railways handed over to
democratically organised workers' associations . . . We want these
associations to be models for agriculture, industry and trade, the
pioneering core of that vast federation of companies and societies woven
into the common cloth of the democratic social Republic."* [**No Gods,
No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 62] Three years later he stressed that
*"[e]very industry, operation or enterprise which by its nature requires
the employment of a large number of workmen of different specialities,
is destined to become a society or company of workers."* [**The General
Idea of the Revolution**, p. 216] This argument for workers'
self-management and collective ownership follows on from his earlier
comment in 1840 that *"leaders"* within industry *"must be chosen from
the labourers by the labourers themselves."* [**What is Property?**, p.
414]

Rather than base his utopia on *"small, private property"* Proudhon
based it on the actual state of the French economy -- one marked by both
artisan and large-scale production. The later he desired to see
transformed into the collective property of workers' associations and
placed under workers' self-management. The former, as it did not involve
wage-labour, he supported as being non-capitalist. Thus his ideas were
aimed at both the artisan and the appearing class of wage slaves.
Moreover, rather than dismiss the idea of large-scale industry in favour
of *"small, private property"* Proudhon argued that *"[l]arge industry .
. . come to us by big monopoly and big property: it is necessary in the
future to make them rise from the [labour] association."* [quoted by K.
Steven Vincent, **Proudhon and the Rise of French Republican
Socialism**, p. 156] As Vincent correctly summarises:

> *"On this issue, it is necessary to emphasise that, contrary to the
> general image given on the secondary literature, Proudhon was not
> hostile to large industry. Clearly, he objected to many aspects of
> what these large enterprises had introduced into society. For example,
> Proudhon strenuously opposed the degrading character of . . . work
> which required an individual to repeat one minor function
> continuously. But he was not opposed in principle to large-scale
> production. What he desired was to humanise such production, to
> socialise it so that the worker would not be the mere appendage to a
> machine. Such a humanisation of large industries would result,
> according to Proudhon, from the introduction of strong workers'
> associations. These associations would enable the workers to determine
> jointly by election how the enterprise was to be directed and operated
> on a day-to-day basis."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 156]

As can be seen, McNally distorts Proudhon's ideas on this question.

McNally correctly states that Proudhon *"oppose[d] trade unions."* While
it is true that Proudhon opposed strikes as counter-productive as well
as trade unions, this cannot be said of Bakunin, Kropotkin, Goldman, and
so on. Bakunin, for example, considered trade unions as truest means of
expressing the power of the working class and strikes as a sign of their
*"collective strength."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, pp. 149-50] Why should
Proudhon (the odd man out in anarchist theory with regards to this
issue) be taken as defining that theory? Such an argument is simply
dishonest and presents a false picture of anarchist theory.

Next McNally states that Proudhon *"violently opposed democracy"* and
presents a series of non-referenced quotes to prove his case. Such a
technique is useful for McNally as it allows him quote Proudhon without
regard to when and where Proudhon made these comments and the context in
which they were made. It is well known, for example, that Proudhon went
through a reactionary phrase roughly between 1852 and 1862 and so any
quotes from this period would be at odds with his anarchist works. As
Daniel Guerin notes:

> "Many of these masters were not anarchists throughout their lives and
> their complete works include passages which have nothing to do with
> anarchism.
> "To take an example: in the second part of his career Proudhon's
> thinking took a conservative turn." [**Anarchism**, p. 6]

Similarly, McNally fails to quote the many statements Proudhon made in
favour of democracy. Why should the anti-democratic quotes represent
anarchism and not the pro-democratic ones? Which ones are more in line
with anarchist theory and practice? Surely the pro-democratic ones.
Hence we find Proudhon arguing that *"[i]n democratising us, revolution
has launched us on the path of industrial democracy"* and that his
People's Bank *"embodies the financial and economic aspects of modern
democracy, that is, the sovereignty of the People, and of the republican
motto, **Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.**"* We have already mentioned
Proudhon's support for workers' self-management of production and his
People's Bank was also democratic in nature -- *"A committee of thirty
representatives shall be set up to see to the management of the Bank . .
. They will be chosen by the General Meeting . . . [which] shall consist
of not more than one thousand nominees of the general body of associates
and subscribers . . . elected according to industrial categories and in
proportion to the number of subscribers and representatives there are in
each category."* [**Selected Writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p.
63, p. 75 and p. 79] Thus, instead of bourgeois democracy Proudhon
proposes industrial and communal democracy:

> *"In place of laws, we will put contracts [i.e. free agreement]. -- No
> more laws voted by a majority, nor even unanimously; each citizen,
> each town, each industrial union, makes its own laws."* [**The General
> Idea of the Revolution**, pp. 245-6]
>
> *"If political right is inherent in man and citizen, consequently if
> suffrage ought to be direct, the same right is inherent as well, so
> much the more so, for each corporation [i.e. self-managed industry],
> for each commune or city, and the suffrage in each of these groups,
> ought to be equally direct."* [quoted by K. Steven Vincent, **Op.
> Cit.**, p. 219]
>
> *"In order that the association may be real, he who participates in it
> must do so . . . as an active factor; he must have a deliberative
> voice in the council . . . everything regarding him, in short, should
> be regulated in accordance with equality. But these conditions are
> precisely those of the organisation of labour."* [quoted by K. Steven
> Vincent, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 155-6]

Do these quotes suggest a man *"violently opposed [to] democracy"*? Of
course not. Nor does McNally quote Proudhon when he stated that
*"[b]esides universal suffrage and as a consequence of universal
suffrage, we want implementation of the binding mandate. Politicians
bulk at it! Which means that in their eyes, the people, in electing
representatives, do not appoint mandatories but rather abjure their
sovereignty! That is assuredly not socialism: it is not even
democracy."* He also supported freedom of association, assembly,
religion, of the press and of thought and speech. [**No Gods, No
Masters**, vol. 1, p. 63] Nor does McNally note Proudhon's aim of (and
use of the term) *"industrial democracy"* which would be *"a
reorganisation of industry, under the jurisdiction of all those who
compose it."* [quoted by Vincent, **Op. Cit.**, p. 225] As can be seen,
Proudhon's position on democracy is not quite what McNally suggests.

Thus McNally presents a distorted picture of Proudhon's ideas and thus
leads the reader to conclusions about anarchism violently at odds with
its real nature. It is somewhat ironic that McNally attacks Proudhon for
being anti-democratic. After all, as we indicate in [section
8](append31.html#app8) below, the Leninist tradition in which he places
himself has a distinct contempt for democracy and, in practice,
destroyed it in favour of party dictatorship.

Lastly, McNally states that Proudhon *"opposed emancipation for the
American blacks and backed the cause of the southern slave owners during
the American Civil War."* In fact, the American Civil War had very
little to do with slavery and far more to do with conflicts within the
US ruling class. Proudhon opposed the North simply because he feared the
centralisation that such a victory would create. He did not *"tolerate"*
slavery. As he wrote in **The Principle of Federation** *"the
enslavement of part of a nation denies the federal principle itself."*
[p. 42f] Moreover, what are we to draw from Proudhon's position with
regards the American Civil War about anarchism? Bakunin supported the
North (a fact unmentioned by McNally). Why is Proudhon's position an
example of anarchism in practice and not Bakunin's? Could it be that
rather than attack anarchism, McNally attacks anarchists?

Also, it is somewhat ironic that McNally mentions Proudhon's "support"
for the South as the Leninist tradition he places his own politics is
renown for supporting various dictatorships during wars. For example,
during the Vietnam war the various Leninist groups called for victory to
North Vietnam, a Stalinist dictatorship. During the Gulf War, they
called for victory to Iraq, another dictatorship. In other words, they
"tolerated" and "supported" anti-working class regimes, dictatorships
and repression of democracy. They stress that they do not politically
support these regimes, rather they wish these states to win in order to
defeat the greater evil of imperialism. In practice, of course, such a
division is hard to defend -- for a state to win a war it must repress
its own working class and so, in calling for a victory for a
dictatorship, they must support the repression and actions that state
requires to win the war. After all, an explosion of resistance, class
struggle and revolt in the "lesser imperialist power" will undermine its
war machine and so lead to its defeat. Hence the notion that such calls
do not mean support for the regime is false. Hence McNally's comments
against Proudhon smack of hypocrisy -- his political tradition have done
similar things and sided with repressive dictatorships during wars in
the name of political aims and theory. In contrast, anarchists have
consistently raised the idea of **"No war but the class war"** in such
conflicts (see [section A.3.4](secA3.html#seca34)).

5. Why are McNally's comments on Bakunin a distortion of his ideas?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

McNally then moves on to Bakunin whom he states *"shared most of
Proudhon's views."* The truth is somewhat different. Unlike Proudhon,
Bakunin supported trade unions and strikes, equality for women,
revolution and far more extensive collectivisation of property. In fact,
rather than share most of his views, Bakunin disagreed with Proudhon on
many subjects. He did share Proudhon's support for industrial
self-management, self-organisation in self-managed workers' associations
from below, his hatred of capitalism and his vision of a decentralised,
libertarian socialist society. It is true that, as McNally notes,
*"Bakunin shared [Proudhon's] anti-semitism"* but he fails to mention
Marx and Engels' many racist remarks against Slavs and other peoples.
Also it is not true that Bakunin *"was a Great Russian chauvinist
convinced that the Russians were ordained to lead humanity into
anarchist utopia."* Rather, Bakunin (being Russian) hoped Russia would
have a libertarian revolution, but he also hoped the same for France,
Spain, Italy and all countries in Europe (indeed, the world). Rather
than being a *"Great Russian chauvinist"* Bakunin opposed the Russian
Empire (he wished *"the destruction of the Empire of All the Russias"*
[**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 162]) and supported national liberation
struggles of nationalities oppressed by Russia (and any other
imperialist nation).

McNally moves on to Bakunin's on revolutionary organisation methods,
stating that they *"were overwhelmingly elitist and authoritarian."* We
have discussed this question in some detail in section J.3.7 ([Doesn't
Bakunin's *"Invisible Dictatorship"* prove that anarchists are secret
authoritarians?](secJ3.html#secj37)) and so will not do so here.
However, we should point out that Bakunin's viewpoints on the
organisational methods of mass working class organisations and those of
political groupings were somewhat different.

The aim of the political grouping was to exercise a *"natural
influence"* on the members of working class unions and associations,
seeking to convince them of the validity of anarchist ideas. The
political group did not aim to seize political power (unlike Marxists)
and so it *"rule[d] out any idea of dictatorship and custodial
control."* Rather the *"revolution would be created by the people, and
supreme control must always belong to the people organised into a free
federation of agricultural and industrial associations . . . organised
from below upwards by means of revolutionary delegation."* All the
political group could do was to *"assist the birth of the revolution by
sowing ideas corresponding to the instincts of the masses . . . [and
act] as intermediaries between the revolutionary idea and the popular
instinct."* The political group thus *"help[s] the people towards
self-determination on the lines of the most complete equality and the
fullest freedom in every direction, without the least interference from
any sort of domination."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p.
172 and p. 191]

As regards the forms of popular organisations Bakunin favoured, he was
clear it would be based on *"factory, artisan, and agrarian sections"*
and their federations [**Statism and Anarchy**, p. 51]. In other words,
trade unions organised from the bottom up and based upon self-management
in *"general membership meetings . . . [i.e.] popular assembles . . .
[where] the items on the agenda were amply discussed and the most
progressive opinion prevailed."* The *"federative alliance of all the
workers' associations . . . will constitute the commune . . . [with]
deputies invested with imperative, always responsible, and always
revocable mandates."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 247 and p. 153]

Given McNally's praise of the Paris Commune and the Russian soviets, it
seems strange that Bakunin's comments with regards to revolutionary
social organisation with its obvious parallels to both should not be
mentioned by McNally. Perhaps because to do so would totally undermine
his case? Thus rather than being *"overwhelmingly elitist and
authoritarian"* Bakunin's ideas on a future society bar marked
similarities to the actual structures created by working people in
struggle and are marked by libertarian and self-managed visions and
concepts -- as anyone familiar with Bakunin's work would know.

McNally then quotes *"one historian"* on Bakunin (not even providing a
name makes evaluating the accuracy of the historian's work impossible
and so leaves the reader in the dark as to whether the historian does
provide a valid account of Bakunin's ideas). The unnamed author states
that:

> *"The International Brotherhood he founded in Naples in 1865-66 was as
> conspiratorial and dictatorial as he could make it, for Bakunin's
> libertarianism stopped short of the notion of permitting anyone to
> contradict him. The Brotherhood was conceived on the Masonic model,
> with elaborate rituals, a hierarchy, and a self-appointed directory
> consisting of Bakunin and a few associates."*

However, as we argue in [section J.3.7](secJ3.html#secj37), this
description of Bakunin's secret societies is so distorted as to be
useless. To point to just **two** examples, the historian T.R.
Ravindranathan indicates that after the Alliance was founded *"Bakunin
wanted the Alliance to become a branch of the International [Worker's
Association] and at the same time preserve it as a secret society. The
Italian and some French members wanted the Alliance to be totally
independent of the IWA and objected to Bakunin's secrecy. Bakunin's view
prevailed on the first question as he succeeded in convincing the
majority of the harmful effects of a rivalry between the Alliance and
the International. On the question of secrecy, he gave way to his
opponents. . ."* [**Bakunin and the Italians**, p. 83] Moreover, the
Spanish section of the Alliance *"survived Bakunin . . . yet with few
exceptions it continued to function in much the same way as it had done
during Bakunin's lifetime."* [George R. Esenwein, **Anarchist Ideology
and the Working Class Movement in Spain**, p. 43] Hardly what you would
expect if McNally's vision was accurate.

In summary, McNally's comments are a distortion of Bakunin's ideas and
activities. McNally represents a distorted picture of one aspect of
Bakunin's ideas while ignoring those aspects which support working class
self-organisation and self-management.

6. Are the *"quirks of personality"* of Proudhon and Bakunin listed by McNally actually rooted *"in the very nature of anarchist doctrine"*?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After chronicling the failings and distorting the facts of two
individuals, McNally tries to generalise. *"These characteristics of
Bakunin and Proudhon,"* he argues, *"were not mere quirks of
personality. Their elitism, authoritarianism and support for
backward-looking and narrow-minded causes are rooted in the very nature
of anarchist doctrine."* Thus McNally claims that these failings of
Proudhon and Bakunin are not personal failings but rather political.
They represent the reactionary core of anarchist politics. However, his
position leaves something to be desired. For example, the question
remains, however, why, say, Proudhon's support of the South during the
American Civil War is an example of *"anarchist doctrine"* while
Bakunin's support of the North is not. Or why Proudhon's opposition to
trade unions and strikes is an example of "anarchist doctrine" while
Bakunin's (and Kropotkin's, Malatesta's, Berkman's, Goldman's, etc)
support for strikes and union organisation is not. Or why Proudhon's
sexism is another example but Bakunin's, Kropotkin's, Goldman's,
Malatesta's, et al support for women's equality is not. Indeed, rather
than take examples which are common to anarchist theorists McNally takes
only those positions held by one, at most two, major anarchist thinkers
(positions tangential to the core of their ideas and, indeed, directly
opposed to them). From this minority of examples he generalises a theory
-- and so violates the basic principles of the scientific method!

These examples in themselves prove the weakness of McNally's claims and
the low levels of scholarship which lay behind them. Indeed, it is
amazing that the SWP/ISO printed this diatribe -- it obviously shows
their contempt for facts, history and the intelligence of their desired
audience.

7. Are anarchists against democracy?
------------------------------------

McNally goes onto assert the following:

> *"Originating in the revolt of small property owners against the
> centralising and collectivising trends in capitalist development (the
> tendency to concentrate production in fewer and fewer large
> workplaces), anarchism has always been rooted in a hostility to
> democratic and collectivist practices. The early anarchists feared the
> organised power of the modern working class."*

We have already refuted the claim that the *"early anarchists feared the
organised power of the modern working class."* We will now indicate why
McNally is wrong to claim that anarchists express *"hostility to
democratic and collectivist practices."*

As indicated above Proudhon supported collective ownership and
management of large-scale workplaces (i.e. those which employ
wage-slaves under capitalism). Thus he clearly was in favour of economic
direct democracy and collective decision making by groups of workers.
Similarly, Bakunin also supported workers' productive associations like
co-operatives and envisioned a free society as being based on workers'
collective ownership and the self-management of production by the
workers themselves. In addition, he supported trade unions and saw the
future society as being based on federations of workers' associations.
To claim that anarchists are hostile to democratic and collectivist
practices is simply not true. As would be clear to anyone reading their
works.

McNally then asserts that *"[t]o this day, most anarchists defend the
'liberty' of the private individual against the democratically made
decisions of collective groups."* Here McNally takes a grain of truth to
create a lie. Yes, anarchists **do** defend the liberty of individuals
to rebel against the decisions of collective groups (we should point out
that Marxists usually use such expressions as a euphemism for the state,
but here we will take it at face value). Why? For two reasons. Firstly,
the majority is not always right. Secondly, simply because progress is
guaranteed by individual liberty -- by **dissent.** That is what McNally
is attacking here -- the right of individuals and groups to dissent, to
express themselves and live their own lives.

As we argue in [section A.2.11](secA2.html#seca211), most anarchists are
in favour of direct democracy in free associations. However, we agree
with Carole Pateman when she argues:

> *"The essence of liberal social contract theory is that individuals
> ought to promise to, or enter an agreement to, obey representatives,
> to whom they have alienated their right to make political decisions .
> . . Promising . . . is an expression of individual freedom and
> equality, yet commits individuals for the future. Promising also
> implies that individuals are capable of independent judgement and
> rational deliberation, and of evaluating and changing their own
> actions and relationships; promises may sometimes justifiably be
> broken. However, to promise to obey is to deny or limit, to a greater
> or lesser degree, individuals' freedom and equality and their ability
> to exercise these capacities. To promise to obey is to state that, in
> certain areas, the person making the promise is no longer free to
> exercise her capacities and decide upon her own actions, and is no
> longer equal, but subordinate."* [**The Problem of Political
> Obligation**, p. 19]

Thus, for anarchists, a democracy which does not involve individual
rights to dissent, to disagree and to practice civil disobedience would
violate freedom and equality, the very values McNally claims to be at
the heart of Marxism. He is essentially arguing that the minority
becomes the slave of the majority -- with no right of dissent when the
majority is wrong. In effect, he wishes the minority to be subordinate,
not equal, to the majority. Anarchists, in contrast, because they
support self-management also recognise the importance of dissent and
individuality -- in essence, because they are in favour of
self-management ("democracy" does not do the concept justice) they also
favour the individual freedom that is its rationale. We support the
liberty of private individuals because we believe in self-management
("democracy") so passionately.

Simply put, Marxism (as McNally presents it here) flies in the face of
how societies change and develop. New ideas start with individuals and
minorities and spread by argument and by force of example. McNally is
urging the end of free expression of individuality. For example, who
would seriously defend a society that "democratically" decided that,
say, homosexuals should not be allowed the freedom to associate freely?
Or that inter-racial marriage was against "Natural Law"? Or that
socialists were dangerous subversives and should be banned? He would, we
hope (like all sane people), recognise the rights of individuals to
rebel against the majority when the majority violate the spirit of
association, the spirit of freedom and equality which should give
democracy its rationale.

Indeed, McNally fails to understand the rationale for democratic
decision making -- it is not based on the idea that the majority is
always right but that individual freedom requires democracy to express
and defend itself. By placing the collective above the individual,
McNally undermines democracy and replaces it with little more than
tyranny by the majority (or, more likely, those who claim to represent
the majority).

If we take McNally's comments seriously then we must conclude that those
members of the German (and other) Social Democratic Party who opposed
their party's role in supporting the First World War were acting in
inappropriately. Rather than express their opposition to the war and act
to stop it, according to McNally's "logic" they should have remained in
their party (after all, **leaving** the party meant ignoring the
democratic decision of a collective group!), accepted the democratic
decision of collective groups and supported the Imperialist slaughter in
the name of democracy. Of course, McNally would reject such a position
-- in **this** case the rights of minorities take precedence over the
*"democratic decisions of collectives."* This is because the majority is
not always right and it is only through the dissent of individuals and
minorities that the opinion of the majority can be moved towards the
right one. Thus his comments are fallacious.

Progress is determined by those who dissent and rebel against the status
quo and the decisions of the majority. That is why anarchists support
the right of dissent in self-managed groups -- in fact, as we argue in
[section A.2.11](secA2.html#seca211), dissent, refusal, revolt by
individuals and minorities is a key aspect of self-management. Given
that Leninists do not support self-management (rather they, at best,
support the Lockean notion of electing a government as being
"democracy") it is hardly surprising they, like Locke, views dissent as
a danger and something to denounce. Anarchists, on the other hand,
recognising that self-management's (i.e. direct democracy) rationale and
base is in individual freedom, recognise and support the rights of
individuals to rebel against what they consider as unjust impositions.
As history shows, the anarchist position is the correct one -- without
rebellion, numerous minorities would never have improved their position.
Indeed, McNally's comments is just a reflection of the standard
capitalist diatribe against strikers and protestors -- they don't need
to protest, for they live in a "democracy."

So, yes, anarchists do support individual freedom to resist even
democratically made decisions simply because democracy **has to be**
based on individual liberty. Without the right of dissent, democracy
becomes a joke and little more than a numerical justification for
tyranny. Thus McNally's latter claim that the *"challenge is to restore
to socialism its democratic essence, its passionate concern with human
freedom"* seems farcical -- after all, he has just admitted that Marxism
aims to eliminate individual freedom in favour of *"collective groups"*
(i.e. the government). Unless of course he means freedom for the
abstraction "humanity" rather than concrete freedom of the individual to
govern themselves as individuals and as part of freely joined
self-managed associations? For those who really seek to restore to
socialism its passionate concern for freedom the way it clear --
anarchism. Hence Murray Bookchin's comments:

> *"Marxism['s] . . . perspectives are orientated not towards concrete,
> existential freedom, but towards an abstract freedom -- freedom for
> 'Society', for the 'Proletariat', for **categories** rather than for
> people."* [**Post Scarcity Anarchism**, pp. 225-6]

Anarchism, on the other hand, favours freedom for people and that
implies two things -- individual freedom and self-management (direct
democracy) in free associations. Any form of "democracy" not based on
individual freedom would be so contradictory as to be useless as a means
to human freedom (and vice versa, any form of "individual freedom" --
such a liberalism -- which denies self-management would be little more
than a justification for minority rule and a denial of human freedom).

Ultimately, McNally's attack on anarchism fails simply because the
majority is not always right and dissent a key to progress. That he
forgets these basic facts of life indicates the depths to which Marxists
will sink to distort the truth about anarchism.

Not that those in the Bolshevik tradition have any problem with
individuals ignoring the democratic decisions of collective groups. The
Bolsheviks were very happy to let individuals ignore and revoke the
democratic decisions of collective groups -- **as long as the
individuals in question were the leaders of the Bolshevik Party**. As
the examples we provide later (in [section 8](append31.html#app8))
indicate, leading lights in the Leninist tradition happily placed the
rights of the party before the rights of working people to decide their
own fate.

Thus McNally comments are strange in the extreme. Both anarchists and
Leninists share a belief that individuals can and should have the right
to ignore decisions made by groups. However, Leninists seem to think
only the government and leadership of the Party should have that right
while anarchists think **all** should. Unlike the egalitarian support
for freedom and dissent for all anarchists favour, Leninists have an
elitist support for the right of those in power to ignore the wishes of
those they govern. Thus the history of Marxists parties in power expose
McNally as a hypocrite. As we argue in [section
14](append31.html#app14), Marxist ideology provides the rationale for
such action.

Moreover, in spite of McNally's claim that the Leninist tradition is
democratic we find Lenin arguing that the *"irrefutable experience of
history has shown that . . . the dictatorship of individual persons was
often the vehicle, the channel of the dictatorship of the revolutionary
classes."* [quoted by Maurice Brinton, **The Bolsheviks and Workers
Control**, p. 40] Such a comment is not an isolated one, as we indicate
in [section 8](append31.html#app8) and indicates well the
anti-democratic nature of the tradition McNally places himself in. Thus
McNally's attempt to portray anarchism as "anti-democratic" is somewhat
ironic.

And we must note, as well as refuting McNally's claim that Leninism is a
democratic tradition, Lenin's comments display a distinct confusion over
the nature of a **social** revolution (rather than a political one).
Yes, **previous** revolutions may have utilised the dictatorship of
individuals but these revolutions have been revolutions from one class
system to another. The "revolutionary" classes in question were
**minority** classes and so elite rule would not in any way undermine
their class nature. Not so with a **socialist** revolution which must be
based on mass participation (in every aspect of society, economic,
political, social) if it is too achieve its goals -- namely a classless
society. Little wonder, with such theoretical confusion, that the
Russian revolution ended in Stalinism -- the means uses determined the
ends (see sections [13](append31.html#app13) and
[14](append31.html#app13) for more discussion of this point).

McNally then states that anarchists *"oppose even the most democratic
forms of collective organisation of social life. As the Canadian
anarchist writer George Woodcock explains: 'Even were democracy
possible, the anarchist would still not support it . . . Anarchists do
not advocate political freedom. What they advocate is freedom from
politics . . .' That is to say, anarchists reject any decision-making
process in which the majority of people democratically determine the
policies they will support."*

First, we must point out a slight irony in McNally's claim. The irony is
that Marxists usually claim that they seek a society similar to that
anarchists seek. In the words of Marx:

> *"What all socialists understand by anarchy is this: once the aim of
> the proletarian movement, the abolition of classes, has been attained,
> the power of the State . . . disappears, and the functions of
> government are transformed into simple administrative functions."*
> [Marx, Engels and Lenin, **Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 76]

So, Marxists and anarchists seek the same society, one of individual
freedom. Hence McNally's comments about anarchism also apply (once the
state "withers away", which it never will) to Marxism. But, of course,
McNally fails to mention this aspect of Marxism and its conflict with
anarchism.

However, our comments above equally apply here. Anarchists are not
opposed to people in free associations democratically determining the
policies they will support (see [section A.2.11](secA2.html#seca211) for
more details on this). What we **do** oppose is the assumption that the
majority is always right and that minorities should submit to the
decisions of the majority no matter how wrong they are. We feel that
history is on our side on this one -- it is only by the freedom to
dissent, by the direct action of minorities to defend and extent their
freedoms that society progresses. Moreover, we feel that theory is on
our side -- majority rule without individual and minority rights is a
violation of the principle of freedom and equality which democracy is
said to be built on.

Democracy should be an expression of individual liberty but in McNally's
hands it is turned into bourgeois liberalism. Little wonder Marxism has
continually failed to produce a free society. It has no conception of
the relationship of individual freedom to democracy and vice versa.

8. Are Leninists in favour of democracy?
----------------------------------------

McNally's attack on Proudhon (and anarchism in general) for being
"anti-democratic" is somewhat ironic. After all, the Leninist tradition
he places himself in did destroy democracy in the workers' soviets and
replaced it with party dictatorship. Thus his attack on anarchism can be
turned back on his politics, with much more justification and evidence.

For example, in response to the *"great Bolshevik losses in the soviet
elections"* during the spring and summer of 1918 *"Bolshevik armed force
usually overthrew the results of these provincial elections . . . [In]
the city of Izhevsk [for example] . . . in the May election [to the
soviet] the Mensheviks and SRs won a majority . . . In June, these two
parties also won a majority of the executive committee of the soviet. At
this point, the local Bolshevik leadership refused to give up power . .
. [and by use of the military] abrogated the results of the May and June
elections and arrested the SR and Menshevik members of the soviet and
its executive committee."* In addition, *"the government continually
postponed the new general elections to the Petrograd Soviet, the term of
which had ended in March 1918. Apparently, the government feared that
the opposition parties would show gains."* [Samuel Farber, **Before
Stalinism**, pp. 23-4 and p. 22]

In the workplace, the Bolsheviks replaced workers' economic democracy
with *"one-man management"* selected from above, by the state (*"The
elective principle must now be replaced by the principle of selection"*
-- Lenin). Trotsky did not consider this a result of the Civil War --
*"I consider if the civil war had not plundered our economic organs of
all that was strongest, most independent, most endowed with initiative,
we should undoubtedly have entered the path of one-man management in the
sphere of economic administration much sooner and much less painfully."*
[quoted by M. Brinton, **The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control**, p. 63
and pp. 66-7] He pushed the ideas of *"militarisation of labour"* as
well as abolishing democratic forms of organisation in the military
(this later policy occurred **before** the start of the Civil War -- as
Trotsky put it, the *"elective basis is politically pointless and
technically inexpedient and has already been set aside by decree"*
[quoted by Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, pp.37-8]).

In May 1921, the All-Russian Congress of the Metalworkers' Union met.
The *"Central Committee of the [Communist] Party handed down to the
Party faction in the union a list of recommended candidates for
**union** (sic!) leadership. The metalworkers' delegates voted down the
list, as did the Party faction in the union . . . The Central Committee
of the Party disregarded every one of the votes and appointed a
Metalworkers' Committee of its own. So much for 'elected and revocable
delegates.' Elected by the union rank and file and revocable by the
Party leadership!"* [M. Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 83]

These are a few examples of Trotsky's argument that you cannot place
*"the workers' right to elect representatives above the party. As if the
Party were not entitled to assert its dictatorship even if that
dictatorship clashed with the passing moods of the workers' democracy!"*
He continued by stating the *"Party is obliged to maintain its
dictatorship . . . regardless of temporary vacillations even in the
working class . . . The dictatorship does not base itself at every
moment on the formal principle of a workers' democracy."* [quoted by
Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 78]

Thus, **when in power,** Trotsky did not *"insist against all odds that
socialism was rooted in the struggle for human freedom"* as McNally
claims he did in the 1920s and 1930s (as we discuss in [section
15](append31.html#app15), Trotsky did not do it then either). Rather, he
thought that the *"very principle of compulsory labour is for the
Communist quite unquestionable . . . the only solution to economic
difficulties from the point of view of both principle and of practice is
to treat the population of the whole country as the reservoir of the
necessary labour power . . . and to introduce strict order into the work
of its registration, mobilisation and utilisation."* Can human freedom
be compatible with the *"introduction of compulsory labour service
[which] is unthinkable without the application . . . of the methods of
militarisation of labour"*? Or when the *"working class cannot be left
wandering round all over Russia. They must be thrown here and there,
appointed, commanded, just like soldiers."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 66 and p.
61]

Of course McNally tries to blame the destruction of democracy in Russia
on the Civil War but, as indicated above, the undermining of democracy
started **before** the civil war started and continued after it had
finished. The claim that the "working class" had been destroyed by the
war cannot justify the fact that attempts by working class people to
express themselves were systematically undermined by the Bolshevik
party. Nor does the notion of an *"exhausted"* or *"disappeared"*
working class make much sense when *"in the early part of 1921, a
spontaneous strike movement . . . took place in the industrial centres
of European Russia"* and strikes involving around 43 000 per year took
place between 1921 and 1925. [Samuel Farber, **Op. Cit.**, p. 188 and p.
88] While it is undeniable that the working class was reduced in numbers
because of the civil war, it cannot be said to have been totally
"exhausted" and, obviously, did survive the war and was more than
capable of collective action and decision making. Strikes, as Bakunin
argued, *"indicate a certain collective strength"* and so rather than
there being objective reasons for the lack of democracy under Lenin we
can suggest **political** reasons -- the awareness that, given the
choice, the Russian working class would have preferred someone else in
power!

Also, we must point out a certain ingenuity in McNally's comments that
Stalinism can be explained purely by the terrible civil war Russia
experienced. After all, Lenin himself stated that every *"revolution . .
., in its development, would give rise to exceptionally complicated
circumstances"* and *"[r]evolution is the sharpest, most furious,
desperate class war and civil war. Not a single great revolution in
history has escaped civil war. No one who does not live in a shell could
imagine that civil war is conceivable without exceptionally complicated
circumstances."* [**Will the Bolsheviks Maintain Power?**, p. 80 and p.
81] Thus McNally's assertion that for *"the germ cell of socialism to
grow [in Russia], it required several essential ingredients. One was
peace. The new workers' state could not establish a thriving democracy
so long as it was forced to raise an army and wage war to defend
itself"* is simply incredible. It also raises an important question with
regards Leninist ideas. If the Bolshevik political and organisational
form cannot survive during a period of disruption and complicated
circumstances then it is clearly a theory to be avoided at all costs.

Therefore, in practice, Leninism has proven to be profoundly
anti-democratic. As we argue in sections [13](append31.html#app13) and
[14](append31.html#app14) this is due to their politics -- the creation
of a *"strong government and centralism"* will inevitably lead to a new
class system being created [Lenin, **Will the Bolsheviks Maintain
Power?**, p. 75] This is not necessarily because Leninists seek
dictatorship for themselves. Rather it is because of the nature of the
state machine. In the words of Murray Bookchin:

> *"Anarchist critics of Marx pointed out with considerable effect that
> any system of representation would become a statist interest in its
> own right, one that at best would work against the interests of the
> working classes (including the peasantry), and that at worst would be
> a dictatorial power as vicious as the worst bourgeois state machines.
> Indeed, with political power reinforced by economic power in the form
> of a nationalised economy, a 'workers' republic' might well prove to
> be a despotism (to use one of Bakunin's more favourite terms) of
> unparalleled oppression."*

He continues:

> *"Republican institutions, however much they are intended to express
> the interests of the workers, necessarily place policy-making in the
> hands of deputies and categorically do not constitute a 'proletariat
> organised as a ruling class.' If public policy, as distinguished from
> administrative activities, is not made by the people mobilised into
> assemblies and confederally co-ordinated by agents on a local,
> regional, and national basis, then a democracy in the precise sense of
> the term does not exist. The powers that people enjoy under such
> circumstances can be usurped without difficulty. . . [I]f the people
> are to acquire real power over their lives and society, they must
> establish -- and in the past they have, for brief periods of time
> established -- well-ordered institutions in which they themselves
> directly formulate the policies of their communities and, in the case
> of their regions, elect confederal functionaries, revocable and
> strictly controllable, who will execute them. Only in this sense can a
> class, especially one committed to the abolition of classes, be
> mobilised as a class to manage society."* [**The Communist Manifesto:
> Insights and Problems**]

This is why anarchists stress direct democracy (self-management) in free
federations of free associations. It is the only way to ensure that
power remains in the hands of the people and is not turned into an alien
power above them. Thus Marxist support for statist forms of organisation
will inevitably undermine the liberatory nature of the revolution.
Moreover, as indicated in [section 14](append31.html#app14), their idea
of the party being the "vanguard" of the working class, combined with
its desire for centralised power, makes the dictatorship of the party
**over** the proletariat inevitable.

9. Why is McNally wrong on the relation of syndicalism to anarchism?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

After slandering anarchism, McNally turns towards another form of
libertarian socialism, namely syndicalism. It is worth quoting him in
full as his comments are truly ridiculous. He states that there is
*"another trend which is sometimes associated with anarchism. This is
syndicalism. The syndicalist outlook does believe in collective working
class action to change society. Syndicalists look to trade union action
-- such as general strikes -- to overthrow capitalism. Although some
syndicalist viewpoints share a superficial similarity with anarchism --
particularly with its hostility to politics and political action --
syndicalism is not truly a form of anarchism. By accepting the need for
mass, collective action and decision-making, syndicalism is much
superior to classical anarchism."*

What is ridiculous about McNally's comments is that all serious
historians who study the links between anarchism and syndicalism agree
that **Bakunin** (for want of a better expression) is the father of
syndicalism (see [section J.3.8](secJ3.html#secj38) -- indeed, many
writers point to syndicalist aspects in Proudhon's ideas as well but
here we concentrate on Bakunin)! Bakunin looked to trade union action
(including the general strike) as the means of overthrowing capitalism
and the state. Thus Arthur Lehning's comment that *"Bakunin's
collectivist anarchism . . . ultimately formed the ideological and
theoretical basis of anarcho-syndicalism"* is totally true and
indicative. [*"Introduction"*, **Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**,
p. 29] As is Rudolf Rocker's:

> *"Modern Anarcho-syndicalism is a direct continuation of those social
> aspirations which took shape in the bosom of the First International
> and which were best understood and most strongly held by the
> libertarian wing of the great workers' alliance."*
> [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 49]

Little wonder, then, we discover Caroline Cahm pointing out *"the basic
syndicalist ideas of Bakunin"* and that he *"argued that trade union
organisation and activity in the International [Working Men's
Association] were important in the building of working-class power in
the struggle against capital . . . He also declared that trade union
based organisation of the International would not only guide the
revolution but also provide the basis for the organisation of the
society of the future."* Indeed, he *"believed that trade unions had an
essential part to play in the developing of revolutionary capacities of
the workers as well as building up the organisation of the masses for
revolution."* [**Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism**, p.
219, p. 215 and p. 216] Cahm quotes Bakunin on the role of the general
strike:

> *"When strikes spread by contagion, it is because they are close to
> becoming a general strike, and a general strike in view of the ideas
> of emancipation which hold sway over the proletariat, can only lead to
> a cataclysm which would make society start a new life after shedding
> its old skin."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 217]

Or George R. Esenwein's comment that syndicalism *"had deep roots in the
Spanish libertarian tradition. It can be traced to Bakunin's
revolutionary collectivism."* He also notes that the class struggle was
*"central to Bakunin's theory."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 209 and p. 20]

Perhaps, in the face of such evidence (and the writings of Bakunin
himself), Marxists like McNally could claim that the sources we quote
are either anarchists or "sympathetic" to anarchism. To counter this we
will quote Marx and Engels. According to Marx Bakunin's theory consisted
of urging the working class to *"only organise themselves by
trades-unions"* and *"not occupy itself with **politics.**"* Engels
asserted that in the *"Bakuninist programme a general strike is the
lever employed by which the social revolution is started"* and that they
admitted *"this required a well-formed organisation of the working
class"* (i.e. a trade union federation). [Marx, Engels and Lenin,
**Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 48, p. 132 and p. 133]
Ignoring the misrepresentations of Marx and Engels about the theories of
their enemies, we can state that they got the basic point of Bakunin's
ideas -- the centrality of trade union organisation and struggle as well
as the use of strikes and the general strike.

(As an aside, ironically enough, Engels distorted diatribe against
Bakunin and the general strike was later used against more radical
Marxists like Rosa Luxemburg -- usually claimed by Leninists as part of
their tradition -- by the reformists in Social Democratic Parties. For
orthodox Marxists, the mass strike was linked to anarchism and Engels
had proven that only political action -- i.e. electioneering -- could
lead to working class emancipation.)

Thus, according to McNally, *"syndicalism"* (i.e. Bakunin's ideas) is
*"much superior to classical anarchism"* (i.e. Bakunin's ideas)! How
spurious McNally's argument actually is can be seen from his comments
about syndicalism and its relation to anarchism.

10. Do syndicalists reject working class political action?
----------------------------------------------------------

His last argument against syndicalism is equally flawed. He states that
*"by rejecting the idea of working class political action, syndicalism
has never been able to give real direction to attempts by workers to
change society."* However, syndicalists (like all anarchists) are clear
what kind of politics they reject -- bourgeois politics (i.e. the
running of candidates in elections). It is worth quoting Rudolf Rocker
at length on McNally's claim:

> "It has often been charged against Anarcho-Syndicalism that it has no
> interest in the political structure of the different countries, and
> consequently no interest in the political struggles of the time, and
> confines its activities to the fight for purely economic demands. This
> idea is altogether erroneous and springs either from outright
> ignorance or wilful distortion of the facts. It is not the political
> struggle as such which distinguishes the Anarcho-Syndicalists from the
> modern labour parties, both in principle and in tactics, but the form
> of this struggle and the aims which it has in view. . .
>
> "The attitude of Anarcho-Syndicalism toward the political power of the
> present-day state is exactly the same as it takes toward the system of
> capitalist exploitation. . . [and so] Anarcho-Syndicalists pursue the
> same tactics in their fight against that political power which finds
> its expression in the state. . .
>
> "For just as the worker cannot be indifferent to the economic
> conditions of his life in existing society, so he cannot remain
> indifferent to the political structure of his country. . . It is,
> therefore, utterly absurd to assert that the Anarcho-Syndicalists take
> no interest in the political struggles of the time. . . But the point
> of attack in the political struggle lies, not in the legislative
> bodies, but in the people. . . If they, nevertheless, reject any
> participation in the work of bourgeois parliaments, it is not because
> they have no sympathy with political struggles in general, but because
> they are firmly convinced that parliamentary activity is for the
> workers the very weakest and the most hopeless form of the political
> struggle. . .
>
> "But, most important of all, practical experience has shown that the
> participation of the workers in parliamentary activity cripples their
> power of resistance and dooms to futility their warfare against the
> existing system. . .
>
> "Anarcho-Syndicalists, then, are not in any way opposed to the
> political struggle, but in their opinion this struggle, too, must take
> the form of direct action, in which the instruments of economic power
> which the working class has at its command are the most effective. . .
>
> "The focal point of the political struggle lies, then, not in the
> political parties, but in the economic fighting organisations of the
> workers. It as the recognition of this which impelled the
> Anarcho-Syndicalists to centre all their activity on the Socialist
> education of the masses and on the utilisation of their economic and
> social power. Their method is that of direct action in both the
> economic and the political struggles of the time. That is the only
> method which has been able to achieve anything at all in every
> decisive moment in history." [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 63-66]

Rocker's work, **Anarcho-Syndicalism**, was written in 1938 and is
considered the standard introduction to that theory. McNally wrote his
pamphlet in the 1980s and did not bother to consult the classic
introduction to the ideas he claims to be refuting. That in itself
indicates the worth of his pamphlet and any claims it has for being
remotely accurate with respect to anarchism and syndicalism.

Thus syndicalists **do** reject working class *"political action"* only
if you think "political action" means simply bourgeois politics -- that
is, electioneering, standing candidates for Parliament, local town
councils and so on. It does not reject "political action" in the sense
of direct action to effect political changes and reforms. As
syndicalists Ford and Foster argue, syndicalists use *"the term
'political action' . . . in its ordinary and correct sense.
Parliamentary action resulting from the exercise of the franchise is
political action. Parliamentary action caused by the influence of direct
action tactics . . . is not political action. It is simply a
registration of direct action."* They also note that syndicalists *"have
proven time and again that they can solve the many so-called political
questions by direct action."* [Earl C. Ford and William Z. Foster,
**Syndicalism**, p. 19f and p. 23]

A historian of the British syndicalist movement reiterates this point:

> *"Nor did syndicalists neglect politics and the state. Revolutionary
> industrial movements were on the contrary highly 'political' in that
> they sought to understand, challenge and destroy the structure of
> capitalist power in society. They quite clearly perceived the
> oppressive role of the state whose periodic intervention in industrial
> unrest could hardly have been missed."* [Bob Holton, **British
> Syndicalism: 1900-1914**, pp. 21-2]

As we argued in [section J.2.10](secJ2.html#secj210), anarchist support
for direct action and opposition to taking part in elections does not
mean we are "apolitical" or reject political action. Anarchists have
always been clear -- we reject "political action" which is bourgeois in
nature in favour of "political action" based on the organisations,
action and solidarity of working class people. This is because
electioneering corrupts those who take part, watering down their radical
ideas and making them part of the system they were meant to change.

And history has proven the validity of our anti-electioneering ideas.
For example, as we argue in [section J.2.6](secJ2.html#secj26), the net
result of the Marxists use of electioneering ("political action") was
the de-radicalising of their movement and theory and its becoming yet
another barrier to working class self-liberation. Rather than
syndicalism not giving *"real direction to attempts by workers to change
society"* it was Marxism in the shape of Social Democracy which did
that. Indeed, at the turn of twentieth century more and more radicals
turned to Syndicalism and Industrial Unionism as the means of by-passing
the dead-weight of Social Democracy (i.e. orthodox Marxism), its
reformism, opportunism and its bureaucracy. As Lenin once put it,
anarchism *"was not infrequently a kind of penalty for the opportunist
sins of the working-class movement."* [Marx, Engels and Lenin,
**Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 305]

Lenin's claim that anarchist and syndicalist support in the working
class is the result of the opportunist nature of the Social Democratic
Parties has an element of truth. Obviously militants sick to death of
the reformist, corrupt and bureaucratic "working class" parties will
seek a revolutionary alternative and find libertarian socialism.

However, Lenin seeks to explain the symptoms (opportunism) and not the
disease itself (Parliamentarianism) . Nowhere does Lenin see the rise of
"opportunist" tendencies in the Marxist parties as the result of the
tactics and organisational struggles they used. Indeed, Lenin desired
the new Communist Parties to practice electioneering ("political
action") and work within the trade unions to capture their leadership
positions. Anarchists rather point out that given the nature of the
means, the ends surely follow. Working in a bourgeois environment
(Parliament) will result in bourgeoisifying and de-radicalising the
party. Working in a centralised environment will empower the leaders of
the party over the members and lead to bureaucratic tendencies.

In other words, as Bakunin predicted, using bourgeois institutions will
corrupt "revolutionary" and radical parties and tie the working class to
the current system. Lenin's analysis of anarchist influence as being the
off-spring of opportunist tendencies in mainstream parties may be right,
but if so its a natural development as the tactics supported by Marxists
inevitably lead to opportunist tendencies developing. Thus, what Lenin
could not comprehend was that opportunism was the symptom and
electioneering was the disease -- using the same means (electioneering)
with different parties/individuals ("Communists" instead of "Social
Democrats") and thinking that opportunism would not return was
idealistic nonsense in the extreme.

11. Why is McNally's claim that Leninism supports working class self-emancipation wrong?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

McNally claims that Marx *"was the first major socialist thinker to make
the principle of self-emancipation -- the principle that socialism could
only be brought into being by the self-mobilisation and
self-organisation of the working class -- a fundamental aspect of the
socialist project."* This is not entirely true. Proudhon in 1848 had
argued that *"the proletariat must emancipate itself without the help of
the government."* [quoted by George Woodcock, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon:
A Biography**, p. 125] This was because the state *"finds itself
inevitably enchained to capital and directed against the proletariat."*
[Proudhon, **System of Economical Contradictions**, p. 399] Thus,
working class people must organise themselves for their own liberation:

> *"it is of no use to change the holders of power or introduce some
> variation into its workings: an agricultural and industrial
> combination must be found by means of which power, today the ruler of
> society, shall become its slave."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 398]

While Proudhon placed his hopes in reformist tendencies (such as
workers' co-operatives and mutual banks) he clearly argued that *"the
proletariat must emancipate itself."* Marx's use of the famous
expression -- *"the emancipation of the working class is the task of the
working class itself"* -- dates from 1865, 17 years after Proudhon's
comment that *"the proletariat must emancipate itself."* As K. Steven
Vincent correctly summarises:

> *"Proudhon insisted that the revolution could only come from below,
> through the action of the workers themselves."* [**Pierre-Joseph
> Proudhon and the Rise of French Republican Socialism**, p. 157]

Indeed, as Libertarian Marxist Paul Mattick points out, Marx was not
even the first person to use the expression *"the emancipation of the
working class is the task of the working class itself."* Flora Tristan
used it in 1843. [**Marx and Keynes**, p. 333] Thus a case could be made
that Marx was, in fact, the **third** *"major socialist thinker to make
the principle of self-emancipation -- the principle that socialism could
only be brought into being by the self-mobilisation and
self-organisation of the working class -- a fundamental aspect of the
socialist project."*

Similarly, Bakunin continually quoted Marx's (and so Tristan's) words
from the Preamble to the General Rules of the First International --
*"That the emancipation of the workers must be accomplished by the
workers themselves."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 92] Far more than Marx,
Bakunin argued that workers' can only free themselves by a *"single
path, that of **emancipation through practical action**"* namely
*"workers' solidarity in their struggle against the bosses"* by trades
unions and solidarity. The *"collective experience"* workers gain in the
International combined with the *"collective struggle of the workers
against the bosses"* will ensure workers *"will necessarily come to
realise that there is an irreconcilable antagonism between the henchmen
of reaction and [their] own dearest human concerns. Having reached this
point, [they] will recognise [themselves] to be a revolutionary
socialist."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 103] In contrast Marx placed his hopes
for working class self-emancipation on a political party which would
conquer "political power." As history soon proved, Marx was mistaken --
"political power" can only be seized by a minority (i.e. the party,
**not** the class it claims to represent) and if the few have the power,
the rest are no longer free (i.e. they no longer govern themselves).
That the many elect the few who issue them orders does **not** signify
emancipation!

However, this is beside the point. McNally proudly places his ideas in
the Leninist tradition. It is thus somewhat ironic that McNally claims
that Marxism is based on self-emancipation of the working class while
claiming Leninism as a form of Marxism. This it because Lenin explicitly
stated the opposite, namely that the working class **could not**
liberate itself by its own actions. In **What is to be Done?** Lenin
argued that *"the working class, exclusively by their own effort, is
able to develop only trade union consciousness . . . The theory of
socialism [i.e. Marxism], however, grew out of the philosophic,
historical and economic theories that were elaborated by the educated
representatives of the propertied classes, the intellectuals . . . the
theoretical doctrine of Social-Democracy arose quite independently of
the spontaneous growth of the labour movement; it arose as a natural and
inevitable outcome of ideas among the revolutionary socialist
intelligentsia."* This meant that *"Social Democratic [i.e. socialist]
consciousness . . . could only be brought to them from without."*
[**Essential Works of Lenin**, pp. 74-5]

Thus, rather than believe in working class self-emancipation, Lenin
thought the opposite. Without the radical bourgeois to provide the
working class with "socialist" ideas, a socialist movement, let along
society, was impossible. Hardly what you would consider
self-emancipation. Nor is this notion of working class passivity
confined to the "early" Lenin of **What is to Be Done?** infamy. It can
be found in his apparently more "libertarian" work **The State and
Revolution**.

In that work he argues *"we do not indulge in 'dreams' of dispensing
**at once** . . . with all subordination; these anarchist dreams . . .
are totally alien to Marxism . . . we want the socialist revolution with
human nature as it is now, with human nature that cannot dispense with
subordination, control and 'managers'"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 307] No where
is the notion that working class people, during the process of mass
struggle, direct action and revolution, **revolutionises themselves**
(see sections [A.2.7](secA2.html#seca27) and [J.7.2](secJ7.html#secj72),
for example). Instead, we find a vision of people as they are under
capitalism (*"human nature as it is now"*) and no vision of
self-emancipation of the working class and the resulting changes that
implies for those who are transforming society by their own action.

Perhaps it will be argued that Lenin sees *"subordination"* as being
*"to the armed vanguard of all the exploited . . . i.e., to the
proletariat"* [**Ibid.**] and so there is no contradiction. However,
this is not the case as he confuses the rule of the party with the rule
of the class. As he states *"[w]e cannot imagine democracy, not even
proletarian democracy, without representative institutions."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 306] Thus *"subordination"* is **not** to the working class
itself (i.e. direct democracy or self-management). Rather it is the
*"subordination"* of the majority to the minority, of the working class
to "its" representatives. Thus we have a vision of a "socialist" society
in which the majority have not revolutionised themselves and are
subordinated to their representatives. Such a subordination, however,
ensures that a socialist consciousness **cannot** develop as only the
**process** of self-management generates the abilities required for
self-management (as Malatesta put it, *"[o]nly freedom or the struggle
for freedom can be the school for freedom."* [**Life and Ideas**, p.
59]).

Therefore McNally's comments that Leninism is a valid expression of
Marx's idea of proletarian self-emancipation is false. In reality, Lenin
rejected the idea that working class people can emancipate themselves
and, therefore, any claim that this tradition stands for proletarian
self-emancipation is false. Rather Leninism, for all its rhetoric, has
no vision of working class self-activity leading to self-liberation --
it denies it can happen and that is why it stresses the role of the
party and its need to take centralised power into its own hands (of
course, it never entered Lenin's mind that if bourgeois ideology imposes
itself onto the working class it also imposes itself on the party as
well -- more so as they are bourgeois intellectuals in the first place).

While anarchists are aware of the need for groups of like minded
individuals to influence the class struggle and spread anarchist ideas,
we reject the idea that such ideas have to be "injected" into the
working class from outside. Rather, as we argued in [section
J.3](secJ3.html), anarchist ideas are developed within the class
struggle by working people themselves. Anarchist groups exist because we
are aware that there is an uneven development of ideas within our class
and to aid the spreading of libertarian ideas it is useful for those
with those ideas to work together. However, being aware that our ideas
are the product of working class life and struggle we are also aware
that we have to learn from that struggle. It is because of this that
anarchists stress self-management of working class struggle and
organisation from below. Anarchists are (to use Bakunin's words)
*"convinced that revolution is only sincere, honest and real in the
hands of the masses, and that when it is concentrated in those of a few
ruling individuals it inevitably and immediately becomes reaction."*
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 237] Only when this happens
can new ways of life be created and truly develop freely. It also
explains anarchist opposition to political groups seizing power -- that
will only result in old dogmas crushing the initiative of people in
struggle and the new forms of life they create. That is way anarchists
stress the importance of revolutionaries using *"natural influence"*
(i.e. arguing their ideas in popular organisations and convincing by
reason) -- doing so allows new developments and ideas to be expressed
and enriched by existing ones and vice versa.

One last point. It could be argued that Lenin's arguments were predated
by Marx and Engels and so Marxism **as such** rather than just Leninism
does not believe in proletarian self-emancipation. This is because they
wrote in **The Communist Manifesto** that *"a portion of the bourgeois
goes over to the proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the
bourgeois ideologists, who have raised themselves to the level of
comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole."* They
also note that the Communists are *"the most advanced and resolute
section of the working-class parties . . . [and] they have over the
great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the
line of march, the conditions, and the general results of the
proletarian movement."* [**Selected Works**, p. 44 and p. 46] Thus a
portion of the bourgeois comprehend *"the historical movement as a
whole"* and this is also the *"advantage"* of the Communist Party over
*"the great mass of the proletariat."* Perhaps Lenin's comments are not
so alien to the Marxist tradition after all.

12. Why is Marxist "class analysis" of anarchism contradictory?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Another ironic aspect of McNally's pamphlet is his praise for the Paris
Commune and the Russian Soviets. This is because key aspects of both
revolutionary forms were predicted by Proudhon and Bakunin.

For example, McNally's and Marx's praise for revocable mandates in the
Commune was advocated by Proudhon in 1840s and Bakunin in 1860s (see
sections [4](append31.html#app4) and [5](append31.html#app5)).
Similarly, the Russian Soviets (a federation of delegates from
workplaces) showed a marked similarity with Bakunin's discussions of
revolutionary change and the importance of industrial associations being
the basis of the future socialist commune (as he put it, the *"future
organisation must be made solely from the bottom upwards, by free
association or free federation of workers, firstly in their unions, then
in the communes, regions, nations and finally in a great federation,
international and universal."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**,
p. 206]).

Indeed, the Paris Commune (in both its economic and political aspects)
showed a clear inspiration from Proudhon's works. In the words of George
Woodcock, there are *"demands in the Commune's Manifesto to the French
People of the 19th April, 1871, that might have been written by Proudhon
himself."* [**Pierre-Joseph Proudhon: A Biography**, p. 276] K. Steven
Vincent also points out that the declaration *"is strongly federalist in
tone [one of Proudhon's favourite ideas], and it has a marked
proudhonian flavour."* [**Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and the Rise of French
Republican Socialism**, p. 232] Moreover, the desire to replace wage
labour with associated labour by the creation of co-operatives expressed
during the Commune clearly showed the influence of Proudhon (see
[section A.5.1](secA5.html#seca51) for more details). As Marx mentions
the *"rough sketch of national organisation"* produced by the Commune it
is useful to quote the Commune's declaration in order to show clearly
its anarchist roots and tendencies:

> "The absolute autonomy of the Commune extended to all districts of
> France . . . to every Frenchman the full exercise of his faculties and
> aptitudes, as man, citizen, and worker.
>
> "The autonomy of the Commune shall have no limits other than the right
> of autonomy equally enjoyed by all other communes adhering to the
> contract, and by whose association together French Unity will be
> preserved. . . Selection by ballot . . . with the responsibility and
> permanent right of control and dismissal of magistrates and all
> communal civil servants of all grades . . . Permanent intervention of
> citizens in communal affairs by the free expression of their ideas.
> Organisation of urban defence and of the National Guard, which elects
> its leaders . . .the large central administration delegated by the
> federation of communes shall adopt and put into practice these same
> principles.
>
> "The Unity which has been imposed on us up to now . . . is nothing but
> despotic centralisation . . . The Political Unity which Paris desires
> is the voluntary association of all local initiatives . . .
>
> "The Communal Revolution . . . spells the end of the old world with
> its governments and its clerics, militarism, officialdom,
> exploitation, stock-jobbing, monopolies, and privileges, to which the
> proletariat owes its servitude, the country its ills and its
> disasters." [*"Declaration to the French People"*, contained in David
> Thomson (ed.), **France: Empire and Republic, 1850-1940**, pp. 186-7]

The links with Proudhon's ideas cannot be clearer. Both Proudhon and the
Commune stressed the importance of decentralisation of power,
federalism, the end of both government and exploitation and so on.
Moreover, in his letter to Albert Richard, Bakunin predicted many
aspects of the Paris Commune and its declaration (see **Bakunin on
Anarchism**, pp. 177-182).

Little wonder few Marxists (nor Marx himself) directly quote from this
declaration. It would be difficult to attack anarchism (as
"petty-bourgeois") while proclaiming the Paris Commune as the first
example of *"the dictatorship of the Proletariat."* The decentralised,
federalist nature of the Commune cannot be squared with the usual
Marxist instance on centralisation and the claim that federalism *"as a
principle follows logically from the petty-bourgeois views of anarchism.
Marx was a centralist."* [Lenin, *"The State and Revolution"*, Marx,
Engels and Lenin, **Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 273]

Given that Marx described the Commune as *"essentially a working-class
government"* and as *"the political form, at last discovered, under
which to work out the economic emancipation of labour,"* it is strange
that McNally terms Proudhon's and Bakunin's ideas as those of the past.
[**Selected Writings**, p. 290] In actually, as can be seen from the
Paris Commune and the soviets, they were the ideas **of the future** --
and of working class self-liberation and self-organisation. And ones
that Marx and his followers paid lip service to.

(We say lip service for Lenin quoted Marx's statement that the future
proletarian state, like the Paris Commune, would abolish the distinction
between executive and administrative powers but did not honour it.
Immediately after the October Revolution the Bolsheviks established an
executive power **above** the soviets, namely the Council of People's
Commissars. Those who quote Lenin's **State and Revolution** as proof of
his democratic nature usually fail to mention this little fact. In
practice that work was little more than an election manifesto to be
broken as required.)

Perhaps it could be argued that, in fact, the Paris Commune was the work
of artisans. This does have an element of truth in it. Marx stated in
1866 that the French workers were *"corrupted"* by *"Proudhonist"*
ideas, *"particularly those of Paris, who as workers in luxury trades
are strongly attached, without knowing it [!], to the old rubbish."*
[Marx, Engels and Lenin, **Anarchism and Anarcho-syndicalism**, pp.
45-6] Five years later, these workers (still obviously influenced by
*"the old rubbish"*) created *"the political form"* of *"the economic
emancipation of labour."* How can the Paris Commune be the
*"Dictatorship of the Proletariat"* (as Engels claimed [**Selected
Writings**, p. 259]) when 35 members of the Commune's council were
artisans and only 4 or 5 were industrial workers (i.e. proletarians)?

Can the fact that artisans were, according to McNally and Marx, social
strata of the past, were backward looking, etc. be reconciled with the
claim that the Paris Commune was the political form of proletarian
emancipation? No, not from a Marxist class analysis. Hence Marxists
ignoring the real nature of the Parisian working class when discussing
the commune. However, from an anarchist perspective -- which sees the
artisan, peasant and proletariat forming a common class of working
people -- the development of the Paris Commune is no surprise. It is the
work of people seeking to end wage labour and the threat of wage labour
**now** rather than sometime in the future once capitalism has fully
developed. Thus McNally's (and Marx's) support for the Commune makes a
mockery of his attacks on anarchism as the theory of the artisans and
peasants for it was the artisans who created the first model of their
*"proletarian"* state!

As indicated, McNally's arguments do not hold water. Ironically, if
anarchism was the death-cry of the artisan and peasant then it is
strange, to say the least, that this theory so influenced the Paris
Commune which McNally praises so much. We therefore suggest that rather
than being a backward-looking cry of despair for those disappearing
under the wheels of rising capitalism, anarchism was in fact a theory
developed from the struggles and self-activity of those currently
suffering capitalist and state oppression -- namely the artisans,
peasants **and** industrial proletariat (i.e. the working class as a
whole). In other words, it is a philosophy and theory for the future,
not of the past. This can be seen from the libertarian aspects of the
Paris Commune, aspects Marx immediately tried to appropriate for his own
theories (which, unfortunately, were swamped by the authoritarian
elements that existing already).

And one last point, McNally claims that Marx *"immediately rallied to
the cause of the Paris Commune."* This is not true. As John Zerzan
points out *"[d]ays after the successful insurrection began he failed to
applaud its audacity, and satisfied himself with grumbling that 'it had
no chance of success.' Though he finally recognised the fact of the
Commune (and was thereby forced to revise his reformist ideas regarding
proletarian use of existing state machinery), his lack of sympathy is
amply reflected by the fact that throughout the Commune's two-month
existence, the General Council of the International spoke not a single
word about it . . . his **Civil War in France** constitutes an
obituary."* [**Elements of Refusal**, p. 126] Perhaps the delay was due
to Marx wondering how Parisian artisans had became the vanguard of the
proletariat overnight and how he could support a Commune created by the
forces of the past?

In addition the *"old rubbish"* the Parisian workers supported was very
much ahead of its time. In 1869 the delegate of the Parisian
Construction Workers' Trade Union argued that *"[a]ssociation of the
different corporations [labour unions] on the basis of town or country .
. . leads to the commune of the future . . . Government is replaced by
the assembled councils of the trade bodies, and by a committee of their
respective delegates."* In addition, *"a local grouping which allows the
workers in the same area to liaise on a day to day basis"* and *"a
linking up of the various localities, fields, regions, etc."* (i.e.
international trade or industrial union federations) would ensure that
*"labour organises for present and future by doing away with wage
slavery."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 184] Such a vision of
workers' councils and associated labour has obvious similarities with
the spontaneously created soviets of the 1905 Russian Revolution. These,
too, were based on assembled councils of workers' delegates. Of course
they were differences but the basic idea and vision are identical.

Therefore to claim that anarchism represents the past presents Marxists
with a few problems given the nature of the Paris Commune and its
obvious libertarian nature. If it is claimed that the Parisian artisans
defended *"not their present, but their future interests"* and so
*"desert[ed] their own standpoint to place themselves at that of the
proletariat"* (the class they are being *"tranfer[ed]"* into by the rise
of capitalism) then, clearly, anarchist ideas are *"future,"*
proletarian, ideas as it is that class interest artisans serve *"[i]f by
chance they are revolutionary."* [Marx and Engels, **The Communist
Manifesto**, p. 44]

Whichever way you look at it, McNally's claims on the class nature of
anarchism do not stand up to close analysis. Proudhon addressed both
artisan/peasant and wage slave in his works. He addressed both the past
and the present working class. Bakunin did likewise (although with a
stronger emphasis on wage slaves). Therefore it is not surprising that
Proudhon and Bakunin predicted aspects of the Paris Commune -- they were
expressing the politics of the future. As is clear from their writings,
which still remain fresh today.

This confusion associated with Marxist "class analysis" of anarchism was
also present in Lenin. Given that anarchism is apparently associated
with the petty-bourgeois we find a strange contradiction in Lenin's
work. On the one hand Lenin argued that Russia *"despite the more
petty-bourgeois composition of her population as compared with the other
European countries"* had, in fact, *"negligible"* anarchist influence
during the two revolutions of 1905 and 1917. He claimed that this was
due to Bolshevism's having *"waged a most ruthless and uncompromising
struggle against opportunism."* [Marx, Engels and Lenin, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 305]

On the other he admitted that, in the developed capitalist nations,
anarchists and syndicalists were *"quite revolutionary and connected
with the masses"* and that it is *"the duty of all Communists to do
everything to help all proletarian mass elements to abandon anarchism .
. . the measure in which genuinely Communist parties succeed in winning
mass proletarian elements . . . away from anarchism, is a criterion of
the success of those Parties."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 317-8]

Thus, in the most capitalist nations, ones with a more widespread and
developed proletariat, the anarchist and syndicalist movements were more
firmly developed and had closer connections with the masses than in
Russia. Moreover, these movements were also quite revolutionary as well
and should be won to Bolshevism. But anarchism is the politics of the
petit-bourgeois and so should have been non-existent in Western
countries but widespread in Russia. The opposite was the case, thus
suggesting that Lenin's analysis is wrong.

We can point to another explanation of these facts. Rather than the
Bolsheviks *"struggle against opportunism"* being the reason why
anarchism was *"negligible"* in 1917-18 in Russia (it was not, in fact)
but had mass appeal in Western Europe perhaps it was the fact that
anarchism was a product of working class struggle in advanced capitalist
countries while Bolshevism was a product of **bourgeois** struggle (for
Parliament, a liberal republic, etc.) in Tsarist Russia?

Similarly, perhaps the reason why Bolshevism did not develop opportunist
tendencies was because it did not work in an environment which
encouraged them. After all, unlike the German Social Democrats, the
Bolsheviks were illegal for long periods of time and worked in an
absolutist monarchy. The influences that corrupted the German SPD were
not at work in the Tsarist regime. Thus, Bolshevism, perhaps at best,
was applicable to Tsarist conditions and anarchism to Western ones.

However, as noted and contrary to Lenin, Russian anarchism was far from
*"negligible"* during 1917-18 and was growing which was why the
Bolsheviks suppressed them **before** the start of the civil war. As
Emma Goldman noted, a claim such as Lenin's *"does not tally with the
incessant persecution of Anarchists which began in [April] 1918, when
Leon Trotsky liquidated the Anarchist headquarters in Moscow with
machine guns. At that time the process of elimination of the Anarchists
began."* [**Trotsky Protests Too Much**] This fact of anarchist
influence during the revolution does not contradict our earlier
analysis. This is because the Russian anarchists, rather than appealing
to the petit-bourgeois, were influencing exactly the same workers,
sailors and soldiers the Bolsheviks were. Indeed, the Bolsheviks often
had to radicalise their activities and rhetoric to counter anarchist
influence. As Alexander Rabinowitch (in his study of the July uprising
of 1917) notes:

> *"At the rank-and-file level, particularly within the [Petrograd]
> garrison and at the Kronstadt naval base, there was in fact very
> little to distinguish Bolshevik from Anarchist. . . The
> Anarchist-Communists and the Bolsheviks competed for the support of
> the same uneducated, depressed. and dissatisfied elements of the
> population, and the fact is that in the summer of 1917, the
> Anarchist-Communists, with the support they enjoyed in a few important
> factories and regiments, possessed an undeniable capacity to influence
> the course of events. Indeed, the Anarchist appeal was great enough in
> some factories and military units to influence the actions of the
> Bolsheviks themselves."* [**Prelude to Revolution**, p. 64]

This is hardly what would be expected if anarchism was "petit-bourgeois"
as Marxists assert.

It could, in fact, be argued that the Bolsheviks gained the support of
so many working class people (wage slaves) during the summer of 1917
***because they sounded and acted like anarchists*** and **not** like
Marxists. At the time many considered the Bolsheviks as anarchists and
one fellow Marxist (an ex-Bolshevik turned Menshevik) thought Lenin had
*"made himself a candidate for one European throne that has been vacant
for thirty years -- the throne of Bakunin!"* [quoted by Alexander
Rabinowitch, **Op. Cit.**, p. 40] As Alexander Berkman argues, the
*"Anarchist mottoes proclaimed by the Bolsheviks did not fail to bring
results. The masses relied to their flag."* [**What is Communist
Anarchism**, p. 101]

Moreover, this stealing of anarchist slogans and tactics was **forced**
upon the Bolsheviks by the working class. On Lenin's own admission, the
masses of peasants and workers were *"a hundred times further to the
left"* than the Bolsheviks. Trotsky himself notes that the Bolsheviks
*"lagged behind the revolutionary dynamic . . . The masses at the
turning point were a hundred times to the left of the extreme left
party."* [**History of the Russian Revolution**, Vol. 1, p. 403f]
Indeed, one leading Bolshevik stated in June, 1917 (in response to a
rise in anarchist influence), *"[b]y fencing ourselves off from the
Anarchists, we may fence ourselves off from the masses."* [quoted by
Alexander Rabinowitch, **Op. Cit.**, p. 102] That, in itself, indicates
the weakness of Lenin's class analysis of anarchism.

Rather than seeing the Russian experience refute the claim that
anarchism is a working class theory, it reinforces it -- the Bolsheviks
would not have succeeded if they had used traditional Marxist slogans
and tactics. Instead, much to the dismay of their more orthodox
comrades, the Bolsheviks embraced traditional anarchist ideas and
tactics and thereby gained increased influence in the working class.
After the Bolshevik seizure of power in the name of the soviets,
anarchist influence increased (see [section A.5.4](secA5.html#seca54))
as more working people recognised that what the Bolsheviks meant by
their slogans was different than what working people thought they meant!

Thus the experience of the Russian Revolution re-enforces the fact that
Marxist "class analysis" of anarchism fails to convince. Far from
proving that libertarian socialism is non-proletariat, that Revolution
proved that it was (just as confirmed the prophetic correctness of the
views of the founders of anarchism and, in particular, their critique of
Marxism).

The usual Marxist "class analysis" of anarchism is somewhat confused. On
the one hand, it claims that anarchism is backward looking and the
politics of the petit-bourgeois being destroyed by the rise and
development of capitalism. On the other hand Marxists point to events
and organisations created in working class struggle which were predicted
and/or influenced by **anarchist** ideas and ideals, **not** Marxist
ones. That indicates better than any other argument that Marxists are
wrong about anarchism and their "class analysis" nothing more than
distortions and bigotry.

Based on the evidence and the contradictions it provokes in Marxist
ideology, we have to argue that McNally is simply wrong. Rather than
being an ideology of the petit-bourgeois anarchism is, in fact, a
political theory of the working class (both artisans and proletariat).
Rather than a backward looking theory, anarchism is a theory of the
present and future -- it has a concrete and radical critique of current
society and a vision of the future and a theory how to get there which
appeals to working people in struggle. Such is obviously the case when
reading anarchist theory.

13. If Marxism is *"socialism from below,"* why do anarchists reject it?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

McNally claims that Marxism is *"socialism from below."* In his text he
indicates support for the Paris Commune and the soviets of the Russian
Revolution. He states that the *"democratic and socialist restructuring
of society remains . . . the most pressing task confronting humanity.
And such a reordering of society can only take place on the basis of the
principles of socialism from below. Now more than ever, the liberation
of humanity depends upon the self-emancipation of the world working
class. . . The challenge is to restore to socialism its democratic
essence, its passionate concern with human freedom."*

So, if this is the case, why the hostility between anarchists and
Marxists? Surely it is a question of semantics? No, for while Marxists
pay lip-service to such developments of working class self-activity and
self-organisation as workers' councils (soviets), factory committees,
workers' control, revocable and mandated delegates they do so in order
to ensure the election of their party into positions of power (i.e. the
government). Rather than see such developments as working people's
**direct** management of their own destinies (as anarchists do) and as a
means of creating a self-managed (i.e. free) society, Marxists see them
as a means for their party to take over state power. Nor do they see
them as a framework by which working class people can take back control
of their own lives. Rather, they see them, at best, as typical bourgeois
forms -- namely the means by which working people can delegate their
power to a new group of leaders, i.e. as a means to elect a socialist
government into power.

This attitude can be seen from Lenin's perspectives on the Russian
soviets. Rather than seeing them as a means of working class
self-government, he saw them purely as a means of gaining influence for
his party. In his own words:

> *"the Party . . . has never renounced its intention of utilising
> certain non-party organisations, such as the Soviets of Workers'
> Deputies . . . to extend Social-Democratic influence among the working
> class and to strengthen the Social-Democratic labour movement . . .
> the incipient revival creates the opportunity to organise or utilise
> non-party working-class institutions, such as Soviets . . . for the
> purpose of developing the Social-Democratic movement; at the same time
> the Social-Democratic Party organisations must bear in mind if
> Social-Democratic activities among the proletarian masses are
> properly, effectively and widely organised, such institutions may
> actually become superfluous."* [Marx, Engels and Lenin, **Anarchism
> and Anarcho-Syndicalism**, pp. 209-10]

Such a perspective indicates well the difference between anarchism and
Leninism. Anarchists do not seek power for their own organisations.
Rather they see self-managed organisation created by working class
people in struggle as a means of eliminating hierarchy within society,
of directly involving the mass of people in the decisions that affect
them. In other words, as a means of creating the organisations through
which people can change both themselves and the world by their own
direct action and the managing of their own struggles, lives,
communities and workplaces. For Leninists, view working class
self-organisation as a means of gaining power for their own party (which
they identify with the power of the working class). Mass organisations,
which could be schools for self-management and freedom, are instead
subjected to an elitist leadership of intellectual ideologues. The party
soon substitutes itself for the mass movement, and the party leadership
substitutes itself the party.

Despite its radical language, Leninism is totally opposed to the nature
of revolt, rebellion and revolution. It seeks to undermine what makes
these organisations and activities revolutionary (their tendencies
towards self-management, decentralisation, solidarity, direct action,
free activity and co-operation) by using them to build their party and,
ultimately, a centralised, hierarchical state structure on the corpse of
these once revolutionary forms of working class self-organisation and
self-activity.

Lenin's view of the soviets was instrumental: he regarded them merely as
a means for educating the working class (i.e. of getting them to support
the Bolshevik Party) and enlisting them in the service of his party.
Indeed, he constantly confused soviet power with party power, seeing the
former as the means to the latter and the latter as the key to creating
socialism. What is missing from his vision is the idea of socialism as
being based on working class self-activity, self-management and
self-government (*"Lenin believed that the transition to socialism was
guaranteed ultimately, not by the self-activity of workers, but by the
'proletarian' character of state power."* [A. S. Smith, **Red
Petrograd**, pp. 261-2] And the 'proletarian' character of the state was
determined by the party in government). And this gap in his politics,
this confusion of party with class, which helped undermine the
revolution and create the dictatorship of the bureaucracy. Little wonder
that by the end of 1918, the Bolsheviks ruled the newly established
soviet state entirely alone and had turned the soviets into docile
instruments of their party apparatus rather than forms of working class
self-government.

For Lenin and other Bolsheviks the party of the proletariat, that is,
**their** party, must strive to monopolise political power, if only to
safeguard the proletarian character of the revolution. This follows
naturally from Lenin's vanguardist politics (see [section
11](append31.html#app11)). As the working class people cannot achieve
anything bar a trade union consciousness by their own efforts, it would
be insane for the Party to let them govern directly. In the words of
Lenin:

> *"Syndicalism hands over to the mass of non-Party workers . . . the
> management of their industries . . . thereby making the Party
> superfluous. . . Why have a Party, if industrial management is to be
> appointed . . . by trade unions nine-tenths of whose members are
> non-Party workers?"* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 319-20]
>
> *"Does every worker know how to run the state? . . . this is not true
> . . . If we say that it is not the Party but the trade unions that put
> up the candidates and administrate, it may sound very democratic . . .
> It will be fatal for the dictatorship of the proletariat."* [**Op.
> Cit.** p. 322]
>
> *"To govern you need an army of steeled revolutionary Communists. We
> have it, and it is called the Party. All this syndicalist nonsense
> about mandatory nominations of producers must go into the wastepaper
> basket. To proceed on those lines would mean thrusting the Party aside
> and making the dictatorship of the proletariat . . . impossible."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p. 323]

In other words, giving the proletariat the power to elect their own
managers means to destroy the *"dictatorship"* of the proletariat! Lenin
clearly places the power of the party above the ability of working
people to elect their own representatives and managers. And McNally
claims that his tradition aims at *"workers' power"* and a *"direct and
active democracy"*!

Lenin's belief that working class people could not liberate themselves
(see [section 11](append31.html#app11)) explains his continual emphasis
on **representative** democracy and centralism -- simply put, the party
must have power **over** the working class as that class could not be
trusted to make the right decisions (i.e. know what its "real" interests
were). At best they would be allowed to vote for the government, but
even this right could be removed if they voted for the wrong people (see
[section 8](append31.html#app8)). For Leninists, revolutionary
consciousness is not generated by working class self-activity in the
class struggle, but is embodied in the party (*"Since there can there
can be no talk of an independent ideology being developed by the masses
of the workers in the process of their movement **the only choice is**:
either bourgeois or socialist ideology"* [Lenin, **The Essential Works
of Lenin**, 82]). The important issues facing the working class are to
be determined not by the workers ourselves, but by the leadership of the
party, who are the (self appointed) *"vanguard of the proletariat"*. The
nature of the relationship between the party and the working class is
clear, however, we remain incapable of achieving revolutionary
consciousness and have to be led by the vanguard.

Russia, Lenin once said, *"was accustomed to being ruled by 150 000 land
owners. Why can 240 000 Bolsheviks not take over the task?"*
[**Collected Works**, Vol. 21, p. 336] The idea of socialism as working
class self-management and self-government was lost on him -- and the
possibility **real** socialism was soon lost to the Russian working
class when the Tsar was replaced by the autocratic the rule of the
Bolshevik Party. *"Workers' power"* cannot be identified or equated with
the power of the Party -- as it repeatedly was by the Bolsheviks (and
Social Democrats before them).

Thus Malatesta's comments:

> "The important, fundamental dissension [between anarchists and
> Marxists] is [that] . . . [Marxist] socialists are authoritarians,
> anarchists are libertarians.
> "Socialists want power . . . and once in power wish to impose their
> programme on the people. . . Anarchists instead maintain, that
> government cannot be other than harmful, and by its very nature it
> defends either an existing privileged class or creates a new one."
> [**Life and Ideas**, p. 142]

Anarchists seek to influence people by the power of our ideas within
popular organisations. We see such organisations as the means by which
working people can take control of their own lives and start to create a
free, libertarian socialist society. A self-managed society can only be
created by self-management, in short, and any tendencies to undermine
popular self-management in favour of hierarchical power of a party will
subvert a revolution and create an end drastically at odds with the
ideals of those who take part in it.

Similarly, anarchists reject the Leninist idea of highly centralised
"vanguard" parties. As the anarchists of Trotwatch explain, such a party
leaves much to be desired:

> *"In reality, a Leninist Party simply reproduces and institutionalises
> existing capitalist power relations inside a supposedly
> 'revolutionary' organisation: between leaders and led; order givers
> and order takers; between specialists and the acquiescent and largely
> powerless party workers. And that elitist power relation is extended
> to include the relationship between the party and class."* [**Carry on
> Recruiting!**, p. 41]

Such an organisation can never create a socialist society. In contrast,
anarchists argue that socialist organisations should reflect as much as
possible the future society we are aiming to create. To build
organisations which are statist/capitalistic in structure cannot do
other than reproduce the very problems of capitalism/statism into them
and so undermine their liberatory potential. As Murray Bookchin puts it:

> "The 'glorious party,' when there is one, almost invariably lags
> behind the events . . . In the beginning . . . it tends to have an
> inhibitory function, not a 'vanguard' role. Where it exercises
> influence, it tends to slow down the flow of events, not 'co-ordinate'
> the revolutionary forced. This is not accidental. The party is
> structured along hierarchical lines **that reflect the very society it
> professes to oppose** . . . Its membership is schooled in obedience .
> . . The party's leadership, in turn, is schooled in habits born of
> command, authority, manipulation . . . Its leaders . . . lose contact
> with the living situation below. The local groups, which know their
> own immediate situation better than any remote leaders, are obliged to
> subordinate their insights to directives from above. The leadership,
> lacking any direct knowledge of local problems, responds sluggishly
> and prudently. . .
> "The party becomes less efficient from a revolutionary point of view
> the more it seeks efficiency by means of hierarchy, cadres and
> centralisation. Although everyone marches in step, the orders are
> usually wrong, especially when events begin to move rapidly and take
> unexpected turns -- as they do in all revolutions. The party is
> efficient in only one respect -- in moulding society in its own
> hierarchical imagine if the revolution is successful. It recreates
> bureaucracy, centralisation and the state. It fosters the bureaucracy,
> centralisation and the state. It fosters the very social conditions
> which justify this kind of society. Hence, instead of 'withering
> away,' the state controlled by the 'glorious party' preserves the very
> conditions which 'necessitate' the existence of a state -- and a party
> to 'guard' it." [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, pp. 194-198]

As we argue in [section J.3](secJ3.html), anarchists do not reject the
need for political organisations (anarchist groups, federations and so
on) to work in mass movements and in revolutionary situations. However,
we do reject the Leninist idea of a vanguard party as being totally
inappropriate for the needs of a social revolution -- a revolution that
aims to create a free society.

In addition to this difference in the **political** nature of a
socialist society, the role of organisations created in, by and for the
class struggle and the nature of socialist organisation, anarchists and
Marxists disagree with the **economic** nature of the future society.

McNally claims that in Russia *"[c]ontrol of the factories was taken
over by the workers"* but this is a total distortion of what actually
happened. Throughout 1917, it was the workers themselves, **not** the
Bolshevik Party, which raised the issue of workers' self-management and
control. As S.A. Smith puts it, the *"factory committees launched the
slogan of workers' control of production quite independently of the
Bolshevik party. It was not until May that the party began to take it
up."* [**Red Petrograd**, p. 154] Given that the defining aspect of
capitalism is wage labour, the Russian workers' raised a clearly
socialist demand that entailed its abolition. It was the Bolshevik
party, we must note, who failed to raise above a *"trade union
conscious"* in this and so many other cases.

In reality, the Bolsheviks themselves hindered the movement of workers
trying to control, and then manage, the factories they worked in. As
Maurice Brinton correctly argued, *"it is ridiculous to claim -- as so
many do today -- that in 1917 the Bolsheviks really stood for the full,
total and direct control by working people of the factories, mines,
building sites or other enterprises in which they worked, i.e. that they
stood for workers' self-management."* [**The Bolsheviks and Workers'
Control**, p. 27] Rather, Lenin identified *"workers' control"* as
something totally different:

> *"When we speak of 'workers control,' always placing this cry side by
> side with the dictatorship of the proletariat . . . we make clear
> thereby what State we have in mind . . . if we have in mind a
> proletarian State -- that is, the dictatorship of the proletariat --
> then the workers' control can become a national, all-embracing,
> universally realisable, most exact and most conscientious regulating
> of the production and distribution of goods."* [**Can the Bolsheviks
> Maintain State Power?**, pp. 46-7]

By *"regulation"* Lenin meant the "power" to oversee the books, to check
the implementation of decisions made by others, rather than fundamental
decision making. As he argued, *"the economists, engineers, agricultural
experts and so on . . . [will] work out plans under the control of the
workers' organisations . . . We are in favour of centralisation."*
[**Op. Cit.**, pp. 78-9] Thus others would determine the plans, not the
workers themselves. As Brinton states, *"[n]owhere in Lenin's writings
is workers' control ever equated with fundamental decision-taking (i.e.
with the **initiation** of decisions) relating to production . . . He
envisioned a period during which, in a workers state, the bourgeois
would still retain the formal ownership and effective management of most
of the productive apparatus . . . capitalists would be coerced into
co-operation. 'Workers' control' was seen as the instrument of this
coercion."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 12-13] In Lenin's own words, *"[t]here is
no other way . . . than . . . organisation of really democratic control,
i.e. control 'from below,' of the workers and poorest peasants **over**
the capitalists."* [**The Threatening Catastrophe and how to avoid it**,
p. 33]

Thus the capitalists would remain and wage slavery would continue but
workers could "control" those who had the real power and gave the orders
(the capitalists were later replaced by state bureaucrats though the
lack of effective control remained). In other words, no vision of
workers' self-management in production (and so real socialism) and the
reduction of "socialism" to a warmed up variation of state capitalism
with (in theory, but not in practice) a dash of liberal democracy in the
form of "control" of those with the real power by those under them in
the hierarchy.

S.A. Smith correctly argues that Lenin's *"proposals . . . [were]
thoroughly statist and centralist in character"* and that he used *"the
term ['workers' control'] in a very different sense from that of the
factory committees."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 154] That is, he used the same
slogans as many workers' but meant something radically different by it.
Leninists follow this tradition today, as can be seen from McNally's use
of the words *"[c]ontrol of the factories was taken over by the
workers"* to refer to situation drastically different from the workers'
self-management it implies to most readers.

Given Lenin's lack of concern about the revolutionising of the relations
of production (a lack not shared by the Russian workers, we must note)
it is hardly surprising that Lenin considered the first task of the
Bolshevik revolution was to build state capitalism. *"State
capitalism,"* he wrote, *"is a complete material preparation for
socialism, the threshold of socialism, a rung on the ladder of history
between which and the rung called socialism there are no gaps."*
[**Collected Works**, vol. 24, p. 259] Hence his support for
centralisation and his full support for *"one-man management"* --
working class power **in production** is never mentioned as a necessary
condition for socialism.

Little wonder Soviet Russia never progressed beyond state capitalism --
it could not as the fundamental aspect of capitalism, wage labour, was
never replaced by workers' self-management of production.

Lenin took the viewpoint that socialism *"is nothing but the next step
forward from state capitalist monopoly. In other words, Socialism is
merely state capitalist monopoly **made to benefit the whole people**;
by this token it **ceases** to be capitalist monopoly."* [**The
Threatening Catastrophe and how to avoid it**, p. 37] He had no real
notion of workers' self-management of production nor of the
impossibilities of combining the centralised state capitalist system
with its big banks, monopolies, big business with genuine rank and file
control, never mind self-management. As Alexander Berkman correctly
argued:

> *"The role of industrial decentralisation in the revolution is
> unfortunately too little appreciated. . . Most people are still in the
> thraldom of the Marxian dogma that centralisation is 'more efficient
> and economical.' They close their eyes to the fact that the alleged
> 'economy' is achieved at the cost of the workers' limb and life, that
> the 'efficiency' degrades him to a mere industrial cog, deadens his
> soul, kills his body. Furthermore, in a system of centralisation the
> administration of industry becomes constantly merged in fewer hands,
> producing a powerful bureaucracy of industrial overlords. It would
> indeed be the sheerest irony if the revolution were to aim at such a
> result. It would mean the creation of a new master class."* [**The ABC
> of Anarchism**, pp. 80-1]

However, this is what Lenin aimed at. The Leninist "vision" of the
future socialist economy is one of a highly centralised organisation,
modelled on capitalism, in which, at best, workers can supervise the
decisions made by others and "control" those in power. It is a vision of
a more democratic corporate structure, with the workers replacing the
shareholders. In practice, it would be a new bureaucracy exploiting and
oppressing those who do the actual work -- as in private capitalism --
simply because capitalist economic structures are designed to empower
the few over the many. Like the capitalist state, they cannot be used by
the working class to achieve their liberation (they are not created for
the mass participation that real socialism requires, quite the reverse
in fact!).

In contrast, anarchists view the socialist economy as being based on
workers' self-management of production and the workplace turned into an
association of equals. Above the individual workplace, federations of
factory committees would co-ordinate activities and ensure wide scale
co-operation is achieved. Thus anarchists see a **new** form of economic
structure developing, one based on workers' organisations created in the
process of struggle **against** capitalism.

In other words, rather than embrace bourgeois notions of "democracy"
(i.e. the election of leaders into positions of power) like Marxists do,
anarchists dissolve hierarchical power by promoting workers'
self-management and association. While Marxism ends up as state
capitalism pure and simple (as can be seen by the experience of Russia
under Lenin and then Stalin) anarchism destroys the fundamental social
relation of capitalism -- wage labour -- via association and workers'
self-management of production.

Thus while both Leninists and anarchists claim to support factory
committees and "workers' control" we have decidedly different notions of
what we mean by this. The Leninists see them as a means of workers' to
supervise those who have the real power in the economy (and so
perpetuate wage slavery with the state replacing the boss). Anarchists,
in contrast, see them as a means of expressing workers
self-organisation, self-management and self-government -- as a means of
abolishing wage slavery and so capitalism by eliminating hierarchical
authority, in other words. The difference could not be more striking.
Indeed, it would be correct to state that the Leninist tradition is not,
in fact, socialist as it identifies socialism as the natural development
of capitalism and **not** as a new form of economy which will develop
**away** from capitalism by means of associated labour and workers'
self-management of production.

In short, anarchists reject both the means and the ends Leninists aim
for and so our disagreements with that tradition is far more than
semantics.

This does not mean that all members of Leninist parties do not support
workers' self-management in society and production, favour workers'
democracy, actually do believe in working class self-emancipation and so
on. Many do, unaware that the tradition they have joined does not
actually share those values. It could, therefore, be argued that such
values can be "added" to the core Leninist ideas. However, such a
viewpoint is optimistic in the extreme. Leninist positions on workers'
self-management, etc., do not "just happen" nor are they the product of
ignorance. Rather they are the natural result of those "core" ideas. To
add other values to Leninism would be like adding extensions to a house
built on sand -- the foundations are unsuitable and any additions would
soon fall down. This was what happened during the Russian Revolution --
movements from below which had a different vision of socialism came to
grief on the rocks of Bolshevik power.

The issue is clear -- either you aim for a socialist society and use
socialist methods to get there or you do not. Those who do seek a
**real** socialism (as opposed to warmed up state capitalism) would be
advised to consider anarchism which is truly *"socialism from below"*
(see [next section](append31.html#app14)).

14. Why is McNally's use of the term *"socialism from below"* dishonest?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

McNally argues that Marxism can be considered as *"socialism from
below."* Indeed, that is the name of his pamphlet. However, his use of
the term is somewhat ironic for two reasons.

Firstly, this is because the expression *"from below"* was constantly on
the lips of Bakunin and Proudhon. For example, in 1848, Proudhon was
talking about being a *"revolutionary **from below**"* and that every
*"serious and lasting Revolution"* was *"made **from below,** by the
people."* A *"Revolution **from above**"* was *"pure governmentalism,"*
*"the negation of collective activity, of popular spontaneity"* and is
*"the oppression of the wills of those below."* [quoted by George
Woodcock, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 143] Similarly, Bakunin saw an
anarchist revolution as coming *"from below."* As he put it, *"liberty
can be created only by liberty, by an insurrection of all the people and
the voluntary organisation of the workers from below upward."*
[**Statism and Anarchy**, p. 179] Elsewhere he writes that *"future
social organisation must be made solely from the bottom upwards, by the
free association or federation of workers, firstly in their unions, then
in the communes, regions, nations and finally in a great federation,
international and universal."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**,
p. 206]

No such idea is present in Marx. Rather, he saw a revolution as
consisting of the election of a socialist party into government.
Therefore, the idea of *"socialism from below"* is a distinctly
anarchist notion, one found in the works of Proudhon and Bakunin,
**not** Marx. It is ironic, given his distorted account of Proudhon and
Bakunin that McNally uses their words to describe Marxism!

Secondly, and far more serious for McNally, Lenin dismissed the idea of
*"from below"* as not Marxist. As he wrote in 1905 (and using Engels as
an authority to back him up) *"the principle, 'only from below' is an
**anarchist** principle."* [Marx, Engels and Lenin, **Anarchism and
Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 192] In this he followed Marx, who commented
that Bakunin's expression *"the free organisation of the working masses
from below upwards"* was *"nonsense."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 153] For Lenin,
Marxists must be in favour of *"From above as well as from below"* and
*"renunciation of pressure also from above is **anarchism**"* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 196, p. 189] McNally does not mention *"from above"* in his
pamphlet and so gives his account of Marxism a distinctly anarchist feel
(while denouncing it in a most deceitful way). Why is this? Because,
according to Lenin, *"[p]ressure from below is pressure by the citizens
on the revolutionary government. Pressure from above is pressure by the
revolutionary government on the citizens."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 189-90]

In other words, Marxism is based on idea that the government pressuring
the citizens is acceptable. Given that Marx and Engels had argued in
**The Holy Family** that the *"question is not what this or that
proletarian, or even the whole of the proletariat at the moment
**considers** as its aim. The question is **what the proletariat is**,
and what, consequent on that **being**, it will be compelled to do"* the
idea of *"from above"* takes on frightening overtones. [quoted by Murray
Bookchin, **The Spanish Anarchists**, p. 280] As Murray Bookchin argues:

> *"These lines and others like them in Marx's writings were to provide
> the rationale for asserting the authority of Marxist parties and their
> armed detachments over and even against the proletariat. Claiming a
> deeper and more informed comprehension of the situation then 'even the
> whole of the proletariat at the given moment,' Marxist parties went on
> to dissolve such revolutionary forms of proletarian organisation as
> factory committees and ultimately to totally regiment the proletariat
> according to lines established by the party leadership."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 289]

A given ideological premise will led to certain conclusions in practice
-- conclusions Lenin and Trotsky were not shy in explicitly stating.

Little wonder McNally fails to mention Lenin's support for revolutionary
action *"from above."* As we proved above (in [section
8](append31.html#app8)), in practice Leninism substitutes the
dictatorship of the party for that of the working class as a whole. This
is unsurprising, given its confusion of working class power and party
power. For example, Lenin once wrote *"the power of the Bolsheviks --
that is, the power of the proletariat"* while, obviously, these two
things **are** different. [**Will the Bolsheviks Maintain Power?**, p.
102] Trotsky makes the same identification of party dictatorship with
popular self-government:

> *"We have more than once been accused of having substituted for the
> dictatorship of the Soviets the dictatorship of our party. Yet it can
> be said with complete justice that the dictatorship of the Soviets
> became possible only by means of the dictatorship of the party. It is
> thanks to the clarity of its theoretical vision and its strong
> revolutionary organisation that the party has afforded to the Soviets
> the possibility of becoming transformed from shapeless parliaments of
> labour into the apparatus of the supremacy of labour. In this
> 'substitution' of the power of the party for the power of the working
> class there is nothing accidental, and in reality there is no
> substitution at all. The Communists express the fundamental interests
> of the working class. It is quite natural that, in the period in which
> history brings up those interests . . . the Communists have become the
> recognised representatives of the working class as a whole."*
> [**Terrorism and Communism**, p. 109]

In this confusion, we must note, they follow Engels who argued that
*"each political party sets out to establish its rule in the state, so
the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party is striving to establish
**its** rule, the rule of the working class."* [Marx, Engels and Lenin,
**Anarchism and Anarcho-syndicalism**, p. 94]

Such confusion is deadly to a true *"revolution from below"* and
justifies the use of repression against the working class -- they do not
understand their own *"fundamental interests,"* only the party does.
Anarchists recognise that parties and classes are different and only
self-management in popular organisations from below upwards can ensure
that a social revolution remains in the hands of all and not a source of
power for the few. Thus *"All Power to the Soviets,"* for anarchists,
means **exactly** that -- not a euphemism for *"All Power to the
Party."* As Voline made clear:

> *"[F]or, the anarchists declared, if 'power' really should belong to
> the soviets, it could not belong to the Bolshevik Party, and if it
> should belong to that Party, as the Bolsheviks envisaged, it could not
> belong to the soviets."* [**The Unknown Revolution**, p. 213]

Marxist confusion of the difference between working class power and
party power, combined with the nature of centralised power and an
ideology which claims to "comprehend" the "real" interests of the people
cannot help but lead to the rise of a ruling bureaucracy, pursuing "from
above" their own power and privileges.

*"**All political power inevitably creates a privileged situation** for
the men who exercise it,"* argued Voline. *"Thus is violates, from the
beginning, the equalitarian principle and strikes at the heart of the
Social Revolution . . . [and] becomes the source of other privileges . .
. **power is compelled to create a bureaucratic and coercive apparatus**
indispensable to all authority . . . **Thus it forms a new privileged
caste,** at first politically and later economically."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 249]

Thus the concept of revolution *"from above"* is one that inevitably
leads to a new form of class rule -- rule by bureaucracy. This is not
because the Bolsheviks were "bad people" -- rather it is to do with the
nature of centralised power (which by its very nature can only be
exercised by the few). As the anarchist Sergven argued in 1918:

> *"The proletariat is being gradually enserfed by the state. The people
> are being transformed into servants over whom there has arisen a new
> class of administrators -- a new class born mainly form the womb of
> the so-called intelligentsia . . . We do not mean to say . . . that
> the Bolshevik party set out to create a new class system. But we do
> say that even the best intentions and aspirations must inevitably be
> smashed against the evils inherent in any system of centralised power.
> The separation of management from labour, the division between
> administrators and workers flows logically from centralisation. It
> cannot be otherwise."* [**The Anarchists in the Russian Revolution**,
> pp. 123-4]

Thus McNally's use of the term *"from below"* is dishonest on two
levels. Firstly, it is of anarchist origin and, secondly, it was
repudiated by Lenin himself (who urged revolution *"from below"* and
*"from above"*, thus laying the groundwork for a new class system based
around the Party). It goes without saying that either McNally is
ignorant of his subject (and if so, why write a pamphlet on it) or he
knew these facts and decided to suppress them.

Either way it shows the bankruptcy of Marxism -- it uses libertarian
rhetoric for non-libertarian ends while distorting the real source of
those ideas. That Lenin dismissed this rhetoric and the ideas behind
them as *"anarchist"* says it all. McNally's (and the SWP/ISO's) use of
this rhetoric and imagery is therefore deeply dishonest.

15. Did Trotsky keep alive Leninism's *"democratic essence"*?
-------------------------------------------------------------

McNally argues that *"[d]uring the terrible decades of the 1920s and
1940s . . . the lone voice of Leon Trotsky kept alive some of the basic
elements of socialism from below."* He suggests that it *"was Trotsky's
great virtue to insist against all odds that socialism was rooted in the
struggle for human freedom."*

There is one slight flaw with this argument, namely that it is not
actually true. All through the 1920s and 1930s Trotsky, rather than
argue for *"socialism's democratic essence"*, continually argued for
party dictatorship. That McNally asserts the exact opposite suggests
that the ideas of anarchism are not the only ones he is ignorant of. To
prove our argument, we simply need to provide a chronological account of
Trotsky's actual ideas.

We shall begin in 1920 when we discover Trotsky arguing that:

> *"We have more than once been accused of having substituted for the
> dictatorship of the Soviets the dictatorship of the party. Yet it can
> be said with complete justice that the dictatorship of the Soviets
> became possible only by means of the dictatorship of the party. It is
> thanks to the . . . party . . . [that] the Soviets . . . [became]
> transformed from shapeless parliaments of labour into the apparatus of
> the supremacy of labour. In this 'substitution' of the power of the
> party for the power of the working class there is nothing accidental,
> and in reality there is no substitution at all. The Communists express
> the fundamental interests of the working class."* [**Terrorism and
> Communism**, p. 109]

Of course, this was written during the Civil War and may be excused in
terms of the circumstances in which it was written. Sadly for this kind
of argument, Trotsky continued to argue for party dictatorship after its
end. In 1921, he argued again for Party dictatorship at the Tenth Party
Congress. His comments made there against the **Workers' Opposition**
within the Communist Party make his position clear:

> *"The Workers' Opposition has come out with dangerous slogans, making
> a fetish of democratic principles! They place the workers' right to
> elect representatives - above the Party, as if the party were not
> entitled to assert its dictatorship even if that dictatorship
> temporarily clashed with the passing moods of the workers' democracy.
> It is necessary to create amongst us the awareness of the
> revolutionary birthright of the party. which is obliged to maintain
> its dictatorship, regardless of temporary wavering even in the working
> classes. This awareness is for us the indispensable element. The
> dictatorship does not base itself at every given moment on the formal
> principle of a workers' democracy."* [quoted by Samuel Farber,
> **Before Stalinism**, p. 209]

He repeated this call again. In 1922 he stated plainly that *"we
maintain the dictatorship of our party!"* [**The First Five Years of the
Communist International**, vol. 2, p. 255] Writing in 1923, he argued
that *"[i]f there is one question which basically not only does not
require revision but does not so much as admit the thought of revision,
it is the question of the dictatorship of the Party, and its leadership
in all spheres of our work."* He stressed that *"[o]ur party is the
ruling party . . . To allow any changes whatever in this field, to allow
the idea of a partial . . . curtailment of the leading role of our party
would mean to bring into question all the achievements of the revolution
and its future."* He indicated the fate of those who **did** question
the party's *"leading role"*: *"Whoever makes an attempt on the party's
leading role will, I hope, be unanimously dumped by all of us on the
other side of the barricade."* [**Leon Trotsky Speaks**, p. 158 and p.
160]

Which, of course, was exactly what the Bolsheviks had done to other
socialists (anarchists and others) and working class militants and
strikers after they had taken power.

At this point, it will be argued that this was before the rise of
Stalinism and the defeat of the Left Opposition. With the rise of
Stalin, many will argue that Trotsky finally rejected the idea of party
dictatorship and re-embraced what McNally terms the *"democratic
essence"* of socialism. Unfortunately, yet again, this argument suffers
from the flaw that it is totally untrue.

Let us start with the so-called *"New Course"* of December 1923, in
which Trotsky stated that *"[w]e are the only party in the country and,
in the period of the dictatorship, it could not be otherwise"* and the
Party was *"obliged to monopolise the direction of political life."*
Although, of course, it was *"incontestable that fractions are a scourge
in the present situation"* and not to be tolerated. Of course, there was
talk of *"workers' democracy"* but the *"New Course Resolution"* was
clear that that term in fact meant only internal party democracy:
*"Workers' democracy means the liberty of frank discussion of the most
important questions of party life by all members, and the election of
all leading party functionaries and commissions"*. To confirm this, it
explicitly stated that *"there can be no toleration of the formation of
groupings whose ideological content is directed . . . against the
dictatorship of the proletariat, as for instance the Workers' Truth and
Workers' Group."* [**The challenge of the Left Opposition (1923-25)**,
p. 87, p. 89 and p. 460] Both these groups explicitly aimed for genuine
workers' democracy and opposed party dictatorship.

Moving on to Left Opposition proper, we see Trotsky opining in 1926 that
the *"dictatorship of the party does not contradict the dictatorship of
the class either theoretically or practically; but is the expression of
it, if the regime of workers' democracy is constantly developed more and
more."* [**The Challenge of the Left Opposition (1926-27)**, p. 76] The
obvious contradictions and absurdities of this assertion are all too
plain. Needless to say, when defending the concept of *"the dictatorship
of the party"* he linked it to Lenin (and so to Leninist orthodoxy):

> *"Of course, the foundation of our regime is the dictatorship of a
> class. But this in turn assumes . . . it is class that has come to
> self-consciousness through its vanguard, which is to say, through the
> party. Without this, the dictatorship could not exist . . .
> Dictatorship is the most highly concentrated function of function of a
> class, and therefore the basic instrument of a dictatorship is a
> party. In the most fundamental aspects a class realises its
> dictatorship through a party. That is why Lenin spoke not only of the
> dictatorship of the class but also the dictatorship of the party and,
> **in a certain sense**, made them identical."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
> 75-6]

1927 saw Trotsky state that *"[w]ith us the dictatorship of the party
(quite falsely disputed theoretically by Stalin) is the expression of
the socialist dictatorship of the proletariat . . . The dictatorship of
a party is a part of the socialist revolution"*? [**Leon Trotsky on
China**, p. 251]

The same year saw the publication of the **Platform of the Opposition**,
in which it will soon be discovered that Trotsky **still** did not
question the issue of Party dictatorship. Indeed, it is actually
stressed in that document. While it urged a *"consistent development of
a workers' democracy in the party, the trade unions, and the soviets"*
and to *"convert the urban soviets into real institutions of proletarian
power"* it contradicted itself by, ironically, attacking Stalin for
weakening the party's dictatorship. In its words, the *"growing
replacement of the party by its own apparatus is promoted by a 'theory'
of Stalin's which denies the Leninist principle, inviolable for every
Bolshevik, that the dictatorship of the proletariat is and can be
realised only through the dictatorship of the party."* Of course it did
not bother to explain how workers' democracy **could** develop within a
party dictatorship nor how soviets could become institutions of power
when real power would, obviously, lie with the party. But, then, it did
not have to as by *"workers' democracy"* the Platform meant inter-party
democracy, as can be seen when its authors *"affirm"* the *"New Course
Resolution"* definition quoted above. [**The Challenge of the Left
Opposition (1926-7)**, p. 384, p. 395 and p. 402]

It repeated this *"principle"* by arguing that *"the dictatorship of the
proletariat demands a single and united proletarian party as the leader
of the working masses and the poor peasantry."* It stressed that
*"[n]obody who sincerely defends the line of Lenin can entertain the
idea of 'two parties' or play with the suggestion of a split. Only those
who desire to replace Lenin's course with some other can advocate a
split or a movement along the two-party road."* As such: *"We will fight
with all our power against the idea of two parties, because the
dictatorship of the proletariat demands as its very core a single
proletarian party. It demands a single party."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 439
and p. 441]

Trotsky did not change from this perspective even after the horrors of
Stalinism which McNally correctly documents. Writing in 1937, ten years
after the Platform was published, this point is reiterated in his essay,
*"Bolshevism and Stalinism"* (written in 1937) when argued quite
explicitly that *"the proletariat can take power only through its
vanguard"* and that *"the necessity for state power arises from an
insufficient cultural level of the masses and their heterogeneity."*
Only with *"support of the vanguard by the class"* can there be the
*"conquest of power"* and it was in *"this sense the proletarian
revolution and dictatorship are the work of the whole class, but only
under the leadership of the vanguard."* Thus, rather than the working
class as a whole seizing power, it is the *"vanguard"* which takes power
- *"a revolutionary party, even after seizing power . . . is still by no
means the sovereign ruler of society."* Note, the party is *"the
sovereign ruler of society,"* **not** the working class. Nor can it be
said that he was not clear who held power in his system: state power is
required to **govern the masses,** who cannot exercise power themselves.
As Trotsky put it, *"[t]hose who propose the abstraction of Soviets to
the party dictatorship should understand that only thanks to the
Bolshevik leadership were the Soviets able to lift themselves out of the
mud of reformism and attain the state form of the proletariat."*
[**Writings 1936-37**, p. 490, p. 488 and p. 495] Later that same year
he repeated this position:

> *"The revolutionary dictatorship of a proletarian party is for me not
> a thing that one can freely accept or reject: It is an objective
> necessity imposed upon us by the social realities -- the class
> struggle, the heterogeneity of the revolutionary class, the necessity
> for a selected vanguard in order to assure the victory. The
> dictatorship of a party belongs to the barbarian prehistory as does
> the state itself, but we can not jump over this chapter, which can
> open (not at one stroke) genuine human history. . . The revolutionary
> party (vanguard) which renounces its own dictatorship surrenders the
> masses to the counter-revolution . . . Abstractly speaking, it would
> be very well if the party dictatorship could be replaced by the
> 'dictatorship' of the whole toiling people without any party, but this
> presupposes such a high level of political development among the
> masses that it can never be achieved under capitalist conditions. The
> reason for the revolution comes from the circumstance that capitalism
> does not permit the material and the moral development of the
> masses."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 513-4]

Which was, let us not forget, his argument in 1920! Such remarkable
consistency on this point over a 17 year period and one which cannot be
overlooked if you seek to present an accurate account of Trotsky's ideas
during this period. Significantly, this was the year after his apparent
(and much belated) embrace of soviet democracy in **The Revolution
Betrayed**. His advice on what to do during the Spanish Revolution
followed this pattern: *"Because the leaders of the CNT renounced
dictatorship **for themselves** they left the place open for the
Stalinist dictatorship."* [our emphasis, **Op. Cit.**, p. 514] So much
for workers' power!

Two years later, Trotsky repeats the same dictatorial ideas. Writing in
1939, he indicates yet again that he viewed democracy as a threat to the
revolution and saw the need for party power over workers' freedom (a
position, incidentally, which echoes his comments from 1921):

> *"The very same masses are at different times inspired by different
> moods and objectives. It is just for this reason that a centralised
> organisation of the vanguard is indispensable. Only a party, wielding
> the authority it has won, is capable of overcoming the vacillation of
> the masses themselves . . . if the dictatorship of the proletariat
> means anything at all, then it means that the vanguard of the
> proletariat is armed with the resources of the state in order to repel
> dangers, including those emanating from the backward layers of the
> proletariat itself."* [*"The Moralists and Sycophants against
> Marxism"*, pp. 53-66, **Their Morals and Ours**, p. 59]

Needless to say, **by definition** everyone is *"backward"* when
compared to the *"vanguard of the proletariat."* Moreover, as it is this
*"vanguard"* which is *"armed with the resources of the state"* and
**not** the proletariat as a whole we are left with one obvious
conclusion, namely party dictatorship rather than working class freedom.
This is because such a position means denying exactly what workers'
democracy is meant to be all about -- namely that working people can
recall and replace their delegates when those delegates do not follow
the wishes and mandates of the electors. If the governors determine what
is and what is not in the "real" interests of the masses and "overcome"
(i.e. repress) the governed, then we have dictatorship, not democracy.
Clearly Trotsky is, yet again, arguing for party dictatorship and his
comments are hardly in the spirit of individual/social freedom or
democracy. Rather they mean the promotion of party power over workers'
power -- a position which Trotsky had argued consistently throughout the
1920s and 1930s.

As "Left Oppositionist" Victor Serge pointed out, *"the greatest reach
of boldness of the Left Opposition in the Bolshevik Party was to demand
the restoration of inner-Party democracy, and it never dared dispute the
theory of single-party government - by this time, it was too late."*
[**The Serge-Trotsky Papers**, p. 181] Even in the prison camps in the
late 1920s and early 1930s, *"almost all the Trotskyists continued to
consider that 'freedom of party' would be 'the end of the revolution.'
'Freedom to choose one's party - that is Menshevism,' was the
Trotskyists' final verdict."* [Ante Ciliga, **The Russian Enigma**, p.
280] As can be seen, they were simply following their leader -- and
Bolshevik orthodoxy!

As can be seen, McNally does not present a remotely accurate account of
Trotsky's ideas. All of which makes McNally's comments deeply ironic.
McNally argues that *"Stalin had returned to an ideology resembling
authoritarian pre-Marxian socialism. Gone was socialism's democratic
essence. Stalin's 'Marxism' was a variant of socialism from above"*
Clearly, Trotsky's "Marxism" was also a variant of *"socialism from
above"* and without *"socialism's democratic essence"* (unless you think
that party dictatorship can somehow be reconciled with democracy or
expresses one of the *"basic elements of socialism from below"*). For
Trotsky, as for Stalin, the dictatorship of the party was a fundamental
principle of Bolshevism and one which was above democracy (which, by its
very nature, expresses the *"vacillation of the masses"*).

Ironically, McNally argues that *"[t]hroughout the 1920s and until his
death . . . Trotsky fought desperately to build a revolutionary
socialist movement based on the principles of Marx and Lenin."* Leaving
Marx to one side for the moment, McNally's comments are correct. In his
support for party power and dictatorship (for a *"socialism from
above,"* to use McNally's term) Trotsky was indeed following Lenin's
principles. As noted in the [last section](append31.html#app14), Lenin
had been arguing from a "socialism" based on *"above"* and *"below"*
since at least 1905. The reality of Bolshevik rule (as indicated in
[section 8](append31.html#app8)) showed, pressure *"from above"* by a
"revolutionary" government easily crushes pressure "from below." Nor was
Lenin shy in arguing for Party dictatorship. As he put it in 1920:

> *"the dictatorship of the proletariat cannot be exercised through an
> organisation embracing the whole of the class, because in all
> capitalist countries (and not only over here, in one of the most
> backward) the proletariat is still so divided, so degraded, and so
> corrupted in parts . . . that an organisation taking in the whole
> proletariat cannot directly exercise proletarian dictatorship. It can
> be exercised only by a vanguard . . . Such is the basic mechanism of
> the dictatorship of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and the
> essentials of transitions from capitalism to communism . . . for the
> dictatorship of the proletariat cannot be exercised by a mass
> proletarian organisation."* [**Collected Works**, vol. 32, p. 21]

To stress the point, Lenin is clearly arguing for party power, **not**
workers' power, and that party dictatorship is inevitable in **every**
revolution. This position is **not** put in terms of the extreme
problems facing the Russian Revolution but rather is expressed in
universal terms. As such, in **this** sense, McNally is right -- by
defending the dictatorship of the party Trotsky was following the
"principles" laid down by Lenin.

Despite Lenin and Trotsky's dismissal of democracy, McNally argues that
democracy is the core need of socialism:

> *"A workers' state, according to Marx and Lenin, is a state based upon
> workers' control of society. It depends upon the existence of
> democratic organisation that can control society from below. A
> workers' state presupposes that workers are running the state. To talk
> of a workers' state is necessarily to talk of workers' power and
> workers' democracy."*

Which, as far as it goes, is correct (for anarchists, of course, the
idea that a state can be run from below is utopian -- it is not designed
for that and no state has ever been). Sadly for his argument, both Lenin
and Trotsky argued against the idea of workers' democracy and, in stark
contrast, argued that the dictatorship of the party was essential for a
successful revolution. Indeed, they both explicitly argued against the
idea that a mass, democratic organisation could run society during a
revolution. The need for party power was raised explicitly to combat the
fact that the workers' could change their minds and vote against the
vanguard party. As such, the founding fathers of the SWP/ISO political
tradition explicitly argued that a workers' state had to reject workers
power and democracy in order to ensure the victory of the revolution.
Clearly, according to McNally's own argument, Bolshevism cannot be
considered as "socialism from below" as it explicitly argued that a
workers' state did not "necessarily" mean workers' power or democracy.

As indicated above, for the period McNally **himself** selects (the
1920s and 1930s), Trotsky consistently argued that the Bolshevik
tradition the SWP/ISO places itself was based on the "principle" of
party dictatorship. For McNally to talk about Trotsky keeping
*"socialism from below"* alive is, therefore, truly amazing. It either
indicates a lack of awareness of Trotsky's ideas or a desire to deceive.

For anarchists, we stress, the Bolshevik substitution of party power for
workers power did not come as a surprise. The state is the delegation of
**power** -- as such, it means that the idea of a "workers' state"
expressing "workers' power" is a logical impossibility. If workers
**are** running society then power rests in their hands. If a state
exists then power rests in the hands of the handful of people at the
top, **not** in the hands of all. The state was designed for minority
rule. No state can be an organ of working class (i.e. majority)
self-management due to its basic nature, structure and design.

For this reason anarchists from Bakunin onwards have argued for a
bottom-up federation of workers' councils as the agent of revolution and
the means of managing society after capitalism and the state have been
abolished. If these organs of workers' self-management are co-opted into
a state structure (as happened in Russia) then their power will be
handed over to the **real** power in any state -- the government (in
this case, the Council of People's Commissars). They will quickly become
mere rubberstamps of the organisation which holds the reigns of power,
the vanguard party and its central committee.

McNally rewrites history by arguing that it was *"Stalin's
counter-revolution"* which saw *"communist militants . . . executed,
peasants slaughtered, the last vestiges of democracy eliminated."* The
SWP/ISO usually date this "counter-revolution" to around 1927/8.
However, by this date there was no *"vestiges"* of meaningful democracy
left -- as Trotsky himself made clear in his comments in favour of party
dictatorship in 1921 and 1923. Indeed, Trotsky had supported the
repression of the Kronstadt revolt which had called for soviet democracy
(see the appendix on ["What was the Kronstadt
Rebellion?"](append42.html) for details). He argues that Trotsky
*"acknowledged that the soviets had been destroyed, that union democracy
had disappeared, that the Bolshevik party had been stripped of its
revolutionary character"* under Stalinism. Yet, as we noted in [section
8](append31.html#app8), the Bolsheviks had already destroyed soviet
democracy, undermined union democracy and repressed all revolutionary
elements outside of the party (the anarchists being first in April
1918). Moreover, as we discussed in [section 13](append31.html#app13),
Lenin had argued for the introduction of state capitalism in April 1918
and the appointment of "one-man management." Clearly, by the start of
the Russian Civil War in late May 1918, the Bolsheviks had introduced
much of which McNally denounces as "Stalinism." By 1921, the repression
of the Kronstadt revolt and the major strike wave that inspired it had
made Stalinism inevitable (see the appendix on ["What was the Kronstadt
Rebellion?"](append42.html)). Clearly, to draw a sharp distinction
between Stalinism and Bolshevism under Lenin is difficult, if not
impossible, to make based on McNally's own criteria.

During his analysis of the Trotskyist movements, McNally states that
after the second world war *"the Trotskyist movement greeted"* the
various new Stalinist regimes in Eastern Europe and elsewhere *"as
workers' states"* in spite of being *"brutally undemocratic state
capitalist tyrannies."* Given that the SWP/ISO and a host of other
Leninist groups still argue that Lenin's brutally undemocratic state
capitalist tyranny was some kind of "workers' state" McNally's comments
seem deeply ironic given the history of Leninism in power. As such,
Trotsky's defence of Stalinism as a *"degenerated workers' state"* is
not as surprising as McNally tries to claim. If, as he argues, *"[t]o
talk of a workers' state is necessarily to talk of workers' power and
workers' democracy"* then Lenin's regime had ceased to be a "workers'
state" (if such a thing could exist) by the spring of 1918 at the
latest. For anarchists (and libertarian Marxists) the similarities are
all too clear between the regime under Lenin and that under Stalin. That
McNally cannot see the obvious similarities suggests a lack of
objectivity.

He sums up his account of the post-Second War World Trotskyists by
arguing that "the movement Trotsky had created fell victim to the
ideology of socialism from above." Unfortunately for his claims, this is
not the case. As proven above, Trotsky had consistently argued for the
dictatorship of the party for 20 years and so Trotskyism had always been
based on *"the ideology of socialism from above."* Trotsky had argued
for party dictatorship simply because democratic mass organisations
would allow the working class to express their *"wavering"* and
*"vacillations."* Given that, according to those who follow Bolshevik
ideas, the working class is meant to run the so-called "workers' state"
Trotsky's arguments are extremely significant. He explicitly
acknowledged that under Bolshevism the working class does **not**
actually manage their own fates but rather the vanguard party does. This
is cannot be anything **but** *"socialism from above."* If, as McNally
argues, Trotsky's *"fatal error"* in not recognising that Stalinism was
state capitalism came from *"violating the principles of socialism from
below,"* then this "fatal error" is at the heart of the Leninist
tradition.

As such, its roots can be traced further back than the rise of Stalin.
Its real roots lie with the idea of a "workers' state" and so with the
ideas of Marx and Engels. As Bakunin argued at the time (and anarchists
have repeated since) the state is, by its nature, a centralised and
top-down machine. By creating a "revolutionary" government, power is
automatically transferred from the working class into the hands of a few
people at the top. As they have the real, **de facto**, power in the
state, it is inevitable that they will implement "socialism from above"
as that is how the state is structured. As Bakunin argued, *"every state
. . . are in essence only machines governing the masses from above"* by
a *"privileged minority, allegedly knowing the genuine interests of the
people better than the people themselves."* The idea of a state being
run "from below" makes as much sense as "dry rain." Little wonder
Bakunin argued for a *"federal organisation, from the bottom upward, of
workers' associations, groups, city and village communes, and finally of
regions and peoples"* as *"the sole condition of a real and not
fictitious liberty."* In other words, *"[w]here all rule, there are no
more ruled, and there is no State."* [**The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, p. 211, p. 210 and p. 223] Only this, the destruction of
every state and its replacement by a system of workers' councils, can
ensure a real ***"socialism from below."***

Therefore, rather than signifying the working class running society
directly, the "workers' state" actually signifies the opposite --
namely, that the working class has delegated that power and
responsibility to **others**, namely the government. As Leninism
supports the idea of a "workers' state" then it is inevitably and
logically tied to the idea of "socialism from below." Given that Lenin
himself argued that "only from below" was an anarchist principle (see
[last section](append31.html#app14)), we can easily see what the "fatal
error" of Trotsky **actually** was. By rejecting anarchism he
automatically rejected **real** ***"socialism from below."***

Sadly for McNally, Trotsky did not, as he asserts, embrace the
*"democratic essence"* of socialism in the 1920s or 30s. Rather, as is
clear from Trotsky's writings, he embraced party dictatorship (i.e.
*"socialism from above"*) and considered this as quite compatible
(indeed, an essential aspect) of his Leninist ideology. That McNally
fails to indicate this and, indeed, asserts the exact opposite of the
facts shows that it is not only anarchism he is ignorant about.
