8 What role did the state take in the creation of capitalism?
=============================================================

If the "anarcho"-capitalist is to claim with any plausibility that
"real" capitalism is non-statist or that it can exist without a state,
it must be shown that capitalism evolved naturally, in opposition to
state intervention. However, in reality, the opposite is the case.
Capitalism was born from state intervention and, in the words of
Kropotkin, *"the State . . . and capitalism . . . developed side by
side, mutually supporting and re-enforcing each other."* [**Kropotkin's
Revolutionary Pamphlets**, p. 181]

Numerous writers have made this point. For example, in Karl Polanyi's
flawed masterpiece **The Great Transformation** we read that *"the road
to the free market was opened and kept open by an enormous increase in
continuous, centrally organised and controlled interventionism"* by the
state [p. 140]. This intervention took many forms -- for example, state
support during "mercantilism," which allowed the "manufactures" (i.e.
industry) to survive and develop, enclosures of common land, and so
forth. In addition, the slave trade, the invasion and brutal conquest of
the Americas and other "primitive" nations, and the looting of gold,
slaves, and raw materials from abroad also enriched the European
economy, giving the development of capitalism an added boost. Thus
Kropotkin:

> *"The history of the genesis of capital has already been told by
> socialists many times. They have described how it was born of war and
> pillage, of slavery and serfdom, of modern fraud and exploitation.
> They have shown how it is nourished by the blood of the worker, and
> how little by little it has conquered the whole world."* [**Op.
> Cit.**,p. 207]

Or, if Kropotkin seems too committed to be fair, we have John Stuart
Mill's statement that:

> *"The social arrangements of modern Europe commenced from a
> distribution of property which was the result, not of just partition,
> or acquisition by industry, but of conquest and violence. . . "*
> [**Principles of Political Economy**, p. 15]

Therefore, when supporters of "libertarian" capitalism say they are
against the "initiation of force," they mean only **new** initiations of
force; for the system they support was born from numerous initiations of
force in the past. And, as can be seen from the history of the last 100
years, it also requires state intervention to keep it going (section
D.1, ["Why does state intervention occur?,"](secD1.html) addresses this
point in some detail). Indeed, many thinkers have argued that it was
precisely this state support and coercion (particularly the separation
of people from the land) that played the **key** role in allowing
capitalism to develop rather than the theory that *"previous savings"*
did so. As the noted German thinker Franz Oppenheimer argued, *"the
concept of a 'primitive accumulation,' or an original store of wealth,
in land and in movable property, brought about by means of purely
economic forces"* while *"seem[ing] quite plausible"* is in fact
*"utterly mistaken; it is a 'fairly tale,' or it is a class theory used
to justify the privileges of the upper classes."* [**The State**, pp.
5-6]

This thesis will be discussed in the following sections. It is, of
course, ironic to hear right-wing libertarians sing the praises of a
capitalism that never existed and urge its adoption by all nations, in
spite of the historical evidence suggesting that only state intervention
made capitalist economies viable -- even in that Mecca of "free
enterprise," the United States. As Noam Chomsky argues, *"who but a
lunatic could have opposed the development of a textile industry in New
England in the early nineteenth century, when British textile production
was so much more efficient that half the New England industrial sector
would have gone bankrupt without very high protective tariffs, thus
terminating industrial development in the United States? Or the high
tariffs that radically undermined economic efficiency to allow the
United States to develop steel and other manufacturing capacities? Or
the gross distortions of the market that created modern electronics?"*
[**World Orders, Old and New**, p. 168]. To claim, therefore, that
"mercantilism" is not capitalism makes little sense. Without
mercantilism, "proper" capitalism would never have developed, and any
attempt to divorce a social system from its roots is ahistoric and makes
a mockery of critical thought.

Similarly, it is somewhat ironic when "anarcho"-capitalists and right
libertarians claim that they support the freedom of individuals to
choose how to live. After all, the working class was not given **that**
particular choice when capitalism was developing. Indeed, their right to
choose their own way of life was constantly violated and denied. So to
claim that **now** (after capitalism has been created) we get the chance
to try and live as we like is insulting in the extreme. The available
options we have are not independent of the society we live in and are
decisively shaped by the past. To claim we are "free" to live as we like
(within the laws of capitalism) is basically to argue that we are able
to "buy" the freedom that every individual is due from those who have
stolen it from us in the first place!

Needless to say, some right-libertarians recognise that the state played
a massive role in encouraging industrialisation (more correct to say
"proletarianisation" as it created a working class which did not own the
tools they used, although we stress that this process started on the
land and not in industry). So they contrast "bad" business people (who
took state aid) and "good" ones. Thus Rothbard's comment that Marxists
have *"made no particular distinction between 'bourgeoisie' who made use
of the state, and bourgeoisie who acted on the free market."* [**The
Ethics of Liberty**, p. 72]

But such an argument is nonsense as it ignores the fact that the "free
market" is a network (and defined by the state by the property rights it
enforces). For example, the owners of the American steel and other
companies who grew rich and their companies big behind protectionist
walls are obviously "bad" bourgeoisie. But are the bourgeoisie who
supplied the steel companies with coal, machinery, food, "defence" and
so on not also benefiting from state action? And the suppliers of the
luxury goods to the wealthy steel company owners, did they not benefit
from state action? Or the suppliers of commodities to the workers that
laboured in the steel factories that the tariffs made possible, did they
not benefit? And the suppliers to these suppliers? And the suppliers to
these suppliers? Did not the users of technology first introduced into
industry by companies protected by state orders also not benefit? Did
not the capitalists who had a large and landless working class to select
from benefit from the "land monopoly" even though they may not have,
unlike other capitalists, directly advocated it? It increased the pool
of wage labour for **all** capitalists and increased their bargaining
position/power in the labour market at the expense of the working class.
In other words, such a policy helped maintain capitalist market power,
irrespective of whether individual capitalists encouraged politicians to
vote to create/maintain it. And, similarly, **all** capitalists
benefited from the changes in common law to recognise and protect
capitalist private property and rights that the state enforced during
the 19th century (see section [B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25)).

It appears that, for Rothbard, the collusion between state and business
is the fault, not of capitalism, but of particular capitalists. The
system is pure; only individuals are corrupt. But, for anarchists, the
origins of the modern state-capitalist system lies not in the individual
qualities of capitalists as such but in the dynamic and evolution of
capitalism itself -- a complex interaction of class interest, class
struggle, social defence against the destructive actions of the market,
individual qualities and so forth. In other words, Rothbard's claims are
flawed -- they fail to understand capitalism as a **system** and its
dynamic nature.

Indeed, if we look at the role of the state in creating capitalism we
could be tempted to rename "anarcho"-capitalism "marxian-capitalism".
This is because, given the historical evidence, a political theory can
be developed by which the "dictatorship of the bourgeoisie" is created
and that this capitalist state "withers away" into anarchy. That this
means rejecting the economic and social ideas of Marxism and their
replacement by their direct opposite should not mean that we should
reject the idea (after all, that is what "anarcho"-capitalism has done
to Individualist Anarchism!). But we doubt that many
"anarcho"-capitalists will accept such a name change (even though this
would reflect their politics far better; after all they do not object to
past initiations of force, just current ones and many do seem to think
that the modern state **will** wither away due to market forces).

But this is beside the point. The fact remains that state action was
required to create and maintain capitalism. Without state support it is
doubtful that capitalism would have developed at all.

So, when the right suggests that "we" be "left alone," what they mean by
"we" comes into clear focus when we consider how capitalism developed.
Artisans and peasants were only "left alone" to starve, and the working
classes of industrial capitalism were only "left alone" outside work and
for only as long as they respected the rules of their "betters." As for
the other side of the class divide, they desire to be "left alone" to
exercise their power over others, as we will see. That modern
"capitalism" is, in effect, a kind of "corporate mercantilism," with
states providing the conditions that allow corporations to flourish
(e.g. tax breaks, subsidies, bailouts, anti-labour laws, etc.) says more
about the statist roots of capitalism than the ideologically correct
definition of capitalism used by its supporters.

8.1 What social forces lay behind the rise of capitalism?
---------------------------------------------------------

Capitalist society is a relatively recent development. As Murray
Bookchin points out, for a *"long era, perhaps spanning more than five
centuries,"* capitalism *"coexisted with feudal and simple commodity
relationships"* in Europe. He argues that this period *"simply cannot be
treated as 'transitional' without reading back the present into the
past."* [**From Urbanisation to Cities**, p. 179] In other words,
capitalism was not a inevitable outcome of "history" or social
evolution.

He goes on to note that capitalism existed *"with growing significance
in the mixed economy of the West from the fourteenth century up to the
seventeenth"* but that it *"literally exploded into being in Europe,
particularly England, during the eighteenth and especially nineteenth
centuries."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 181] The question arises, what lay behind
this *"growing significance"*? Did capitalism *"explode"* due to its
inherently more efficient nature or where there other, non-economic,
forces at work? As we will show, it was most definitely the later one --
capitalism was born not from economic forces but from the political
actions of the social elites which its usury enriched. Unlike artisan
(simple commodity) production, wage labour generates inequalities and
wealth for the few and so will be selected, protected and encouraged by
those who control the state in their own economic and social interests.

The development of capitalism in Europe was favoured by two social
elites, the rising capitalist class within the degenerating medieval
cities and the absolutist state. The medieval city was *"thoroughly
changed by the gradual increase in the power of commercial capital, due
primarily to foreign trade. . . By this the inner unity of the commune
was loosened, giving place to a growing caste system and leading
necessarily to a progressive inequality of social interests. The
privileged minorities pressed ever more definitely towards a
centralisation of the political forces of the community. . .
Mercantilism in the perishing city republics led logically to a demand
for larger economic units [i.e. to nationalise the market]; and by this
the desire for stronger political forms was greatly strengthened. . . .
Thus the city gradually became a small state, paving the way for the
coming national state."* [Rudolf Rocker, **Nationalism and Culture**, p.
94]

The rising economic power of the proto-capitalists conflicted with that
of the feudal lords, which meant that the former required help to
consolidate their position. That aid came in the form of the monarchical
state. With the force of absolutism behind it, capital could start the
process of increasing its power and influence by expanding the "market"
through state action.

As far as the absolutist state was concerned, it *"was dependent upon
the help of these new economic forces, and vice versa. . . ." "The
absolutist state,"* Rocker argues, *"whose coffers the expansion of
commerce filled . . ., at first furthered the plans of commercial
capital. Its armies and fleets . . . contributed to the expansion of
industrial production because they demanded a number of things for whose
large-scale production the shops of small tradesmen were no longer
adapted. Thus gradually arose the so-called manufactures, the
forerunners of the later large industries."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 117-8]

Some of the most important state actions from the standpoint of early
industry were the so-called Enclosure Acts, by which the "commons" --
the free farmland shared communally by the peasants in most rural
villages -- was "enclosed" or incorporated into the estates of various
landlords as private property (see section
[8.3](append138.html#secf83)). This ensured a pool of landless workers
who had no option but to sell their labour to capitalists. Indeed, the
widespread independence caused by the possession of the majority of
households of land caused the rising class of merchants to complain
*"that men who should work as wage-labourers cling to the soil, and in
the naughtiness of their hearts prefer independence as squatters to
employment by a master."* [R.H Tawney, cited by Allan Elgar in **The
Apostles of Greed**, p. 12]

In addition, other forms of state aid ensured that capitalist firms got
a head start, so ensuring their dominance over other forms of work (such
as co-operatives). A major way of creating a pool of resources that
could be used for investment was the use of mercantilist policies which
used protectionist measures to enrich capitalists and landlords at the
expense of consumers and their workers. For example, one of most common
complaints of early capitalists was that workers could not turn up to
work regularly. Once they had worked a few days, they disappeared as
they had earned enough money to live on. With higher prices for food,
caused by protectionist measures, workers had to work longer and harder
and so became accustomed to factory labour. In addition, mercantilism
allowed native industry to develop by barring foreign competition and so
allowed industrialists to reap excess profits which they could then use
to increase their investments. In the words of Marian-socialist economic
historian Maurice Dobbs:

> *"In short, the Mercantile System was a system of State-regulated
> exploitation through trade which played a highly important rule in the
> adolescence of capitalist industry: it was essentially the economic
> policy of an age of primitive accumulation."* [**Studies in Capitalism
> Development**, p. 209]

As Rocker summarises, *"when abolutism had victoriously overcome all
opposition to national unification, but its furthering of mercantilism
and economic monopoly it gave the whole social evolution a direction
which could only lead to capitalism."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 116-7]

This process of state aid in capitalist development was also seen in the
United States of America. As Edward Herman points out, the *"level of
government involvement in business in the United States from the late
eighteenth century to the present has followed a U-shaped pattern: There
was extensive government intervention in the pre-Civil War period (major
subsidies, joint ventures with active government participation and
direct government production), then a quasi-laissez faire period between
the Civil War and the end of the nineteenth century [a period marked by
"the aggressive use of tariff protection" and state supported railway
construction, a key factor in capitalist expansion in the USA], followed
by a gradual upswing of government intervention in the twentieth
century, which accelerated after 1930."* [**Corporate Control, Corporate
Power**, p. 162]

Such intervention ensured that income was transferred from workers to
capitalists. Under state protection, America industrialised by forcing
the consumer to enrich the capitalists and increase their capital stock.
*"According to one study, of the tariff had been removed in the 1830s
'about half the industrial sector of New England would have been
bankrupted' . . . the tariff became a near-permanent political
institution representing government assistance to manufacturing. It kept
price levels from being driven down by foreign competition and thereby
shifted the distribution of income in favour of owners of industrial
property to the disadvantage of workers and customers."* [Richard B. Du
Boff, **Accumulation and Power**, p. 56]

This protection was essential, for as Du Boff notes, the *"end of the
European wars in 1814 . . . reopened the United States to a flood of
British imports that drove many American competitors out of business.
Large portions of the newly expanded manufacturing base were wiped out,
bringing a decade of near-stagnation."* Unsurprisingly, the *"era of
protectionism began in 1816, with northern agitation for higher tariffs.
. . "* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 14, p. 55]

Combined with ready repression of the labour movement and government
"homesteading" acts (see section [8.5](append138.html#secf85)), tariffs
were the American equivalent of mercantilism (which, after all, was
above all else a policy of protectionism, i.e. the use of government to
stimulate the growth of native industry). Only once America was at the
top of the economic pile did it renounce state intervention (just as
Britain did, we must note).

This is **not** to suggest that government aid was limited to tariffs.
The state played a key role in the development of industry and
manufacturing. As John Zerzan notes, the *"role of the State is
tellingly reflected by the fact that the 'armoury system' now rivals the
older 'American system of manufactures' term as the more accurate to
describe the new system of production methods"* developed in the early
1800s. [**Elements of Refusal**, p. 100] Moreover, the *"lead in
technological innovation [during the US Industrial Revolution] came in
armaments where assured government orders justified high fixed-cost
investments in special-pursue machinery and managerial personnel.
Indeed, some of the pioneering effects occurred in government-owned
armouries."* [William Lazonick, **Competitive Advantage on the Shop
Floor**, p. 218] The government also *"actively furthered this process
[of "commercial revolution"] with public works in transportation and
communication."* [Richard B. Du Boff, **Op. Cit.**, p. 15]

In addition to this "physical" aid, *"state government provided critical
help, with devices like the chartered corporation"* [**Ibid.**] and, as
we noted in section [B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25), changes in the legal
system which favoured capitalist interests over the rest of society.

Interestingly, there was increasing inequality between 1840 and 1860 in
the USA This coincided with the victory of wage labour and industrial
capitalism -- the 1820s *"constituted a watershed in U.S. life. By the
end of that decade . . .industrialism assured its decisive American
victory, by the end of the 1830s all of its cardinal features were
definitely present."* [John Zerzan, **Op. Cit.**, p. 99] This is
unsurprising, for as we have argued many times, the capitalist market
tends to increase, not reduce, inequalities between individuals and
classes. Little wonder the Individualist Anarchists at the time
denounced the way that property had been transformed into *"a power
[with which] to accumulate an income"* (to use the words of J.K.
Ingalls).

Over all, as Paul Ormerod puts it, the *"advice to follow pure
free-market polices seems . . . to be contrary to the lessons of
virtually the whole of economic history since the Industrial Revolution
. . . every country which has moved into . . . strong sustained growth .
. . has done so in outright violation of pure, free-market principles."
"The model of entrepreneurial activity in the product market, with
judicious state support plus repression in the labour market, seems to
be a good model of economic development."* [**The Death of Economics**,
p. 63]

Thus the social forces at work creating capitalism was a combination of
capitalist activity and state action. But without the support of the
state, it is doubtful that capitalist activity would have been enough to
generate the initial accumulation required to start the economic ball
rolling. Hence the necessity of Mercantilism in Europe and its modified
cousin of state aid, tariffs and "homestead acts" in America.

8.2 What was the social context of the statement "laissez-faire?"
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The honeymoon of interests between the early capitalists and autocratic
kings did not last long. *"This selfsame monarchy, which for weighty
reasons sought to further the aims of commercial capital and was. . .
itself aided in its development by capital, grew at last into a
crippling obstacle to any further development of European industry."*
[Rudolf Rocker, **Nationalism and Culture**, p. 117]

This is the social context of the expression *"laissez-faire"* -- a
system which has outgrown the supports that protected it in its early
stages of growth. Just as children eventually rebel against the
protection and rules of their parents, so the capitalists rebelled
against the over-bearing support of the absolutist state. Mercantilist
policies favoured some industries and harmed the growth of industrial
capitalism in others. The rules and regulations imposed upon those it
did favour reduced the flexibility of capitalists to changing
environments. As Rocker argues, *"no matter how the abolutist state
strove, in its own interest, to meety the demands of commerce, it still
put on industry countless fetters which became gradually more and more
oppressive . . . [it] became an unbearable burden . . . which paralysed
all economic and social life."* [*Op. Cit.*, p. 119] All in all,
mercantilism became more of a hindrance than a help and so had to be
replaced. With the growth of economic and social power by the capitalist
class, this replacement was made easier.

Errico Malatesta notes, *"[t]he development of production, the vast
expansion of commerce, the immeasurable power assumed by money . . .
have guaranteed this supremacy [of economic power over the political
power] to the capitalist class which, no longer content with enjoying
the support of the government, demanded that government arise from its
own ranks. A government which owed its origin to the right of conquest .
. . though subject by existing circumstances to the capitalist class,
went on maintaining a proud and contemptuous attitude towards its now
wealthy former slaves, and had pretensions to independence of
domination. That government was indeed the defender, the property
owners' gendarme, but the kind of gendarmes who think they are somebody,
and behave in an arrogant manner towards the people they have to escort
and defend, when they don't rob or kill them at the next street corner;
and the capitalist class got rid of it . . . [and replaced it] by a
government [and state] . . . at all times under its control and
specifically organised to defend that class against any possible demands
by the disinherited."* [**Anarchy**, pp. 19-20]

Malatesta here indicates the true meaning of *"leave us alone,"* or
*"laissez-faire."* The **absolutist** state (not "the state" per se)
began to interfere with capitalists' profit-making activities and
authority, so they determined that it had to go -- as happened, for
example, in the English, French and American revolutions. However, in
other ways, state intervention in society was encouraged and applauded
by capitalists. *"It is ironic that the main protagonists of the State,
in its political and administrative authority, were the middle-class
Utilitarians, on the other side of whose Statist banner were inscribed
the doctrines of economic Laissez Faire"* [E.P. Thompson, **The Making
of the English Working Class**, p. 90]. Capitalists simply wanted
**capitalist** states to replace monarchical states, so that heads of
government would follow state economic policies regarded by capitalists
as beneficial to their class as a whole. And as development economist
Lance Taylor argues:

> *"In the long run, there are no laissez-faire transitions to modern
> economic growth. The state has always intervened to create a
> capitalist class, and then it has to regulate the capitalist class,
> and then the state has to worry about being taken over by the
> capitalist class, but the state has always been there."* [quoted by
> Noam Chomsky, **Year 501**, p. 104]

In order to attack mercantilism, the early capitalists had to ignore the
successful impact of its policies in developing industry and a "store of
wealth" for future economic activity. As William Lazonick points out,
*"the political purpose of [Adam Smith's] the **Wealth of Nations** was
to attack the mercantilist institutions that the British economy had
built up over the previous two hundred years. . . In his attack on these
institutions, Smith might have asked why the extent of the world market
available to Britain in the late eighteenth century was **so uniquely
under British control.** If Smith had asked this 'big question,' he
might have been forced to grant credit for [it] . . . to the very
mercantilist institutions he was attacking . . ."* Moreover, he *"might
have recognised the integral relation between economic and political
power in the rise of Britain to international dominance."* Overall,
*"[w]hat the British advocates of laissez-faire neglected to talk about
was the role that a system of national power had played in creating
conditions for Britain to embark on its dynamic development path . . .
They did not bother to ask how Britain had attained th[e] position [of
'workshop of the world'], while they conveniently ignored the on going
system of national power - the British Empire -- that . . . continued to
support Britain's position."* [**Business Organisation and the Myth of
the Market Economy**, p. 2, p. 3, p.5]

Similar comments are applicable to American supporters of laissez faire
who fail to notice that the "traditional" American support for
world-wide free trade is quite a recent phenomenon. It started only at
the end of the Second World War (although, of course, **within** America
military Keynesian policies were utilised). While American industry was
developing, the country had no time for laissez-faire. After it had
grown strong, the United States began preaching laissez-faire to the
rest of the world -- and began to kid itself about its own history,
believing its slogans about laissez-faire as the secret of its success.
In addition to the tariff, nineteenth-century America went in heavily
for industrial planning--occasionally under that name but more often in
the name of national defence. The military was the excuse for what is
today termed rebuilding infrastructure, picking winners, promoting
research, and co-ordinating industrial growth (as it still is, we should
add).

As Richard B. Du Boff points out, the "anti-state" backlash of the 1840s
onwards in America was highly selective, as the general opinion was that
*"[h]enceforth, if governments wished to subsidise private business
operations, there would be no objection. But if public power were to be
used to control business actions or if the public sector were to
undertake economic initiatives on its own, it would run up against the
determined opposition of private capital."* [**Accumulation and Power**,
p. 26] In other words, the state could aid capitalists indirectly (via
tariffs, land policy, repression of the labour movement, infrastructure
subsidy and so on) and it would "leave them alone" to oppress and
exploit workers, exploit consumers, build their industrial empires and
so forth.

So, the expression "laissez-faire" dates from the period when
capitalists were objecting to the restrictions that helped create them
in the first place. It has little to do with freedom as such and far
more to do with the needs of capitalist power and profits (as Murray
Bookchin argues, it is an error to depict this *"revolutionary era and
its democratic aspirations as 'bourgeois,' an imagery that makes
capitalism a system more committed to freedom, or even ordinary civil
liberties, than it was historically"* [**From Urbanisation to Cities**,
p. 180f]). Takis Fotopoules, in his essay *"The Nation-state and the
Market"*, indicates that the social forces at work in "freeing" the
market did not represent a "natural" evolution towards freedom:

> *"Contrary to what liberals and Marxists assert, marketisation of the
> economy was not just an evolutionary process, following the expansion
> of trade under mercantilism . . . modern [i.e. capitalist] markets did
> not evolve out of local markets and/or markets for foreign goods . . .
> the nation-state, which was just emerging at the end of the Middle
> Ages, played a crucial role creating the conditions for the
> 'nationalisation' of the market . . . and . . . by freeing the market
> [i.e. the rich and proto-capitalists] from effective social control."*
> [**Society and Nature**, Vol. 3, pp. 44-45]

The "freeing" of the market thus means freeing those who "own" most of
the market (i.e. the wealthy elite) from *"effective social control,"*
but the rest of society was not as lucky. Peter Kropotkin makes a
similar point in **Modern Science and Anarchism**, *"[w]hile giving the
capitalist any degree of free scope to amass his wealth at the expense
of the helpless labourers, the government has **nowhere** and **never**.
. .afforded the labourers the opportunity 'to do as they pleased'."*
[**Kropotkin's Revolutionary Pamphlets**, p. 182]

The one essential form of support the "Libertarian" right wants the
state (or "defence" firms) to provide capitalism is the enforcement of
property rights -- the right of property owners to "do as they like" on
their own property, which can have obvious and extensive social impacts.
What "libertarian" capitalists object to is attempts by others --
workers, society as a whole, the state, etc. -- to interfere with the
authority of bosses. That this is just the defence of privilege and
power (and **not** freedom) has been discussed in [section
B](secBcon.html) and elsewhere in [section F](append13con.html), so we
will not repeat ourselves here.

Samuel Johnson once observed that *"we hear the loudest **yelps** for
liberty among the drivers of Negroes."* Our modern "libertarian"
capitalist drivers of wage-slaves are yelping for exactly the same kind
of "liberty." [Johnson quoted in Noam Chomsky, **Year 501**, p. 141]

8.3 What other forms did state intervention in creating capitalism take?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beyond being a paymaster for new forms of production and social
relations and defending the owners' power, the state intervened
economically in other ways as well. As we noted in section
[B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25), the state played a key role in transforming
the law codes of society in a capitalistic fashion, ignoring custom and
common law to do so. Similarly, the use of tariffs and the granting of
monopolies to companies played an important role in accumulating capital
at the expense of working people, as did the breaking of unions and
strikes by force.

However, one of the most blatant of these acts was the enclosure of
common land. In Britain, by means of the Enclosure Acts, land that had
been freely used by poor peasants for farming their small family plots
was claimed by large landlords as private property. As E.P. Thompson
notes, *"Parliament and law imposed capitalist definitions to exclusive
property in land"* [**Customs in Common**, p. 163]. Property rights,
which exclusively favoured the rich, replaced the use rights and free
agreement that had governed peasant's use of the commons. Unlike use
rights, which rest in the individual, property rights require state
intervention to create and maintain.

This stealing of the land should not be under estimated. Without land,
you cannot live and have to sell your liberty to others. This places
those with capital at an advantage, which will tend to increase, rather
than decrease, the inequalities in society (and so place the landless
workers at an increasing disadvantage over time). This process can be
seen from early stages of capitalism. With the enclosure of the land, an
agricultural workforce was created which had to travel where the work
was. This influx of landless ex-peasants into the towns ensured that the
traditional guild system crumbled and was transformed into capitalistic
industry with bosses and wage slaves rather than master craftsmen and
their journeymen. Hence the enclosure of land played a key role, for
*"it is clear that economic inequalities are unlikely to create a
division of society into an employing master class and a subject
wage-earning class, unless access to the mans of production, including
land, is by some means or another barred to a substantial section of the
community."* [Maurice Dobbs, **Studies in Capitalist Development**, p.
253]

The importance of access to land is summarised by this limerick by the
followers of Henry George (a 19th century writer who argued for a
*"single tax"* and the nationalisation of land). The Georgites got their
basic argument on the importance of land down these few, excellent
lines:

*A college economist planned\
 To live without access to land\
 He would have succeeded\
 But found that he needed\
 Food, shelter and somewhere to stand.\
*

Thus the Individualist (and other) anarchists' concern over the *"land
monopoly"* of which the Enclosure Acts were but one part. The land
monopoly, to use Tucker's words, *"consists in the enforcement by
government of land titles which do not rest upon personal occupancy and
cultivation."* [**The Anarchist Reader**, p. 150] It is important to
remember that wage labour first developed on the land and it was the
protection of land titles of landlords and nobility, combined with
enclosure, that meant people could not just work their own land.

In other words, the circumstances so created by enclosing the land and
enforcing property rights to large estates ensured that capitalists did
not have to point a gun at workers head to get them to work long hours
in authoritarian, dehumanising conditions. In such circumstances, when
the majority are dispossessed and face the threat of starvation,
poverty, homelessness and so on, "initiation of force" is **not
required.** But guns **were** required to enforce the system of private
property that created the labour market in the first place, to enforce
the enclosure of common land and protect the estates of the nobility and
wealthy.

In addition to increasing the availability of land on the market, the
enclosures also had the effect of destroying working-class independence.
Through these Acts, innumerable peasants were excluded from access to
their former means of livelihood, forcing them to migrate to the cities
to seek work in the newly emerging factories of the budding capitalist
class, who were thus provided with a ready source of cheap labour. The
capitalists, of course, did not describe the results this way, but
attempted to obfuscate the issue with their usual rhetoric about
civilisation and progress. Thus John Bellers, a 17th-century supporter
of enclosures, claimed that commons were *"a hindrance to Industry, and
. . . Nurseries of Idleness and Insolence."* The *"forests and great
Commons make the Poor that are upon them too much like the
**indians.**"* [quoted by Thompson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 163] Elsewhere
Thompson argues that the commons *"were now seen as a dangerous centre
of indiscipline . . . Ideology was added to self-interest. It became a
matter of public-spirited policy for gentlemen to remove cottagers from
the commons, reduce his labourers to dependence . . ."* [**The Making of
the English Working Class**, pp. 242-3]

The commons gave working-class people a degree of independence which
allowed them to be "insolent" to their betters. This had to be stopped,
as it undermined to the very roots of authority relationships within
society. The commons **increased** freedom for ordinary people and made
them less willing to follow orders and accept wage labour. The reference
to "Indians" is important, as the independence and freedom of Native
Americans is well documented. The common feature of both cultures was
communal ownership of the means of production and free access to it
(usufruct). This is discussed further in section I.7 ([Won't Libertarian
Socialism destroy individuality?](secI7.html))

As the early American economist Edward Wakefield noted in 1833, *"where
land is cheap and all are free, where every one who so pleases can
easily obtain a piece of land for himself, not only is labour dear, as
respects the labourer's share of the product, but the difficulty is to
obtain combined labour at any price."* [**England and America**, quoted
by Jeremy Brecher and Tim Costello, **Commonsense for Hard Times**, p.
24]

The enclosure of the commons (in whatever form it took -- see section
[8.5](append138.html#secf85) for the US equivalent) solved both problems
-- the high cost of labour, and the freedom and dignity of the worker.
The enclosures perfectly illustrate the principle that capitalism
requires a state to ensure that the majority of people do not have free
access to any means of livelihood and so must sell themselves to
capitalists in order to survive. There is no doubt that if the state had
"left alone" the European peasantry, allowing them to continue their
collective farming practices ("collective farming" because, as Kropotkin
shows in **Mutual Aid**, the peasants not only shared the land but much
of the farm labour as well), capitalism could not have taken hold (see
**Mutual Aid**, pp. 184-189, for more on the European enclosures). As
Kropotkin notes, *"[i]nstances of commoners themselves dividing their
lands were rare, everywhere the State coerced them to enforce the
division, or simply favoured the private appropriation of their lands"*
by the nobles and wealthy. [**Mutual Aid**, p. 188]

Thus Kropotkin's statement that *"to speak of the natural death of the
village community [or the commons] in virtue of economical law is as
grim a joke as to speak of the natural death of soldiers slaughtered on
a battlefield."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 189]

Like the more recent case of fascist Chile, "free market" capitalism was
imposed on the majority of society by an elite using the authoritarian
state. This was recognised by Adam Smith when he opposed state
intervention in **The Wealth of Nations**. In Smith's day, the
government was openly and unashamedly an instrument of wealth owners.
Less than 10 per cent of British men (and no women) had the right to
vote. When Smith opposed state interference, he was opposing the
imposition of wealth owners' interests on everybody else (and, of
course, how "liberal", nevermind "libertarian", is a political system in
which the many follow the rules and laws set-down in the so-called
interests of all by the few? As history shows, any minority given, or
who take, such power **will** abuse it in their own interests). Today,
the situation is reversed, with neo-liberals and right libertarians
opposing state interference in the economy (e.g. regulation of Big
Business) so as to prevent the public from having even a minor impact on
the power or interests of the elite.

The fact that "free market" capitalism always requires introduction by
an authoritarian state should make all honest "Libertarians" ask: How
"free" is the "free market"? And why, when it is introduced, do the rich
get richer and the poor poorer? This was the case in Chile (see [Section
C.11](secC11.html)). For the poverty associated with the rise of
capitalism in England 200 years ago, E.P. Thompson's **The Making of the
English Working Class** provides a detailed discussion. Howard Zinn's
**A People's History of the United States** describes the poverty
associated with 19th-century US capitalism.

8.4 Aren't the enclosures a socialist myth?
-------------------------------------------

The short answer is no, they are not. While a lot of historical analysis
has been spent in trying to deny the extent and impact of the
enclosures, the simple fact is (in the words of noted historian E.P.
Thompson) enclosure *"was a plain enough case of class robbery, played
according to the fair rules of property and law laid down by a
parliament of property-owners and lawyers."* [**The Making of the
English Working Class**, pp. 237-8]

The enclosures were one of the ways that the *"land monopoly"* was
created. The land monopoly was used to refer to capitalist property
rights and ownership of land by (among others) the Individualist
Anarchists. Instead of an *"occupancy and use"* regime advocated by
anarchists, the land monopoly allowed a few to bar the many from the
land -- so creating a class of people with nothing to sell but their
labour. While this monopoly is less important these days in developed
nations (few people know how to farm) it was essential as a means of
consolidating capitalism. Given the choice, most people preferred to
become independent farmers rather than wage workers (see [next
section](append138.html#secf85)).

However, the importance of the enclosure movement is downplayed by
supporters of capitalism. Little wonder, for it is something of an
embarrassment for them to acknowledge that the creation of capitalism
was somewhat less than "immaculate" -- after all, capitalism is
portrayed as an almost ideal society of freedom. To find out that an
idol has feet of clay and that we are still living with the impact of
its origins is something pro-capitalists must deny. So **is** the
enclosures a socialist myth? Most claims that it is flow from the work
of the historian J.D. Chambers' famous essay *"Enclosures and the Labour
Supply in the Industrial Revolution."* [**Economic History Review**, 2nd
series, no. 5, August 1953] In this essay, Chambers attempts to refute
Karl Marx's account of the enclosures and the role it played in what
Marx called *"primitive accumulation."*

We cannot be expected to provide an extensive account of the debate that
has raged over this issue. All we can do is provide a summary of the
work of William Lazonick who presented an excellent reply to those who
claim that the enclosures were an unimportant historical event. We are
drawing upon his summary of his excellent essay *"Karl Marx and
Enclosures in England"* [**Review of Radical Political Economy**, no. 6,
Summer, 1974] which can be found in his books **Competitive Advantage on
the Shop Floor** and **Business Organisation and the Myth of the Market
Economy**. There are three main claims against the socialist account of
the enclosures. We will cover each in turn.

Firstly, it is often claimed that the enclosures drove the uprooted
cottager and small peasant into industry. However, this was never
claimed. It is correct that the agricultural revolution associated with
the enclosures **increased** the demand for farm labour as claimed by
Chambers and others. And this is the whole point - enclosures created a
pool of dispossessed labourers who had to sell their time/liberty to
survive. The *"critical transformation was not the level of agricultural
employment before and after enclosure but the changes in employment
relations caused by the reorganisation of landholdings and the
reallocation of access to land."* [**Competitive Advantage on the Shop
Floor**, p. 30] Thus the key feature of the enclosures was that it
created a supply for farm labour, a supply that had no choice but to
work for another. This would drive down wages and increase demand.
Moreover, freed from the land, these workers could later move to the
towns in search for better work.

Secondly, it is argued that the number of small farm owners increased,
or at least did not greatly decline, and so the enclosure movement was
unimportant. Again, this misses the point. Small farm owners can still
employ wage workers (i.e. become capitalist farmers as opposed to
"yeomen" -- independent peasant proprietor). As Lazonick notes, *"[i]t
is true that after 1750 some petty proprietors continued to occupy and
work their own land. But in a world of capitalist agriculture, the
yeomanry no longer played an important role in determining the course of
capitalist agriculture. As a social class that could influence the
evolution of British economy society, the yeomanry had disappeared."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 32]

Thirdly, it is often claimed that it was population growth, rather than
enclosures, that caused the supply of wage workers. So was population
growth more important that enclosures? Maurice Dobbs argues that *"the
centuries in which a proletariat was most rapidly recruited were apt to
be those of slow rather than of rapid natural increase of population,
and the paucity or plenitude of a labour reserve in different countries
was not correlated with comparable difference in their rates of
population-growth."* [**Studies in Capitalist Development**, p. 223]
Moreover, the population argument ignores the question of whether the
changes in society caused by enclosures and the rise of capitalism have
an impact on the observed trends towards earlier marriage and larger
families after 1750. Lazonick argues that *"[t]here is reason to believe
that they did."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 33] Also, of course, the use of child
labour in the factories created an economic incentive to have more
children, an incentive created by the developing capitalist system.
Overall, Lazonick notes that *"[t]o argue that population growth created
the industrial labour supply is to ignore these momentous social
transformations"* associated with the rise of capitalism [**Business
Organisation and the Myth of the Market Economy**, p. 273].

In other words, there is good reason to think that the enclosures, far
from being some kind of socialist myth, in fact played a key role in the
development of capitalism. As Lazonick himself notes, *"Chambers
misunderstood" "the argument concerning the 'institutional creation' of
a proletarianised (i.e. landless) workforce. Indeed, Chamber's own
evidence and logic tend to support the Marxian [and anarchist!]
argument, when it is properly understood."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 273]

8.5 What about the lack of enclosures in the Americas?
------------------------------------------------------

The enclosure movement was but one way of creating the *"land monopoly"*
which ensured the creation of a working class. The circumstances facing
the ruling class in the Americas were distinctly different than in the
Old World and so the "land monopoly" took a different form there. In the
Americas, enclosures were unimportant as customary land rights did not
really exist. Here the problem was that (after the original users of the
land were eliminated, of course) there were vast tracts of land
available for people to use.

Unsurprisingly, there was a movement towards independent farming and
this pushed up the price of labour, by reducing the supply. Capitalists
found it difficult to find workers willing to work for them at wages low
enough to provide them with sufficient profits. It was due the
difficulty in finding cheap enough labour that capitalists in America
turned to slavery. All things being equal, wage labour **is** more
productive than slavery. But in early America all things were **not**
equal. Having access to cheap (indeed, free) land meant that working
people had a choice, and few desired to become wage slaves. Because of
this, capitalists turned to slavery in the South and the "land monopoly"
in the North and West.

This was because, in the words of Maurice Dobbs, it *"became clear to
those who wished to reproduce capitalist relations of production in the
new country that the foundation-stone of their endeavour must be the
restriction of land-ownership to a minority and the exclusion of the
majority from any share in [productive] property."* [**Studies in
Capitalist Development**, pp. 221-2] As one radical historian puts it,
*"[w]hen land is 'free' or 'cheap'. as it was in different regions of
the United States before the 1830s, there was no compulsion for farmers
to introduce labour-saving technology. As a result, 'independent
household production' . . . hindered the development of capitalism . . .
[by] allowing large portions of the population to escape wage labour."*
[Charlie Post, *"The 'Agricultural Revolution' in the United States"*,
pp. 216-228, **Science and Society**, vol. 61, no. 2, p. 221]

It was precisely this option (i.e. of independent production) that had
to be destroyed in order for capitalist industry to develop. The state
had to violate the holy laws of "supply and demand" by controlling the
access to land in order to ensure the normal workings of "supply and
demand" in the labour market (i.e. that the bargaining position on the
labour market favoured employer over employee). Once this situation
became the typical one (i.e. when the option of self-employment was
effectively eliminated) a (protectionist based) "laissez-faire" approach
could be adopted and state action used only to protect private property
from the actions of the dispossessed.

So how was this transformation of land ownership achieved?

Instead of allowing settlers to appropriate their own farms as was the
case before the 1830s, the state stepped in once the army had cleared
out the original users. Its first major role was to enforce legal rights
of property on unused land. Land stolen from the Native Americans was
sold at auction to the highest bidders, namely speculators, who then
sold it on to farmers. This process started right *"after the
revolution, [when] huge sections of land were bought up by rich
speculators"* and their claims supported by the law [Howard Zinn, **A
People's History of the United States**, p. 125] Thus land which should
have been free was sold to land-hungry farmers and the few enriched
themselves at the expense of the many. Not only did this increase
inequality within society, it also encouraged the development of wage
labour -- having to pay for land would have ensured that many immigrants
remained on the East Coast until they had enough money. Thus a pool of
people with little option but to sell their labour was increased due to
state protection of unoccupied land. That the land usually ended up in
the hands of farmers did not (could not) countermand the shift in class
forces that this policy created.

This was also the essential role of the various "Homesteading Acts" and,
in general, the *"Federal land law in the 19th century provided for the
sale of most of the public domain at public auction to the higher bidder
. . . Actual settlers were forced to buy land from speculators, at
prices considerably above the federal minimal price"* (which few people
could afford anyway) [Charlie Post, **Op. Cit.**, p. 222]. Little wonder
the Individualist Anarchists supported an *"occupancy and use"* system
of land ownership as a key way of stopping capitalist and landlord usury
as well as the development of capitalism itself.

This change in the appropriation of land had significant effects on
agriculture and the desirability of taking up farming for immigrants. As
Post notes, *"[w]hen the social conditions for obtaining and maintaining
possession of land change, as they did in the midwest between 1830 and
1840, pursuing the goal of preserving [family ownership and control] . .
. produced very different results. In order to pay growing mortgages,
debts and taxes, family farmers were compelled to specialise production
toward cash crops and to market more and more of their output."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 221-2]

So, in order to pay for land which was formerly free, farmers got
themselves into debt and increasingly turned to the market to pay it
off. Thus, the *"Federal land system, by transforming land into a
commodity and stimulating land speculation, made the midwestern farmers
dependent upon markets for the continual possession of their farms."*
[Charlie Post, **Op. Cit.**, p. 223] Once on the market, farmers had to
invest in new machinery and this also got them into debt. In the face of
a bad harvest or market glut, they could not repay their loans and their
farms had to be sold to so do so. By 1880, 25% of all farms were rented
by tenants, and the numbers kept rising.

This means that Murray Rothbard's comment that *"once the land was
purchased by the settler, the injustice disappeared"* is nonsense -- the
injustice was transmitted to other parts of society and this, along with
the legacy of the original injustice, lived on and helped transform
society towards capitalism [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 73]. In
addition, his comments about *"the establishment in North America of a
truly libertarian land system"* would be one the Individualist
Anarchists would have seriously disagreed with! [**Ibid.**]

Thus state action, in restricting free access to the land, ensured that
workers were dependent on wage labour. In addition, the *"transformation
of social property relations in northern agriculture set the stage for
the 'agricultural revolution' of the 1840s and 1850s . . . [R]ising
debts and taxes forced midwestern family farmers to compete as commodity
producers in order to maintain their land-holding . . . The
transformation . . . was the central precondition for the development of
industrial capitalism in the United States."* [Charlie Post, **Ibid.**,
p. 226]

In addition to seizing the land and distributing it in such a way as to
benefit capitalist industry, the *"government played its part in helping
the bankers and hurting the farmers; it kept the amount of money - based
in the gold supply - steady while the population rose, so there was less
and less money in circulation. The farmer had to pay off his debts in
dollars that were harder to get. The bankers, getting loans back, were
getting dollars worth more than when they loaned them out - a kind of
interest on top of interest. That was why . . . farmers' movements [like
the Individualist Anarchists, we must add] . . . [talked about] putting
more money in circulation."* [Howard Zinn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 278]

Overall, therefore, state action ensured the transformation of America
from a society of independent workers to a capitalist one. By creating
and enforcing the "land monopoly" (of which state ownership of
unoccupied land and its enforcement of landlord rights were the most
important) the state ensured that the balance of class forces tipped in
favour of the capitalist class. By removing the option of farming your
own land, the US government created its own form of enclosure and the
creation of a landless workforce with little option but to sell its
liberty on the "free market". This, combined with protectionism, ensured
the transformation of American society from a pre-capitalist one into a
capitalist one. They was nothing "natural" about it.

Little wonder the Individualist Anarchist J.K. Ingalls attacked the
"land monopoly" in the following words:

> *"The earth, with its vast resources of mineral wealth, its
> spontaneous productions and its fertile soil, the free gift of God and
> the common patrimony of mankind, has for long centuries been held in
> the grasp of one set of oppressors by right of conquest or right of
> discovery; and it is now held by another, through the right of
> purchase from them. All of man's natural possessions . . . have been
> claimed as property; nor has man himself escaped the insatiate jaws of
> greed. The invasion of his rights and possessions has resulted . . .
> in clothing property with a power to accumulate an income."* [quoted
> by James Martin, **Men Against the State**, p. 142]

8.6 How did working people view the rise of capitalism?
-------------------------------------------------------

The best example of how hated capitalism was can be seen by the rise and
spread of the socialist movement, in all its many forms, across the
world. It is no coincidence that the development of capitalism also saw
the rise of socialist theories. However, in order to fully understand
how different capitalism was from previous economic systems, we will
consider early capitalism in the US, which for many "Libertarians" is
**the** example of the "capitalism-equals-freedom" argument.

Early America was pervaded by artisan production -- individual ownership
of the means of production. Unlike capitalism, this system is **not**
marked by the separation of the worker from the means of life. Most
people did not have to work for another, and so did not. As Jeremy
Brecher notes, in 1831 the *"great majority of Americans were farmers
working their own land, primarily for their own needs. Most of the rest
were self-employed artisans, merchants, traders, and professionals.
Other classes - employees and industrialists in the North, slaves and
planters in the South - were relatively small. The great majority of
Americans were independent and free from anybody's command."*
[**Strike!**, p. xxi] These conditions created the high cost of combined
(wage) labour which ensured the practice of slavery existed.

However, toward the middle of the 19th century the economy began to
change. Capitalism began to be imported into American society as the
infrastructure was improved, which allowed markets for manufactured
goods to grow. Soon, due to (state-supported) capitalist competition,
artisan production was replaced by wage labour. Thus "evolved" modern
capitalism. Many workers understood, resented, and opposed their
increasing subjugation to their employers (*"the masters"*, to use Adam
Smith's expression), which could not be reconciled with the principles
of freedom and economic independence that had marked American life and
sunk deeply into mass consciousness during the days of the early
economy. In 1854, for example, a group of skilled piano makers wrote
that *"the day is far distant when they [wage earners] will so far
forget what is due to manhood as to glory in a system forced upon them
by their necessity and in opposition to their feelings of independence
and self-respect. May the piano trade be spared such exhibitions of the
degrading power of the day [wage] system."* [quoted by Brecher and
Costello, **Common Sense for Hard Times**, p. 26]

Clearly the working class did not consider working for a daily wage, in
contrast to working for themselves and selling their own product, to be
a step forward for liberty or individual dignity. The difference between
selling the product of one's labour and selling one's labour (i.e.
oneself) was seen and condemned (*"[w]hen the producer . . . sold his
product, he retained himself. But when he came to sell his labour, he
sold himself . . . the extension [of wage labour] to the skilled worker
was regarded by him as a symbol of a deeper change"* [Norman Ware, **The
Industrial Worker, 1840-1860**, p. xiv]). Indeed, one group of workers
argued that they were *"slaves in the strictest sense of the word"* as
they had *"to toil from the rising of the sun to the going down of the
same for our masters - aye, masters, and for our daily bread"* [Quoted
by Ware, **Op. Cit.**, p. 42] and another argued that *"the factory
system contains in itself the elements of slavery, we think no sound
reasoning can deny, and everyday continues to add power to its
incorporate sovereignty, while the sovereignty of the working people
decreases in the same degree."* [quoted by Brecher and Costello, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 29]

Almost as soon as there were wage workers, there were strikes, machine
breaking, riots, unions and many other forms of resistance. John
Zerzan's argument that there was a *"relentless assault on the worker's
historical rights to free time, self-education, craftsmanship, and play
was at the heart of the rise of the factory system"* is extremely
accurate [**Elements of Refusal**, p. 105]. And it was an assault that
workers resisted with all their might. In response to being subjected to
the "law of value," workers rebelled and tried to organise themselves to
fight the powers that be and to replace the system with a co-operative
one. As the printer's union argued, *"[we] regard such an organisation
[a union] not only as an agent of immediate relief, but also as an
essential to the ultimate destruction of those unnatural relations at
present subsisting between the interests of the employing and the
employed classes. . . .[W]hen labour determines to sell itself no longer
to speculators, but to become its own employer, to own and enjoy itself
and the fruit thereof, the necessity for scales of prices will have
passed away and labour will be forever rescued from the control of the
capitalist."* [quoted by Brecher and Costello, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 27-28]

Little wonder, then, why wage labourers considered capitalism as a form
of *"slavery"* and why the term *"wage slavery"* became so popular in
the anarchist movement. It was just reflecting the feelings of those who
experienced the wages system at first hand and joined the socialist and
anarchist movements. As labour historian Norman Ware notes, the *"term
'wage slave' had a much better standing in the forties [of the 19th
century] than it has today. It was not then regarded as an empty
shibboleth of the soap-box orator. This would suggest that it has
suffered only the normal degradation of language, has become a
**cliche**, not that it is a grossly misleading characterisation."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. xvf]

These responses of workers to the experience of wage labour is important
to show that capitalism is by no means "natural." The fact is the first
generation of workers tried to avoid wage labour is at all possible as
they hated the restrictions of freedom it imposed upon them. They were
perfectly aware that wage labour was wage slavery -- that they were
decidedly **unfree** during working hours and subjected to the will of
another. While many working people now are accustomed to wage labour
(while often hating their job) the actual process of resistance to the
development of capitalism indicates well its inherently authoritarian
nature. Only once other options were closed off and capitalists given an
edge in the "free" market by state action did people accept and become
accustomed to wage labour.

Opposition to wage labour and factory fascism was/is widespread and
seems to occur wherever it is encountered. *"Research has shown"*,
summarises William Lazonick, *"that the 'free-born Englishman' of the
eighteenth century - even those who, by force of circumstance, had to
submit to agricultural wage labour - tenaciously resisted entry into the
capitalist workshop."* [**Business Organisation and the Myth of the
Market Economy**, p. 37] British workers shared the dislike of wage
labour of their American cousins. A *"Member of the Builders' Union"* in
the 1830s argued that the trade unions *"will not only strike for less
work, and more wages, but will ultimately **abolish wages**, become
their own masters and work for each other; labour and capital will no
longer be separate but will be indissolubly joined together in the hands
of workmen and work-women."* [quoted by Geoffrey Ostergaard, **The
Tradition of Workers' Control**, p. 133] This is unsurprising, for as
Ostergaard notes, *"the workers then, who had not been swallowed up
whole by the industrial revolution, could make critical comparisons
between the factory system and what preceded it."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
134] While wage slavery may seem "natural" today, the first generation
of wage labourers saw the transformation of the social relationships
they experienced in work, from a situation in which they controlled
their own work (and so themselves) to one in which **others** controlled
them, and they did not like it. However, while many modern workers
instinctively hate wage labour and having bosses, without the awareness
of some other method of working, many put up with it as "inevitable."
The first generation of wage labourers had the awareness of something
else (although, of course, a flawed something else) and this gave then a
deep insight into the nature of capitalism and produced a deeply radical
response to it and its authoritarian structures.

Far from being a "natural" development, then, capitalism was imposed on
a society of free and independent people by state action. Those workers
alive at the time viewed it as *"unnatural relations"* and organised to
overcome it. These feelings and hopes still exist, and will continue to
exist until such time as we organise and *"abolish the wage system"* (to
quote the IWW preamble) and the state that supports it.

8.7 Why is the history of capitalism important?
-----------------------------------------------

Simply because it provides us with an understanding of whether that
system is "natural" and whether it can be considered as just and free.
If the system was created by violence, state action and other unjust
means then the apparent "freedom" which we currently face within it is a
fraud, a fraud masking unnecessary and harmful relations of domination,
oppression and exploitation. Moreover, by seeing how capitalist
relationships were viewed by the first generation of wage slaves reminds
us that just because many people have adjusted to this regime and
consider it as normal (or even natural) it is nothing of the kind.

Murray Rothbard is well aware of the importance of history. He
considered the *"moral indignation"* of socialism arises from the
argument *"that the capitalists have stolen the rightful property of the
workers, and therefore that existing titles to accumulated capital are
unjust."* He argues that given *"this hypothesis, the remainder of the
impetus for both Marxism and anarchosyndicalism follow quote
logically."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 52]

So some right-libertarians are aware that the current property owners
have benefited extensively from violence and state action in the past.
Murray Rothbard argues (in **The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 57) that if the
just owners cannot be found for a property, then the property simply
becomes again unowned and will belong to the first person to appropriate
and utilise it. If the current owners are not the actual criminals then
there is no reason at all to dispossess them of their property; if the
just owners cannot be found then they may keep the property as the first
people to use it (of course, those who own capital and those who use it
are usually different people, but we will ignore this obvious point).

Thus, since all original owners and the originally dispossessed are long
dead nearly all current title owners are in just possession of their
property except for recently stolen property. The principle is simple,
dispossess the criminals, restore property to the dispossessed if they
can be found otherwise leave titles where they are (as Native American
tribes owned the land **collectively** this could have an interesting
effect on such a policy in the USA. Obviously tribes that were wiped out
need not apply, but would such right-libertarian policy recognise such
collective, non-capitalist ownership claims? We doubt it, but we could
be wrong -- the Libertarian Party Manifesto states that their "just"
property rights will be restored. And who defines "just"? And given that
unclaimed federal land will be given to Native Americans, its seems
pretty likely that the **original** land will be left alone).

Of course, that this instantly gives an advantage to the wealthy on the
new "pure" market is not mentioned. The large corporations that, via
state protection and support, built their empires and industrial base
will still be in an excellent position to continue to dominate the
market. Wealthy land owners, benefiting from the effects of state
taxation and rents caused by the "land monopoly" on farmstead failures,
will keep their property. The rich will have a great initial advantage
and this may be more than enough to maintain them in there place. After
all, exchanges between worker and owner tend to reinforce existing
inequalities, **not** reduce them (and as the owners can move their
capital elsewhere or import new, lower waged, workers from across the
world, its likely to stay that way).

So Rothbard's "solution" to the problem of past force seems to be
(essentially) a justification of existing property titles and not a
serious attempt to understand or correct past initiations of force that
have shaped society into a capitalist one and still shape it today. The
end result of his theory is to leave things pretty much as they are, for
the past criminals are dead and so are their victims.

However, what Rothbard fails to note is that the **results** of this
state action and coercion are still with us. He totally fails to
consider that the theft of productive wealth has a greater impact on
society than the theft itself. The theft of **productive** wealth shapes
society in so many ways that **all** suffer from it (including current
generations). This (the externalities generated by theft) cannot be
easily undone by individualistic "solutions".

Let us take an example somewhat more useful that the one Rothbard uses
(namely, a stolen watch). A watch cannot really be used to generate
wealth (although if I steal a watch, sell it and buy a winning lottery
ticket, does that mean I can keep the prize after returning the money
value of your watch to you? Without the initial theft, I would not have
won the prize but obviously the prize money far exceeds the amount
stolen. Is the prize money mine?). Let us take a tool of production
rather than a watch.

Let assume a ship sinks and 50 people get washed ashore on an island.
One woman has foresight to take a knife from the ship and falls
unconscious on the beach. A man comes along and steals her knife. When
the woman awakes she cannot remember if she had managed to bring the
knife ashore with her or not. The man maintains that he brought it with
him and no one else saw anything. The survivors decide to split the
island equally between them and work it separately, exchanging goods via
barter.

However, the man with the knife has the advantage and soon carves
himself a house and fields from the wilderness. Seeing that they need
the knife and the tools created by the knife to go beyond mere existing,
some of the other survivors hire themselves to the knife owner. Soon he
is running a surplus of goods, including houses and equipment which he
decides to hire out to others. This surplus is then used to tempt more
and more of the other islanders to work for him, exchanging their land
in return for the goods he provides. Soon he owns the whole island and
never has to work again. His hut is well stocked and extremely
luxurious. His workers face the option of following his orders or being
fired (i.e. expelled from the island and so back into the water and
certain death). Later, he dies and leaves his knife to his son. The
woman whose knife it originally was had died long before, childless.

Note that the theft did not involve taking any land. All had equal
access to it. It was the initial theft of the knife which provided the
man with market power, an edge which allowed him to offer the others a
choice between working by themselves or working for him. By working for
him they did "benefit" in terms of increased material wealth (and also
made the thief better off) but the accumulate impact of unequal
exchanges turned them into the effective slaves of the thief.

Now, would it **really** be enough to turn the knife over to the whoever
happened to be using it once the theft was discovered (perhaps the thief
made a death-bed confession). Even if the woman who had originally taken
it from the ship been alive, would the return of the knife **really**
make up for the years of work the survivors had put in enriching the the
thief or the "voluntary exchanges" which had resulted in the thief
owning all the island? The equipment people use, the houses they life in
and the food they eat are all the product of many hours of collective
work. Does this mean that the transformation of nature which the knife
allowed remain in the hands of the descendants of the thief or become
the collective property of all? Would dividing it equally between all be
fair? Not everyone worked equally hard to produce it. So we have a
problem -- the result of the initial theft is far greater than the theft
considered in isolation due to the productive nature of what was stolen.

In other words, what Rothbard ignores in his attempt to undermine
anarchist use of history is that when the property stolen is of a
productive nature, the accumulative effect of its use is such as to
affect all of society. Productive assets produce **new** property,
**new** values, create a **new** balance of class forces, **new** income
and wealth inequalities and so on. This is because of the **dynamic**
nature of production and human life. When the theft is such that it
creates accumulative effects after the initial act, it is hardly enough
to say that it does not really matter any more. If a nobleman invests in
a capitalist firm with the tribute he extracted from his peasants, then
(once the firm starts doing well) sells the land to the peasants and
uses that money to expand his capitalist holdings, does that **really**
make everything all right? Does not the crime transmit with the cash?
After all, the factory would not exist without the prior exploitation of
the peasants.

In the case of actually existing capitalism, born as it was of extensive
coercive acts, the resultant of these acts have come to shape the
**whole** society. For example, the theft of common land (plus the
enforcement of property rights -- the land monopoly -- to vast estates
owned by the aristocracy) ensured that working people had no option to
sell their labour to the capitalists (rural or urban). The terms of
these contracts reflected the weak position of the workers and so
capitalists extracted surplus value from workers and used it to
consolidate their market position and economic power. Similarly, the
effect of mercantilist policies (and protectionism) was to enrich the
capitalists at the expense of workers and allow them to build industrial
empires.

The accumulative effect of these acts of violation of a "free" market
was to create a class society wherein most people "consent" to be wage
slaves and enrich the few. While those who suffered the impositions are
long gone and the results of the specific acts have multiplied and
magnified well beyond their initial form. And we are still living with
them. In other words, the initial acts of coercion have been transmitted
and transformed by collective activity (wage labour) into society-wide
affects.

Rothbard argues in the situation where the descendants (or others) of
those who initially tilled the soil and their aggressors (*"or those who
purchased their claims"*) still extract *"tribute from the modern
tillers"* that this is a case of *"**continuing** aggression against the
true owners"*. This means that *"the land titles should be transferred
to the peasants, without compensation to the monopoly landlords."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 65] But what he fails to note is that the extracted
"tribute" could have been used to invest in industry and transform
society. Why ignore what the "tribute" has been used for? Does stolen
property not remain stolen property after it has been transferred to
another? And if the stolen property is used to create a society in which
one class has to sell their liberty to another, then surely any surplus
coming from those exchanges are also stolen (as it was generated
directly and indirectly by the theft).

Yes, anarchist agree with Rothbard -- peasants should take the land they
use but which is owned by another. But this logic can equally be applied
to capitalism. Workers are still living with the effects of past
initiations of force and capitalists still extract "tribute" from
workers due to the unequal bargaining powers within the labour market
that this has created. The labour market, after all, was created by
state action (directly or indirectly) and is maintained by state action
(to protect property rights and new initiations of force by working
people). The accumulative effects of stealing productive resources as
been to increase the economic power of one class compared to another. As
the victims of these past abuses are long gone and attempts to find
their descendants meaningless (because of the generalised effects the
thefts in question), anarchists feel we are justified in demanding the
***"expropriation of the expropriators"***.

Due to Rothbard's failure to understand the dynamic and generalising
effects that result from the theft of productive resources (i.e.
externalities that occur from coercion of one person against a specific
set of others) and the creation of a labour market, his attempt to
refute anarchist analysis of the history of "actually existing
capitalism" also fails. Society is the product of collective activity
and should belong to us all (although whether and how we divide it up is
another question).
