Appendix - The Symbols of Anarchy
=================================

[1 What is the history of the Black Flag?](append2.html#black)\
 [2 Why the red-and-black flag?](append2.html#redblack)\
 [3 Where does the circled A come from?](append2.html#circledA)\
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Introduction

Anarchism has always stood deliberately for a broad, and at times vague,
political platform. The reasoning is sound; blueprints create rigid
dogma and stifle the creative spirit of revolt. Along the same lines and
resulting in the same problems, Anarchists have rejected the
"disciplined" leadership that is found in many other political groupings
on the Left. The reasoning for this is also sound; leadership based on
authority is inherently hierarchical.

It seems to follow logically that since Anarchists have shied away from
anything static, that we would also shy away from the importance of
symbols and icons. Yet the fact is Anarchists have used symbolism in our
revolt against the State and Capital, the most famous of which are the
circled-A, the black flag and the red-and-black flag. This appendix
tries to show the history of these three iconic symbols and indicate why
they were taken up by anarchists to represent our ideas and movement.

Ironically enough, one of the original anarchist symbols was the
***red*** flag. As anarchist Communard Louise Michel put it, *"Lyon,
Marseille, Narbonne, all had their own Communes, and like ours [in
Paris], theirs too were drowned in the blood of revolutionaries. That is
why our flags are red. Why are our red banners so terribly frightening
to those persons who have caused them to be stained that colour?"*
[**The Red Virgin: Memoirs of Louise Michel**, p. 65] March 18th, 1877,
saw Kropotkin participate in a protest march in Berne which involved the
anarchists *"carrying the red flag in honour of the Paris Commune"* for
*"in Switzerland federal law prohibited public display of the red
flag."* [Martin A. Miller, **Kropotkin**, p. 137] Anarchist historians
Nicolas Walter and Heiner Becker note that *"Kropotkin always preferred
the red flag."* [Peter Kropotkin, **Act for Yourselves**, p. 128] On
Labour Day in 1899, Emma Goldman gave lectures to miners in Spring
Valley, Illinois, which ended in a demonstration which she headed
*"carrying a large red flag."* [**Living My Life**, vol. 1, p. 245]
According to historian Caroline Waldron Merithew, the 300 marchers
*"defied police orders to haul down the 'red flag of anarchy.'"*
[**Anarchist Motherhood**, p. 236]

This should be unsurprising as anarchism is a form of socialism and came
out of the general socialist and labour movements. Common roots would
imply common imagery. However, as mainstream socialism developed in the
nineteenth century into either reformist social democracy or the state
socialism of the revolutionary Marxists, anarchists developed their own
images of revolt based upon those raised by working class people in
struggle. As will be shown, they come from the revolutionary anarchism
most directly associated with the wider labour and socialist movements,
i.e., the dominant, mainstream social anarchist tradition. As Nicholas
Walter put it:

> *"[The] serious study of anarchism should be based on fact rather than
> fantasy, and concentrate on people and movements that actually used
> the word. However old and wide the ideas of anarchism may be . . . no
> one called himself an anarchist before [Proudhon in] 1840, and no
> movement called itself anarchist before the 1870s . . . The actual
> anarchist movement was founded . . . by the anti-authoritarian
> sections of the First International . . . This was certainly the first
> anarchist movement, and this movement was certainly based on a
> libertarian version of the concept of the class struggle."* [**The
> Anarchist Past and other essays**, pp. 60-1]

Unsurprisingly, the first anarchist symbols reflected the origins and
ideas of this class struggle movement. Both the black and red-and-black
flags were first used by revolutionary anarchists. The black flag was
popularised in the 1880s by Louise Michel, a leading French
communist-anarchist militant. From Europe it spread to America when the
communist-anarchists of the **International Working People's
Association** raised it in their struggle against capitalism before
being taken up by other revolutionary class struggle anarchists across
the globe. The red-and-black flag was first used by the Italian section
of the First International and this had been the first to move from
collectivist to communist-anarchism in October 1876. [Nunzio Pernicone,
**Italian Anarchism, 1864-1892**, p. 111] From there, it spread to
Mexico and was used by anarchist labour militants there before being
re-invented by the Spanish anarcho-syndicalists in the 1930s. Like
anarchism itself, the anarchist flags are a product of the social
struggle against capitalism and statism.

We would like to point out that this appendix is partly based on Jason
Wehling's 1995 essay **Anarchism and the History of the Black Flag**.
Needless to say, this appendix does not cover all anarchists symbols.
For example, recently the red-and-black flag has become complemented by
the green-and-black flag of eco-anarchism (the symbolism of the green
should need no explanation). Other libertarian popular symbols include
the IWW inspired ***"Wildcat"*** (representing, of course, the
spontaneity, direct action, solidarity and militancy of a wildcat
strike), the ***"Black Rose"*** (inspired, no doubt, by the demand of
striking IWW women workers in Lawrence, 1912, for not only bread, but
for roses too) and the ironic ***"little black bomb"*** (among others).
Here we concentrate on the three most famous ones.

### 1 What is the history of the Black Flag?

As is well known, the black flag is the symbol of anarchism. Howard
Ehrlich has a great passage in his book **Reinventing Anarchy, Again**
on why anarchists use it. It is worth quoting at length:

> "Why is our flag black? Black is a shade of negation. The black flag
> is the negation of all flags. It is a negation of nationhood which
> puts the human race against itself and denies the unity of all
> humankind. Black is a mood of anger and outrage at all the hideous
> crimes against humanity perpetrated in the name of allegiance to one
> state or another. It is anger and outrage at the insult to human
> intelligence implied in the pretences, hypocrisies, and cheap
> chicaneries of governments . . . Black is also a colour of mourning;
> the black flag which cancels out the nation also mourns its victims
> the countless millions murdered in wars, external and internal, to the
> greater glory and stability of some bloody state. It mourns for those
> whose labour is robbed (taxed) to pay for the slaughter and oppression
> of other human beings. It mourns not only the death of the body but
> the crippling of the spirit under authoritarian and hierarchic
> systems; it mourns the millions of brain cells blacked out with never
> a chance to light up the world. It is a colour of inconsolable grief.
>
> "But black is also beautiful. It is a colour of determination, of
> resolve, of strength, a colour by which all others are clarified and
> defined. Black is the mysterious surrounding of germination, of
> fertility, the breeding ground of new life which always evolves,
> renews, refreshes, and reproduces itself in darkness. The seed hidden
> in the earth, the strange journey of the sperm, the secret growth of
> the embryo in the womb all these the blackness surrounds and protects.
>
> "So black is negation, is anger, is outrage, is mourning, is beauty,
> is hope, is the fostering and sheltering of new forms of human life
> and relationship on and with this earth. The black flag means all
> these things. We are proud to carry it, sorry we have to, and look
> forward to the day when such a symbol will no longer be necessary."
> [*"Why the Black Flag?"*, Howard Ehrlich (ed.), **Reinventing Anarchy,
> Again**, pp. 31-2]

Here we discuss when and why anarchists first took up the black flag as
our symbol.

There are ample accounts of the use of black flags by anarchists.
Probably the most famous was Nestor Makhno's partisans during the Russia
Revolution. Under the black banner, his army routed a dozen armies and
kept a large portion of the Ukraine free from concentrated power for a
good couple of years. On the black flag was embroidered *"Liberty or
Death"* and *"The Land to the Peasant, The Factories to the Workers."*
[Voline, **The Unknown Revolution**, pp. 607-10] In 1925, the Japanese
anarchists formed the **Black Youth League** and, in 1945, when the
anarchist federation reformed, their journal was named **Kurohata**
(**Black Flag**). [Peter Marshall, **Demanding the Impossible**, pp.
525-6] In 1968, students carried black (and red) flags during the street
fighting and General Strike in France, bringing the resurgence of
anarchism in the 1960s into the view of the general public. The same
year saw the Black Flag being raised at the American **Students for a
Democratic Society** national convention. Two years later the British
based magazine **Black Flag** was started and is still going strong. At
the turn of the 21st century, the Black Flag was at the front of the
so-called anti-globalisation protests. Today, if you go to any sizeable
demonstration you will usually see the Black Flag raised by the
anarchists present.

However, the anarchists' black flag originated much earlier than this.
Louise Michel, famous participant in the Paris Commune of 1871, was
instrumental in popularising the use of the Black Flag in anarchist
circles. At a March 18th public meeting in 1882 to commemorate the Paris
Commune she proclaimed that the *"red flag was no longer appropriate;
[the anarchists] should raise the black flag of misery."* [Edith Thomas,
**Louise Michel**, p. 191] The following year she put her words into
action. According to anarchist historian George Woodcock, Michel flew
the black flag on March 9, 1883, during demonstration of the unemployed
in Paris, France. An open air meeting of the unemployed was broken up by
the police and around 500 demonstrators, with Michel at the front
carrying a black flag and shouting *"Bread, work, or lead!"* marched off
towards the Boulevard Saint-Germain. The crowd pillaged three baker's
shops before the police attacked. Michel was arrested and sentenced to
six years solitary confinement. Public pressure soon forced the granting
of an amnesty. [**Anarchism**, pp. 251-2] August the same year saw the
publication of the anarchist paper **Le Drapeau Noir** (**The Black
Flag**) in Lyon which suggests that it had become a popular symbol
within anarchist circles. [*"Sur la Symbolique anarchiste"*, **Bulletin
du CIRA**, no. 62, p. 2] However, anarchists had been using
red-and-black flags a number of years previously (see [next
section](append2.html#redblack)) so Michel's use of the colour black was
not totally without precedence.

Not long after, the black flag made its way to America. Paul Avrich
reports that on November 27, 1884, it was displayed in Chicago at an
anarchist demonstration. According to Avrich, August Spies, one of the
Haymarket martyrs, *"noted that this was the first occasion on which
[the black flag] had been unfurled on American soil."* By January the
following year, *"[s]treet parades and mass outdoor demonstrations, with
red and black banners . . . were the most dramatic form of
advertisement"* for the revolutionary anarchist movement in America.
April 1885 saw Lucy Parsons and Lizzie Holmes at the head of a protest
march *"each bearing a flag, one black, the other red."* [**The
Haymarket Tragedy**, p. 145, pp. 81-2 and p. 147] The Black Flag
continued to be used by anarchists in America, with one being seized by
police at an anarchist organised demonstration for the unemployed in
1893 at which Emma Goldman spoke. [**Emma Goldman: A Documentary History
of the American Years**, vol. 1, p. 144] Twenty one years later,
Alexander Berkman reported on another anarchist inspired unemployed
march in New York which raised the black flag in *"menacing defiance in
the face of parasitic contentment and self-righteous arrogance"* of the
*"exploiters and well-fed idlers."* [*"The Movement of the Unemployed"*,
**Anarchy! An Anthology of Emma Goldman's Mother Earth**, p. 341]

It seems that black flags did not appear in Russia until the founding of
the **Chernoe Znamia** (***"black banner"***) movement in 1905. With the
defeat of that year's revolution, anarchism went underground again. The
Black Flag, like anarchism in general, re-emerged during the 1917
revolution. Anarchists in Petrograd took part in the February
demonstrations which brought down Tsarism carrying black flags with
*"Down with authority and capitalism!"* on them. As part of their
activity, anarchists organised armed detachments in most towns and
cities called *"Black Guards"* to defend themselves against
counter-revolutionary attempts by the provisional government. As noted
above, the Makhnovists fought Bolshevik and White dictatorship under
Black Flags. On a more dreary note, February 1921 saw the end of black
flags in Soviet Russia. That month saw Peter Kropotkin's funeral take
place in Moscow. Twenty thousand people marched in his honour, carrying
black banners that read: *"Where there is authority there is no
freedom."* [Paul Avrich, **The Russian Anarchists**, p. 44, p. 124, p.
183 and p. 227] Only two weeks after Kropotkin's funeral march, the
Kronstadt rebellion broke out and anarchism was erased from Soviet
Russia for good. With the end of Stalinism, anarchism with its Black
Flag re-emerged all across Eastern Europe, including Russia.

While the events above are fairly well known, as has been related, the
exact origin of the black flag is not. What is known is that a large
number of Anarchist groups in the early 1880s adopted titles associated
with black. In July of 1881, the Black International was founded in
London. This was an attempt to reorganise the Anarchist wing of the
recently dissolved First International. In October 1881, a meeting in
Chicago lead to the **International Working People's Association** being
formed in North America. This organisation, also known as the **Black
International**, affiliated to the London organisation. [Woodcock, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 212-4 and p. 393] These two conferences are immediately
followed by Michel's demonstration (1883) and the black flags in Chicago
(1884).

Thus it was around the early 1880s that anarchism and the Black Flag
became inseparably linked. Avrich, for example, states that in 1884, the
black flag *"was the new anarchist emblem."* [**The Haymarket Tragedy**,
p. 144] In agreement, Murray Bookchin reports that *"in later years, the
Anarchists were to adopt the black flag"* when speaking of the Spanish
Anarchist movement in 1870. [**The Spanish Anarchists**, p. 57] Walter
and Heiner also note that *"it was adopted by the anarchist movement
during the 1880s."* [Kropotkin, **Act for Yourselves**, p. 128]

Now the question becomes why, exactly, black was chosen. The Chicago
*"Alarm"* stated that the black flag is *"the fearful symbol of hunger,
misery and death."* [quoted by Avrich, **Op. Cit.**, p. 144] Bookchin
asserts that anarchists were *"to adopt the black flag as a symbol of
the workers misery and as an expression of their anger and bitterness."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 57] Historian Bruce C. Nelson also notes that the
Black Flag was considered *"the emblem of hunger"* when it was unfurled
in Chicago in 1884. [**Beyond the Martyrs**, p. 141 and p. 150] While it
*"was interpreted in anarchist circles as the symbol of death, hunger
and misery"* it was *"also said to be the 'emblem of retribution'"* and
in a labour procession in Cincinnati in January 1885, *"it was further
acknowledged to be the banner of working-class intransigence, as
demonstrated by the words 'No Quarter' inscribed on it."* [Donald C.
Hodges, **Sandino's Communism**, p. 21] For Berkman, it was the *"symbol
of starvation and desperate misery."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 341] Louise
Michel stated that the *"black flag is the flag of strikes and the flag
of those who are hungry."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 168]

Along these lines, Albert Meltzer maintains that the association between
the black flag and working class revolt *"originated in Rheims [France]
in 1831 ('Work or Death') in an unemployed demonstration."* [**The
Anarcho-Quiz Book**, p. 49] He went on to assert that it was Michel's
action in 1883 that solidified the association. The links from revolts
in France to anarchism are even stronger. As Murray Bookchin records, in
Lyon *"[i]n 1831, the silk-weaving artisans . . . rose in armed conflict
to gain a better **tarif**, or contract, from the merchants. For a brief
period they actually took control of the city, under red and black flags
-- which made their insurrection a memorable event in the history of
revolutionary symbols. Their use of the word **mutuelisme** to denote
the associative disposition of society that they preferred made their
insurrection a memorable event in the history of anarchist thought as
well, since Proudhon appears to have picked up the word from them during
his brief stay in the city in 1843-4."* [**The Third Revolution**, vol.
2, p. 157] Sharif Gemie confirms this, noting that a police report sent
to the Lyon prefect that said: *"The silk-weavers of the Croix-Rousse
have decided that tomorrow they will go down to Lyon, carrying a black
flag, calling for work or death."* The revolt saw the Black Flag raised:

> *"At eleven a.m. the silk-weavers' columns descended the slops of the
> Croix-Rousse. Some carried black flags, the colour of mourning and a
> reminder of their economic distress. Others pushed loaves of bread on
> the bayonets of their guns and held them aloft. The symbolic force of
> this action was reinforced by a repeatedly-shouted slogan: 'bread or
> lead!': in other words, if they were not given bread which they could
> afford, then they were prepared to face bullets. At some point during
> the rebellion, a more eloquent expression was devised: '**Vivre en
> travaillant ou mourir en combattant**!' -- 'Live working or die by
> fighting!'. Some witnesses report seeing this painted on a black
> flag."* [Sharif Gemie, **French Revolutions, 1815-1914**, pp. 52-53]

Kropotkin himself states that its use continued in the French labour
movement after this uprising. He notes that the Paris Workers *"raised
in June [1848] their black flag of 'Bread or Labour'"* [**Act for
Yourselves**, p. 100] Black flags were also hung from windows in Paris
on the 1st of March, 1871, in defiance of the Prussians marching through
the city after their victory in the Franco-Prussian War. [Stewart
Edwards, **The Communards of Paris, 1871**, p. 25]

The use of the black flag by anarchists, therefore, is an expression of
their roots and activity in the labour movement in Europe, particularly
in France. The anarchist adoption of the Black Flag by the movement in
the 1880s reflects its use as *"the traditional symbol of hunger,
poverty and despair"* and that it was *"raised during popular risings in
Europe as a sign of no surrender and no quarter."* [Walter and Becker,
**Act for Yourselves**, p. 128] This is confirmed by the first anarchist
journal to be called **Black Flag**: *"On the heights of the city [of
Lyon] in la Croix-Rousse and Vaise, workers, pushed by hunger, raised
for the first time this sign of mourning and revenge [the black flag],
and made therefore of it the emblem of workers' demands."* [**Le Drapeau
Noir**, no. 1, 12th August 1883] This was echoed by Louise Michel:

> "How many wrathful people, young people, will be with us when the red
> and black banners wave in the wind of anger! What a tidal wave it will
> be when the red and black banners rise around the old wreck!
> "The red banner, which has always stood for liberty, frightens the
> executioners because it is so red with our blood. The black flag, with
> layers of blood upon it from those who wanted to live by working or
> die by fighting, frightens those who want to live off the work of
> others. Those red and black banners wave over us mourning our dead and
> wave over our hopes for the dawn that is breaking." [**The Red Virgin:
> Memoirs of Louise Michel**, pp. 193-4]

The mass slaughter of Communards by the French ruling class after the
fall of the Paris Commune of 1871 could also explain the use of the
Black Flag by anarchists at this time. Black *"is the colour of mourning
[at least in Western cultures], it symbolises our mourning for dead
comrades, those whose lives were taken by war, on the battlefield
(between states) or in the streets and on the picket lines (between
classes)."* [Chico, *"letters"*, **Freedom**, vol. 48, No. 12, p. 10]
Given the 25 000 dead in the Commune, many of them anarchists and
libertarian socialists, the use of the Black Flag by anarchists
afterwards would make sense. Sandino, the Nicaraguan libertarian
socialist (whose use of the red-and-black colours we discuss
[below](append2.html#redblack)) also said that black stood for mourning
(*"Red for liberty; black for mourning; and the skull for a struggle to
the death"* [Donald C. Hodges, **Sandino's Communism**, p. 24]).

Regardless of other meanings, it is clear that anarchists took up the
black flag in the 1880s because it was, like the red flag, a recognised
symbol of working class resistance to capitalism. This is unsurprising
given the nature of anarchist politics. Just as anarchists base our
ideas on actual working class practice, we would also base our symbols
on those created by that self-activity. For example, Proudhon as well as
taking the term *"mutualism"* from radical workers also argued that
co-operative *"labour associations"* had *"spontaneously, without
prompting and without capital been formed in Paris and in Lyon. . . the
proof of it [mutualism, the organisation of credit and labour] . . .
lies in current practice, revolutionary practice."* [**No Gods, No
Masters**, vol. 1, pp. 59-60] He considered his ideas, in other words,
to be an expression of working class self-activity. Indeed, according to
K. Steven Vincent, there was *"close similarity between the
associational ideal of Proudhon . . . and the program of the Lyon
Mutualists"* and that there was *"a remarkable convergence [between the
ideas], and it is likely that Proudhon was able to articulate his
positive program more coherently because of the example of the silk
workers of Lyon. The socialist ideal that he championed was already
being realised, to a certain extent, by such workers."* [**Pierre-Joseph
Proudhon and the Rise of French Republican Socialism**, p. 164] Other
anarchists have made similar arguments concerning anarchism being the
expression of tendencies within working class struggle against
oppression and exploitation and so the using of a traditional workers
symbol would be a natural expression of this aspect of anarchism.

Similarly, perhaps it is Louise Michel's comment that the Black Flag was
the *"flag of strikes"* which could explain the naming of the **Black
International** founded in 1881 (and so the increasing use of the Black
Flag in anarchist circles in the early 1880s). Around the time of its
founding congress Kropotkin was formulating the idea that this
organisation would be a *"Strikers' International"* (**Internationale
Greviste**) -- it would be *"an organisation of resistance, of
strikes."* [quoted by Martin A. Miller, **Kropotkin**, p. 147] In
December 1881 he discussed the revival of the International Workers
Association as a *Strikers' International* for to *"be able to make the
revolution, the mass of workers will have to organise themselves.
Resistance and strikes are excellent methods of organisation for doing
this."* He stressed that the *"strike develops the sentiment of
solidarity"* and argued that the First International *"was born of
strikes; it was fundamentally a strikers' organisation."* [quoted by
Caroline Cahm, **Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism,
1872-1886**, p. 255 and p. 256]

A *"Strikers International"* would need the strikers flag and so,
perhaps, the **Black International** got its name. This, of course, fits
perfectly with the use of the Black Flag as a symbol of workers'
resistance by anarchism, a political expression of that resistance.

However, the black flag did not instantly replace the red flag as the
main anarchist symbol. The use of the red flag continued for some
decades in anarchist circles. Thus we find Kropotkin writing in the
early 1880s of *"anarchist groups . . . rais[ing] the red flag of
revolution."* As Woodcock noted, the *"black flag was not universally
accepted by anarchists at this time. Many, like Kropotkin, still thought
of themselves as socialists and of the red flag as theirs also."*
[**Words of a Rebel**, p. 75 and p. 225] In addition, we find the
Chicago anarchists using both black and red flags all through the 1880s.
French Anarchists carried three red flags at the funeral of Louise
Michel's mother in 1885 as well as at her own funeral in January 1905.
[Louise Michel, **Op. Cit.**, p. 183 and p. 201] Anarchist in Japan, for
example, demonstrated under red flags bearing the slogans *"Anarchy"*
and *"Anarchist Communism"* in June, 1908. [John Crump, **Hatta Shuzo
and Pure Anarchism in Interwar Japan**, p. 25] Three years later, the
Mexican anarchists declared that they had *"hoisted the Red Flag on
Mexico's fields of action"* as part of their *"war against Authority,
war against Capital, and war against the Church."* They were *"fighting
under the Red Flag to the famous cry of 'Land and Liberty.'"* [Ricardo
Flores Magon, **Land and Liberty**, p. 98 and p. 100]

So for a considerable period of time anarchists used red as well as
black flags as their symbol. The general drift away from the red flag
towards the black must be placed in the historical context. During the
1880s the socialist movement was changing. Marxist social democracy was
becoming the dominant socialist trend, with libertarian socialism going
into relative decline in many areas. Thus the red flag was increasingly
associated with the authoritarian and statist (and increasingly
reformist) side of the socialist movement. In order to distinguish
themselves from other socialists, the use of the black flag makes
perfect sense as it was it an accepted symbol of working class revolt
like the red flag.

After the Russian Revolution and its slide into dictatorship (first
under Lenin, then Stalin) anarchist use of the red flag decreased as it
no longer *"stood for liberty."* Instead, it had become associated, at
worse, with the Communist Parties or, at best, bureaucratic, reformist
and authoritarian social democracy. This change can be seen from the
Japanese movement. As noted above, before the First World War anarchists
there had happily raised the red flag but in the 1920s they unfurled the
black flag. Organised in the **Kokushoku Seinen Renmei** (Black Youth
League), they published **Kokushoku Seinen** (Black Youth). By 1930, the
anarchist theoretical magazine **Kotushoku Sensen** (Black Battlefront)
had been replaced by two journals called **Kurohata** (Black Flag) and
**Kuhusen** (Black Struggle). [John Crump, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 69-71 and
p. 88]

According to historian Candace Falk, *"[t]hough black has been
associated with anarchism in France since 1883, the colour red was the
predominant symbol of anarchism throughout this period; only after the
First World War was the colour black widely adopted."* [**Emma Goldman:
A Documentary History of the American Years**, vol. 1, p. 208fn] As this
change did not occur overnight, it seems safe to conclude that while
anarchism and the black flag had been linked, at the latest, from the
early 1880s, it did not become the definitive anarchist symbol until the
1920s (Carlo Tresca in America was still talking of standing *"beneath
the red flag that is the immaculate flag of the anarchist idea"* in
1925. [quoted by Nunzio Pernicone, **Carlo Tresca: Portrait of a
Rebel**, p. 161]). Before then, anarchists used both it and the red flag
as their symbols of choice. After the Russian Revolution, anarchists
would still use red in their flags, but only when combined with black.
In this way they would not associate themselves with the tyranny of the
USSR or the reformism and statism of the mainstream socialist movement.

### 2 Why the red-and-black flag?

The red-and-black flag has been associated with anarchism for some time.
Murray Bookchin placed the creation of this flag in Spain:

> *"The presence of black flags together with red ones became a feature
> of Anarchist demonstrations throughout Europe and the Americas. With
> the establishment of the CNT, a single flag on which black and red
> were separated diagonally, was adopted and used mainly in Spain."*
> [**The Spanish Anarchists**, p. 57]

George Woodcock also stressed the Spanish origin of the flag:

> *"The anarcho-syndicalist flag in Spain was black and red, divided
> diagonally. In the days of the [First] International the anarchists,
> like other socialist sects, carried the red flag, but later they
> tended to substitute for it the black flag. The black-and-red flag
> symbolised an attempt to unite the spirit of later anarchism with the
> mass appeal of the International."* [**Anarchism**, p. 325fn]

According to Abel Paz, anarchist historian and CNT militant in the
1930s, the 1st of May, 1931, was *"the first time in history [that] the
red and black flag flew over a CNT-FAI rally."* This was the outcome of
an important meeting of CNT militants and anarchist groups to plan the
May Day demonstrations in Barcelona. One of the issues to be resolved
was *"under what flag to march."* One group was termed the *"Red Flag"*
anarchists (who *"put greater emphasis on labour issues"*), the other
*"Black Flag"* anarchists (who were *"more distant (at the time) from
economic questions"*). However, with the newly proclaimed Republic there
were *"tremendous opportunities for mass mobilisations"* which made
disagreements on how much emphasis to place on labour issues
*"meaningless."* This allowed an accord to be reached with its
*"material expression"* being *"making the two flags into one: the black
and red flag."* [**Durruti in the Spanish Revolution**, p. 206]

However, the red-and-black flag was used by anarchists long before 1931,
indeed decades before the CNT was even formed. In fact, it, rather than
the black flag, may well have been the first specifically anarchist
flag.

The earliest recorded use of the red-and-black colours was during the
attempted Bologna insurrection of August 1874 where participants were
*"sporting the anarchists' red and black cockade."* [Nunzio Pernicone,
**Italian Anarchism, 1864-1892**, p. 93] In April 1877, a similar
attempt at provoking rebellion saw anarchists enter the small Italian
town of Letino *"wearing red and black cockades"* and carrying a *"red
and black banner."* These actions helped to *"captur[e] national
attention"* and *"draw considerable notice to the International and its
socialist programme."* [Nunzio Pernicone, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 124-5 and
pp. 126-7] Significantly, another historian notes that the insurgents in
1874 were *"decked out in the red and black emblem of the
International"* while three years later they were *"prominently
displaying the red and black anarchist flag."* [T. R. Ravindranathan,
**Bakunin and the Italians**, p. 208 and p. 228] Thus the black-and-red
flag, like the black flag, was a recognised symbol of the labour
movement (in this case, the Italian section of the First International)
before becoming linked to anarchism.

The red-and-black flag was used by anarchists a few years later in
Mexico. At an anarchist protest meeting on December 14th, 1879, at
Columbus Park in Mexico City *"[s]ome five thousand persons gathered
replete with numerous red-and-black flags, some of which bore the
inscription 'La Social, Liga International del Jura.' A large black
banner bearing the inscription 'La Social, Gran Liga International'
covered the front of the speaker's platform."* The links between the
Mexican and European anarchist movements were strong, as the
*"nineteenth-century Mexican urban labour-movement maintained direct
contact with the Jura branch of the . . . European-based First
International Workingmen's Association and at one stage openly
affiliated with it."* [John M. Hart, **Anarchism and the Mexican Working
Class, 1860-1931**, p. 58 and p. 17] One year after it was founded, the
anarchist influenced **Casa del Obrero Mundial** organised Mexico's
first May Day demonstration in 1913 and *"between twenty and twenty-five
thousand workers gathered behind red and black flags"* in Mexico City.
[John Lear, **Workers, Neighbors, and Citizens**, p. 236]

Augusto Sandino, the radical Nicaraguan national liberation fighter was
so inspired by the example of the Mexican anarcho-syndicalists that he
based his movement's flag on their red-and-black ones (the Sandinista's
flag is divided horizontally, rather than diagonally). As historian
Donald C. Hodges notes, Sandino's *"red and black flag had an
anarcho-syndicalist origin, having been introduced into Mexico by
Spanish immigrants."* Unsurprisingly, his flag was considered a
*"workers' flag symbolising their struggle for liberation."* (Hodges
refers to Sandino's *"peculiar brand of anarcho-communism"* suggesting
that his appropriation of the flag indicated a strong libertarian theme
to his politics). [**Intellectual Foundations of the Nicaraguan
Revolution**, p. 49, p. 137 and p. 19]

This suggests that the red-and-black flag was rediscovered by the
Spanish Anarchists in 1931 rather than being invented by them. However,
the CNT-FAI seem to have been the first to bisect their flags diagonally
black and red (but other divisions, such as horizontally, were also
used). In the English speaking world, though, the use of the
red-and-black flag by anarchists seems to spring from the world-wide
publicity generated by the Spanish Revolution in 1936. With CNT-FAI
related information spreading across the world, the use of the CNT
inspired diagonally split red-and-black flag also spread until it became
a common anarchist and anarcho-syndicalist symbol in all countries.

For some, the red-and-black flag is associated with anarcho-syndicalism
more than anarchism. As Albert Meltzer put it, *"[t]he flag of the
labour movement (not necessarily only of socialism) is red. The CNT of
Spain originated the red-and-black of anarchosyndicalism (anarchism plus
the labour movement)."* [**Anarcho-Quiz Book**, p. 50] Donald C. Hodges
makes a similar point, when he states that *"[o]n the insignia of the
Mexico's House of the World Worker [the Mexican anarcho-syndicalist
union], the red band stood for the economic struggle of workers against
the proprietary classes, and the black for their insurrectionary
struggle."* [**Sandino's Communism**, p. 22]

This does not contradict its earliest uses in Italy and Mexico as those
anarchists took it for granted that they should work within the labour
movement to spread libertarian ideas. Therefore, it is not surprising we
find movements in Mexico and Italy using the same flags. Both were
involved in the First International and its anti-authoritarian
off-spring. Both, like the Jura Federation in Switzerland, were heavily
involved in union organising and strikes. Given the clear links and
similarities between the collectivist anarchism of the First
International (the most famous advocate of which was Bakunin) and
anarcho-syndicalism, it is not surprising that they used similar
symbols. As Kropotkin argued, *"Syndicalism is nothing other than the
rebirth of the International -- federalist, worker, Latin."* [quoted by
Martin A. Miller, **Kropotkin**, p. 176] So a rebirth of symbols would
not be a co-incidence.

Thus the red-and-black flag comes from the experience of anarchists in
the labour movement and is particularly, but not exclusively, associated
with anarcho-syndicalism. The black represents libertarian ideas and
strikes (i.e. direct action), the red represents the labour movement.
Over time association with anarcho-syndicalism has become less noted,
with many non-syndicalist anarchists happy to use the red-and-black flag
(many anarcho-communists use it, for example). It would be a good
generalisation to state that social anarchists are more inclined to use
the red-and-black flag than individualist anarchists just as social
anarchists are usually more willing to align themselves with the wider
socialist and labour movements than individualists (in modern times at
least). However, both the red and black flags have their roots in the
labour movement and working class struggle which suggests that the
combination of both flags into one was a logical development. Given that
the black **and** red flags were associated with the Lyon uprising of
1831, perhaps the development of the red-and-black flag is not too
unusual. Similarly, given that the Black Flag was the *"flag of
strikes"* (to quote Louise Michel -- see [above](append2.html#black))
its use with the red flag of the labour movement seems a natural
development for a movement like anarchism and anarcho-syndicalism which
bases itself on direct action and the importance of strikes in the class
struggle.

So while associated with anarcho-syndicalism, the red-and-black flag has
become a standard anarchist symbol as the years have gone by, with the
black still representing anarchy and the red, social co-operation or
solidarity. Thus the red-and-black flag more than any one symbol
symbolises the aim of anarchism (*"Liberty of the individual and social
co-operation of the whole community"* [Peter Kropotkin, **Act for
Yourselves**, p. 102]) as well as its means (*"[t]o make the revolution,
the mass of workers will have to organise themselves. Resistance and the
strike are excellent means of organisation for doing this"* and *"the
strike develops the sentiment of solidarity."* [Kropotkin, quoted by
Caroline Cahm, **Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism:
1872-1186**, p. 255 and p. 256]).

### 3 Where does the circled-A come from?

The circled-A is, perhaps, even more famous than the Black and
Red-and-Black flags as an anarchist symbol (probably because it lends
itself so well to graffiti). According to Peter Marshall the
*"circled-A"* represents Proudhon's maxim *"Anarchy is Order."*
[**Demanding the Impossible** p. 558] Peter Peterson also adds that the
circle is *"a symbol of unity and determination"* which *"lends support
to the off-proclaimed idea of international anarchist solidarity."*
[*"Flag, Torch, and Fist: The Symbols of Anarchism"*, **Freedom**, vol.
48, No. 11, pp. 8]

However, the origin of the "circled-A" as an anarchist symbol is less
clear. Many think that it started in the 1970s punk movement, but it
goes back to a much earlier period. According to Peter Marshall, *"[i]n
1964 a French group, **Jeunesse Libertaire**, gave new impetus to
Proudhon's slogan 'Anarchy is Order' by creating the circled-A a symbol
which quickly proliferated throughout the world."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
445] This is not the earliest sighting of this symbol. On November 25
1956, at its foundation in Brussels, the **Alliance Ouvriere
Anarchiste** (AOA) adopted this symbol. Going even further, a BBC
documentary on the Spanish Civil War shows an anarchist militia member
with a "circled-A" clearly on the back of his helmet. Other than this,
there is little know about the "circled-A"s origin.

Today the circled-A is one of the most successful images in the whole
field of political symbolising. Its *"incredible simplicity and
directness led [it] to become the accepted symbol of the restrengthened
anarchist movement after the revolt of 1968"* particularly as in many,
if not most, of the world's languages the word for anarchy begins with
the letter A. [Peter Peterson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 8]
