11 What is the myth of "Natural Law"?
=====================================

Natural Law, and the related concept of Natural Rights, play an
important part in Libertarian and "anarcho"-capitalist ideology.
Right-libertarians are not alone in claiming that their particular
ideology is based on the "law of nature". Hitler, for one, claimed the
same thing for Nazi ideology. So do numerous other demagogues, religious
fanatics, and political philosophers. However, each likes to claim that
only **their** "natural law" is the "real" one, all the others being
subjective impositions. We will ignore these assertions (they are not
arguments) and concentrate on explaining why natural law, in all its
forms, is a myth. In addition, we will indicate its authoritarian
implications.

Instead of such myths anarchists urge people to "work it out for
themselves" and realise that any ethical code is subjective and not a
law of nature. If its a good "code", then others will become convinced
of it by your arguments and their intellect. There is no need to claim
its a function of "man's nature"!

The following books discuss the subject of "Natural Law" in greater
depth and are recommended for a fuller discussion of the issues raised
in this section:

Robert Anton Wilson, **Natural Law** and L.A. Rollins, **The Myth of
Natural Law**.

We should note that these books are written by people associated, to
some degree, with right-libertarianism and, of course, we should point
out that not all right-libertarians subscribe to "natural law" theories
(David Friedman, for example, does not). However, such a position seems
to be the minority in right-Libertarianism (Ayn Rand, Robert Nozick and
Murray Rothbard, among others, did subscribe to it). We should also
point out that the Individualist Anarchist Lysander Spooner also
subscribed to "natural laws" (which shows that, as we noted above, the
concept is not limited to one particular theory or ideology). We present
a short critique of Spooner's ideas on this subject in section
[G.7](secG7.html).

Lastly, it could be maintained that it is a common "straw man" to
maintain that supporters of Natural Law argue that their Laws are like
the laws of physics (and so are capable of stopping people's actions
just as the law of gravity automatically stops people flying from the
Earth). But that is the whole point -- using the term "Natural Law"
implies that the moral rights and laws that its supporters argue for are
to be considered just like the law of gravity (although they
acknowledge, of course, that unlike gravity, **their** *"natural laws"*
**can be violated in nature**). Far from saying that the rights they
support are just that (i.e. rights **they** think are good) they try to
associate them with universal facts. For example, Lysander Spooner (who,
we must stress, used the concept of "Natural law" to **oppose** the
transformation of America into a capitalist society, unlike Rand, Nozick
and Rothbard who use it to defend capitalism) stated that:

> *"the true definition of law is, that it is a fixed, immutable,
> natural principle; and not anything that man ever made, or can make,
> unmake, or alter. Thus we speak of the laws of matter, and the laws of
> mind; of the laws of gravitation, the laws of light, heat, and
> electricity. . .etc., etc. . . . The law of justice is just as supreme
> and universal in the moral world, as these others are in the mental or
> physical world; and is as unalterable as are these by any human power.
> And it is just as false and absurd to talk of anybody's having the
> power to abolish the law of justice, and set up their own in its
> stead, as it would be to talk of their having the power to abolish the
> law of gravitation, or any other natural laws of the universe, and set
> up their own will in the place of them."* [**A Letter to Grover
> Cleveland**, p. 88]

Rothbard and other capitalist supporters of "Natural Law" make the same
sort of claims (as we will see). Now, why, if they are aware of the fact
that unlike gravity their "Natural Laws" can be violated, do they use
the term at all? Benjamin Tucker said that "Natural Law" was a
*"religious"* concept -- and this provides a clue. To say "Do not
violate these rights, otherwise I will get cross" does not have
**quite** the same power as "Do not violate these rights, they are facts
of natural and you are violating nature" (compare to "Do not violate
these laws, or you will go to hell"). So to point out that "Natural Law"
is **not** the same as the law of gravity (because it has to be enforced
by humans) is not attacking some kind of "straw man" -- it is exposing
the fact that these "Natural Laws" are just the personal prejudices of
those who hold them. If they do not want then to be exposed as such then
they should call their laws what they are -- personal ethical laws --
rather than compare them to the facts of nature.

11.1 Why the term "Natural Law" in the first place?
---------------------------------------------------

Murray Rothbard claims that *"Natural Law theory rests on the insight. .
. that each entity has distinct and specific properties, a distinct
'nature,' which can be investigated by man's reason"* [**For a New
Liberty**, p. 25] and that *"man has rights because they are **natural**
rights. They are grounded in the nature of man."* [**The Ethics of
Liberty**, p. 155]

To put it bluntly, this form of "analysis" was originated by Aristotle
and has not been used by science for centuries. Science investigates by
proposing theories and hypotheses to explain empirical observations,
testing and refining them by experiment. In stark contrast, Rothbard
**invents** definitions (*"distinct" "natures"*) and then draws
conclusions from them. Such a method was last used by the medieval
Church and is devoid of any scientific method. It is, of course, a
fiction. It attempts to deduce the nature of a "natural" society from *a
priori* considerations of the "innate" nature of human beings, which
just means that the assumptions necessary to reach the desired
conclusions have been built into the definition of "human nature." In
other words, Rothbard defines humans as having the "distinct and
specific properties" that, given his assumptions, will allow his dogma
(private state capitalism) to be inferred as the "natural" society for
humans.

Rothbard claims that *"if A, B, C, etc., have differing attributes, it
follows that they have different **natures.**"* [**The Ethics of
Liberty**, p. 9] Does this means that as every individual is unique
(have different attributes), they have different natures? Skin and hair
colour are different attributes, does this mean that red haired people
have different natures than blondes? That black people have different
natures than white (and such a "theory" of "natural law" was used to
justify slavery -- yes, slaves **are** human but they have "different
natures" than their masters and so slavery is okay). Of course Rothbard
aggregates "attributes" to species level, but why not higher? Humans are
primates, does that mean we have the same natures are monkeys or
gorillas? We are also mammals as well, we share many of the same
attributes as whales and dogs. Do we have similar natures?

But this is by the way. To continue we find that after defining certain
"natures," Rothbard attempts to derive *"Natural Rights and Laws"* from
them. However, these *"Natural Laws"* are quite strange, as they can be
violated in nature! Real natural laws (like the law of gravity)
**cannot** be violated and therefore do not need to be enforced. The
"Natural Laws" the "Libertarian" desires to foist upon us are not like
this. They need to be enforced by humans and the institutions they
create. Hence, Libertarian "Natural Laws" are more akin to moral
prescriptions or juridical laws. However, this does not stop Rothbard
explicitly *"plac[ing]"* his *"Natural Laws" "alongside physical or
'scientific' natural laws."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 42]

So why do so many Libertarians use the term "Natural Law?" Simply, it
gives them the means by which to elevate their opinions, dogmas, and
prejudices to a metaphysical level where nobody will dare to criticise
or even think about them. The term smacks of religion, where "Natural
Law" has replaced "God's Law." The latter fiction gave the priest power
over believers. "Natural Law" is designed to give the Libertarian
ideologist power over the people that he or she wants to rule.

How can one be against a "Natural Law" or a "Natural Right"? It is
impossible. How can one argue against gravity? If private property, for
example, is elevated to such a level, who would dare argue against it?
Ayn Rand listed having landlords and employers along with *"the laws of
nature."* They are **not** similar: the first two are social
relationships which have to be imposed by the state; the *"laws of
nature"* (like gravity, needing food, etc.) are **facts** which do not
need to be imposed. Rothbard claims that *"the natural fact is that
labour service **is** indeed a commodity."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 40]
However, this is complete nonsense -- labour service as a commodity is a
**social** fact, dependent on the distribution of property within
society, its social customs and so forth. It is only "natural" in the
sense that it exists within a given society (the state is also "natural"
as it also exists within nature at a given time). But neither wage
slavery or the state is "natural" in the sense that gravity is natural
or a human having two arms is. Indeed, workers at the dawn of
capitalism, faced with selling their labour services to another,
considered it as decidedly "unnatural" and used the term "wage slavery"
to describe it!

Thus, where and when a "fact" appears is essential. For example,
Rothbard claims that *"[a]n apple, let fall, will drop to the ground;
this we all observe and acknowledge to be **in the nature** of the
apple."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 9] Actually, we do not
"acknowledge" anything of the kind. We acknowledge that the apple was
subject to the force of gravity and that is why it fell. The same apple,
"let fall" in a space ship would **not** drop to the floor. Has the
"nature" of the apple changed? No, but the situation it is in has. Thus
any attempt to generate abstract "natures" requires you to ignore
reality in favour of ideals.

Because of the confusion its usage creates, we are tempted to think that
the use of "Natural Law" dogma is an attempt to **stop** thinking, to
restrict analysis, to force certain aspects of society off the political
agenda by giving them a divine, everlasting quality.

Moreover, such an "individualist" account of the origins of rights will
always turn on a muddled distinction between individual rationality and
some vague notion of rationality associated with membership of the human
species. How are we to determine what is rational for an individual **as
and individual** and what is rational for that same individual **as a
human being**? It is hard to see that we can make such a distinction for
*"[i]f I violently interfere with Murray Rothbard's freedom, this may
violate the 'natural law' of Murray Rothbard's needs, but it doesn't
violate the 'natural law' of **my** needs."* [L.A. Rollins, **The Myth
of Natural Rights**, p. 28] Both parties, after all, are human and if
such interference is, as Rothbard claims, *"antihuman"* then why? *"If
it helps me, a human, to advance my life, then how can it be
unequivocally 'antihuman'?"* [L. A. Rollins, **Op. Cit.**, p. 27] Thus
"natural law" is contradictory as it is well within the bounds of human
nature to violate it.

This means that in order to support the dogma of "Natural Law," the
cultists **must** ignore reality. Ayn Rand claims that *"the source of
man's rights is. . .the law of identity. A is A -- and Man is Man."* But
Rand (like Rothbard) **defines** *"Man"* as an *"entity of a specific
kind -- a rational being"* [**The Virtue of Selfishness**, pp. 94-95].
Therefore she cannot account for **irrational** human behaviours (such
as those that violate "Natural Laws"), which are also products of our
"nature." To assert that such behaviours are not human is to assert that
A can be not-A, thus contradicting the law of identity. Her ideology
cannot even meet its own test.

11.2 But "Natural Law" provides protection for individual rights from violation by the State. Those who are against Natural Law desire total rule by the state.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The second statement represents a common "Libertarian" tactic. Instead
of addressing the issues, they accuse an opponent of being a
"totalitarian" (or the less sinister "statist"). In this way, they hope
to distract attention from, and so avoid discussing, the issue at hand
(while at the same time smearing their opponent). We can therefore
ignore the second statement.

Regarding the first, "Natural Law" has **never** stopped the rights of
individuals from being violated by the state. Such "laws" are as much
use as a chocolate fire-guard. If "Natural Rights" could protect one
from the power of the state, the Nazis would not have been able to
murder six million Jews. The only thing that stops the state from
attacking people's rights is individual (and social) power -- the
ability and desire to protect oneself and what one considers to be right
and fair. As the anarchist Rudolf Rocker pointed out:

> *"Political [or individual] rights do not exist because they have been
> legally set down on a piece of paper, but only when they have become
> the ingrown habit of a people, and when any attempt to impair them
> will be meet with the violent resistance of the populace. . . .One
> compels respect from others when he knows how to defend his dignity as
> a human being. . . .The people owe all the political rights and
> privileges which we enjoy today, in greater or lesser measure, not to
> the good will of their governments, but to their own strength."*
> [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 64]

Of course, if is there are no "Natural Rights," then the state has no
"right" to murder you or otherwise take away what are commonly regarded
as human rights. One can object to state power without believing in
"Natural Law."

11.3 Why is "Natural Law" authoritarian?
----------------------------------------

Rights, far from being fixed, are the product of social evolution and
human action, thought and emotions. What is acceptable now may become
unacceptable in the future. Slavery, for example, was long considered
"natural." In fact, John Locke, the "father" of "Natural Rights," was
heavily involved in the slave trade. He made a fortune in violating what
is today regarded as a basic human right: not to be enslaved. Many in
Locke's day claimed that slavery was a "Natural Law." Few would say so
now.

Thomas Jefferson indicates exactly why "Natural Law" is authoritarian
when he wrote *"[s]ome men look at constitutions with sanctimonious
reverence, and deem them like the ark of the Covenant, too sacred to be
touched. They ascribe to the men of the preceding age a wisdom more than
human, and suppose what they did to be beyond amendment. . .laws and
institutions must go hand in hand with the progress of the human mind. .
. as that becomes more developed, more enlightened, as new discoveries
are made, institutions must advance also, to keep pace with the times. .
. We might as well require a man to wear still the coat which fitted him
when a boy as civilised society to remain forever under the regimen of
their barbarous ancestors."*

The "Natural Law" cult desires to stop the evolutionary process by which
new rights are recognised. Instead they wish to fix social life into
what **they** think is good and right, using a form of argument that
tries to raise their ideology above critique or thought. Such a wish is
opposed to the fundamental feature of liberty: the ability to think for
oneself. Michael Bakunin writes *"the liberty of man consists solely in
this: that he obeys natural laws because he has **himself** recognised
them as such, and not because they have been externally imposed upon him
by any extrinsic will whatever, divine or human, collective or
individual."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 227]

Thus anarchism, in contrast to the "natural law" cult, recognises that
"natural laws" (like society) are the product of individual evaluation
of reality and social life and are, therefore, subject to change in the
light of new information and ideas (Society *"progresses slowly through
the moving power of individual initiative"* [Bakunin, **The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 166] and so, obviously, do social rights and
customs). Ethical or moral "laws" (which is what the "Natural Law" cult
is actually about) is not a product of "human nature" or abstract
individuals. Rather, it is a **social** fact, a creation of society and
human interaction. In Bakunin's words, *"moral law is not an individual
but a social fact, a creation of society"* and any *"natural laws"* are
*"inherent in the social body"* (and so, we must add, not floating
abstractions existing in "man's nature"). [**Ibid.**, p. 125, p. 166]

The case for liberty and a free society is based on the argument that,
since every individual is unique, everyone can contribute something that
no one else has noticed or thought about. It is the free interaction of
individuals which allows them, along with society and its customs and
rights, to evolve, change and develop. "Natural Law," like the state,
tries to arrest this evolution. It replaces creative inquiry with dogma,
making people subject to yet another god, destroying critical thought
with a new rule book.

In addition, if these "Natural Laws" are really what they are claimed to
be, they are necessarily applicable to **all** of humanity (Rothbard
explicitly acknowledges this when he wrote that *"one of the notable
attributes of natural law"* is *"its applicability to all men,
regardless of time or place"* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 42]). In
other words, every other law code **must** (by definition) be "against
nature" and there exists **one** way of life (the "natural" one). The
authoritarian implications of such arrogance is clear. That the Dogma of
Natural Law was only invented a few hundred years ago, in one part of
the planet, does not seem to bother its advocates. Nor does the fact
that for the vast majority of human existence, people have lived in
societies which violated almost **all** of their so-called "Natural
Laws" To take one example, before the late Neolithic, most societies
were based on usufruct, or free access to communally held land and other
resources [see Murray Bookchin, **The Ecology of Freedom**]. Thus for
millennia, all human beings lived in violation of the supposed "Natural
Law" of private property -- perhaps the chief "law" in the "Libertarian"
universe.

If "Natural Law" did exist, then all people would have discovered these
"true" laws years ago. To the contrary, however, the debate is still
going on, with (for example) fascists and "Libertarians" each claiming
"the laws of nature" (and socio-biology) as their own.

11.4 Does "Natural Law" actually provides protection for individual liberty?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

But, it seems fair to ask, does "natural law" actually respect
individuals and their rights (i.e. liberty)? We think not. Why?

According to Rothbard, *"the natural law ethic states that for man,
goodness or badness can be determined by what fulfils or thwarts what is
best for man's nature."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 10] But, of
course, what may be "good" for "man" may be decidedly **bad** for men
(and women). If we take the example of the sole oasis in a desert (see
section [4.2](append134.html#secf42)) then, according to Rothbard, the
property owner having the power of life and death over others is "good"
while, if the dispossessed revolt and refuse to recognise his
"property", this is "bad"! In other words, Rothbard's "natural law" is
good for **some** people (namely property owners) while it can be bad
for others (namely the working class). In more general terms, this means
that a system which results in extensive hierarchy (i.e. **archy**,
power) is "good" (even though it restricts liberty for the many) while
attempts to **remove** power (such as revolution and the democratisation
of property rights) is "bad". Somewhat strange logic, we feel.

However such a position fails to understand **why** we consider coercion
to be wrong/unethical. Coercion is wrong because it subjects an
individual to the will of another. It is clear that the victim of
coercion is lacking the freedom that the philosopher Isaiah Berlin
describes in the following terms:

> *"I wish my life and decisions to depend on myself, not on external
> forces of whatever kind. I wish to be an instrument of my own, not of
> other men's, acts of will. I wish to be a subject, not an object; to
> be moved by reasons, by conscious purposes, which are my own, not by
> causes which affect me, as it were, from outside. I wish to be
> somebody, not nobody; a doer -- deciding, not being decided for,
> self-directed and not acted upon by external nature or by other mean
> as if I were a thing, or an animal, or a slave incapable of playing a
> human role, that is, of conceiving goals and policies of my own and
> realising them."* [**Four Essays on Liberty**, p. 131]

Or, as Alan Haworth points out, *"we have to view coercion as a
violation of what Berlin calls **positive** freedom."*
[**Anti-Libertarianism**, p. 48]

Thus, if a system results in the violation of (positive) liberty by its
very nature -- namely, subject a class of people to the will of another
class (the worker is subject to the will of their boss and is turned
into an order-taker) -- then it is justified to end that system. Yes, it
is "coercion" is dispossess the property owner -- but "coercion" exists
only for as long as they desire to exercise power over others. In other
words, it is not domination to remove domination! And remember it is the
domination that exists in coercion which fuels our hatred of it, thus
"coercion" to free ourselves from domination is a necessary evil in
order to stop far greater evils occurring (as, for example, in the
clear-cut case of the oasis monopoliser).

Perhaps it will be argued that domination is only bad when it is
involuntary, which means that it is only the involuntary nature of
coercion that makes it bad, not the domination it involves. By this
argument wage slavery is not domination as workers voluntarily agree to
work for a capitalist (after all, no one puts a gun to their heads) and
any attempt to overthrow capitalist domination is coercion and so wrong.
However, this argument ignores that fact that **circumstances** force
workers to sell their liberty and so violence on behalf of property
owners is not (usually) required -- market forces ensure that physical
force is purely "defensive" in nature. And as we argued in section
[2.2](append132.html#secf22), even Rothbard recognised that the economic
power associated with one class of people being dispossessed and another
empowered by this fact results in relations of domination which cannot
be considered "voluntary" by any stretch of the imagination (although,
of course, Rothbard refuses to see the economic power associated with
capitalism -- when its capitalism, he cannot see the wood for the trees
-- and we are ignoring the fact that capitalism was created by extensive
use of coercion and violence -- see section [8](append138.html)).

Thus, "Natural law" and attempts to protect individuals rights/liberty
and see a world in which people are free to shape their own lives are
fatally flawed if they do not recognise that private property is
incompatible with these goals. This is because the existence of
capitalist property smuggles in power and so domination (the restriction
of liberty, the conversion of some into order-givers and the many into
order-takers) and so Natural Law does not fulfil its promise that each
person is free to pursue their own goals. The unqualified right of
property will lead to the domination and degradation of large numbers of
people (as the oasis monopoliser so graphically illustrates).

And we stress that anarchists have no desire to harm individuals, only
to change institutions. If a workplace is taken over by its workers, the
owners are not harmed physically. If the oasis is taken from the
monopoliser, the ex-monopoliser becomes like other users of the oasis
(although probably **disliked** by others). Thus anarchists desire to
treat people as fairly as possible and not replace one form of coercion
and domination with another -- individuals must **never** be treated as
abstractions (if they have power over you, destroy what creates the
relation of domination, **not** the individual, in other words! And if
this power can be removed without resorting to force, so much the better
-- a point which social and individualist anarchists disagree on, namely
whether capitalism can be reformed away or not comes directly from this.
As the Individualists think it can, they oppose the use of force. Most
social anarchists think it cannot, and so support revolution).

This argument may be considered as "utilitarian" (the greatest good for
the greatest number) and so treats people not as "ends in themselves"
but as "means to an end". Thus, it could be argued, "natural law" is
required to ensure that **all** (as opposed to some, or many, or the
majority of) individuals are free and have their rights protected.

However, it is clear that "natural law" can easily result in a minority
having their freedom and rights respected, while the majority are forced
by circumstances (created by the rights/laws produced by applying
"natural law" we must note) to sell their liberty and rights in order to
survive. If it is wrong to treat anyone as a "means to an end", then it
is equally wrong to support a theory or economic system that results in
people having to negate themselves in order to live. A respect for
persons -- to treat them as ends and never as means -- is not compatible
with private property.

The simple fact is that **there are no easy answers** -- we need to
weight up our options and act on what we think is best. Yes, such
subjectivism lacks the "elegance" and simplicity of "natural law" but it
reflects real life and freedom far better. All in all, we must always
remember that what is "good" for man need not be good for people.
"Natural law" fails to do this and stands condemned.

11.5 But Natural Law was discovered, not invented!
--------------------------------------------------

This statement truly shows the religious nature of the Natural Law cult.
To see why its notion of "discovery" is confused, let us consider the
Law of Gravity. Newton did not "discover" the law of gravity, he
invented a theory which explained certain observed phenomena in the
physical world. Later Einstein updated Newton's theories in ways that
allowed for a better explanation of physical reality. Thus, unlike
"Natural Law," scientific laws can be updated and changed as our
knowledge changes and grows. As we have already noted, however, "Natural
Laws" cannot be updated because they are derived from fixed definitions
(Rothbard is pretty clear on this, he states that it is *"[v]ery true"*
that natural law is *"universal, fixed and immutable"* and so are
*"'absolute' principles of justice"* and that they are *"independent of
time and place"* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 19]). However, what he
fails to understand is that what the "Natural Law" cultists are
"discovering" are simply the implications of their own definitions,
which in turn simply reflect their own prejudices and preferences.

Since "Natural Laws" are thus "unchanging" and are said to have been
"discovered" centuries ago, it's no wonder that many of its followers
look for support in socio-biology, claiming that their "laws" are part
of the genetic structure of humanity. But socio-biology has dubious
scientific credentials for many of its claims. Also, it has
authoritarian implications **exactly** like Natural Law. Murray Bookchin
rightly characterises socio-biology as *"suffocatingly rigid; it not
only impedes action with the autocracy of a genetic tyrant but it closes
the door to any action that is not biochemically defined by its own
configuration. When freedom is nothing more than the recognition of
necessity. . .we discover the gene's tyranny over the greater totality
of life. . .when knowledge becomes dogma (and few movements are more
dogmatic than socio-biology) freedom is ultimately denied."*
[*"Socio-biology or Social Ecology"*, in **Which way for the Ecology
Movement?** pp. 49 - 75, p. 60]

In conclusion the doctrine of Natural Law, far from supporting
individual freedom, is one of its greatest enemies. By locating
individual rights within "Man's Nature," it becomes an unchanging set of
dogmas. Do we really know enough about humanity to say what are
"Natural" and universal Laws, applicable forever? Is it not a rejection
of critical thinking and thus individual freedom to do so?

11.6 Why is the notion of "discovery" contradictory?
----------------------------------------------------

Ayn Rand indicates the illogical and contradictory nature of the
concepts of "discovering" "natural law" and the "natural rights" this
"discovery" argument creates when she stated that her theory was
*"objective."* Her "Objectivist" political theory *"holds that good is
neither an attribute of 'things in themselves' nor man's emotional
state, but **an evaluation** of the facts of reality by man's
consciousness according to a rational standard of value. . . The
objective theory holds that **the good is an aspect of reality in
relation to man** - and that it must be discovered, not invented, by
man."* [**Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal**, p. 22]

However, this is playing with words. If something is "discovered" then
it has always been there and so is an intrinsic part of it. If "good"
**is** "discovered" by "man" then "good" exists independently of people
-- it is waiting to be "discovered." In other words, "good" is an
attribute of *"man as man,"* of *"things in themselves"* (in addition,
such a theory also implies that there is just **one** possible
interpretation of what is "good" for all humanity). This can be seen
when Rand talks about her system of "objective" values and rights.

When discussing the difference between *"subjective,"* *"intrinsic"* and
*"objective"* values Rand noted that *"intrinsic"* and *"subjective"*
theories *"make it possible for a man to believe what is good is
independent of man's mind and can be achieved by physical force."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 22] In other words, intrinsic and subjective values
justify tyranny. However, her *"objective"* values are placed squarely
in *"Man's Nature"* -- she states that *"[i]ndividual rights are the
means of subordinating society to moral law"* and that *"the source of
man's rights is man's nature."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 320, p. 322]

She argues that the *"**intrinsic** theory holds that the good is
inherent in certain things or actions, as such, regardless of their
context and consequences, regardless of any benefit or injury they may
cause to the actors and subjects involved."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 21]
According to the **Concise Oxford Dictionary**, *"intrinsic"* is defined
as *"inherent,"* *"essential,"* *"belonging naturally"* and defines
*"nature"* as *"a thing's, or person's, innate or essential qualities or
character."* In other words, if, as Rand maintains, man's rights **are**
the product of *"man's nature"* then such rights are **intrinsic**! And
if, as Rand maintains, such rights are the *"extension of morality into
the social system"* then morality itself is also intrinsic.

Again, her ideology fails to meet its own tests -- and opens the way for
tyranny. This can be seen by her whole hearted support for wage slavery
and her total lack of concern how it, and concentrations of wealth and
power, affect the individuals subjected to them. For, after all, what is
"good" is "inherent" in capitalism, regardless of the context,
consequences, benefits or injuries it may cause to the actors and
subjects involved.

The key to understanding her contradictory and illogical ideology lies
in her contradictory use of the word "man." Sometimes she uses it to
describe individuals but usually it is used to describe the human race
collectively (*"man's nature," "man's consciousness"*). But "Man" does
not have a consciousness, only individuals do. Man is an abstraction, it
is individuals who live and think, not "Man." Such "Man worship" -- like
Natural Law -- has all the markings of a religion.

As Max Stirner argues *"liberalism is a religion because it separates my
essence from me and sets it above me, because it exalts 'Man' to the
same extent as any other religion does to God. . . it sets me beneath
Man."* [**The Ego and Its Own**, p. 176] Indeed, he *"who is infatuated
with **Man** leaves persons out of account so far as that infatuation
extends, and floats in an ideal, sacred interest. **Man**, you see, is
not a person, but an ideal, a spook."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.79]

Rand argues that we must evaluate *"the facts of reality by man's
consciousness according to a rational standard of value"* but who
determines that value? She states that *"[v]alues are not determined by
fiat nor by majority vote"* [p. 24] but, however, neither can they be
determined by "man" or "man's consciousness" because "man" does not
exist. Individuals exist and have consciousness and because they are
unique have different values (but as we argued in section
[A.2.19](secA2.html#seca219), being social creatures these values are
generalised across individuals into social, i.e. objective, values). So,
the abstraction "man" does not exist and because of this we see the
healthy sight of different individuals convincing others of their ideas
and theories by discussion, presenting facts and rational debate. This
can be best seen in scientific debate.

The aim of the scientific method is to invent theories that explain
facts, the theories are not part of the facts but created by the
individual's mind in order to explain those facts. Such scientific
"laws" can and do change in light of new information and new thought. In
other words, the scientific method is the creation of subjective
theories that explain the objective facts. Rand's method is the opposite
- she assumes "man's nature," "discovers" what is "good" from those
assumptions and draws her theories by deduction from that. This is the
**exact** opposite of the scientific method and, as we noted above,
comes to us straight from the Roman Catholic church.

It is the subjective revolt by individuals against what is considered
"objective" fact or "common sense" which creates progress and develops
ethics (what is considered "good" and "right") and society. This, in
turn, becomes "accepted fact" until the next free thinker comes along
and changes how we view the world by presenting **new** evidence,
re-evaluating old ideas and facts or exposing the evil effects
associated with certain ideas (and the social relationships they
reflect) by argument, fact and passion. Attempts to impose *"an
evaluation of the facts of reality by man's consciousness"* would be a
death blow to this process of critical thought, development and
evaluation of the facts of reality by individual's consciousness. Human
thought would be subsumed by dogma.
