10 Would laissez-faire capitalism be stable?
============================================

Unsurprisingly, right-libertarians combine their support for "absolute
property rights" with a whole-hearted support for laissez-faire
capitalism. In such a system (which they maintain, to quote Ayn Rand, is
an *"unknown ideal"*) everything would be private property and there
would be few (if any) restrictions on "voluntary exchanges."
"Anarcho"-capitalists are the most extreme of defenders of pure
capitalism, urging that the state itself be privatised and no voluntary
exchange made illegal (for example, children would be considered the
property of their parents and it would be morally right to turn them
into child prostitutes -- the child has the option of leaving home if
they object).

As there have been no example of "pure" capitalism it is difficult to
say whether their claims about are true (for a discussion of a close
approximation see the section [10.3](append1310.html#secf103)). This
section of the FAQ is an attempt to discover whether such a system would
be stable or whether it would be subject to the usual booms and slumps.
Before starting we should note that there is some disagreement within
the right-libertarian camp itself on this subject (although instead of
stability they usually refer to "equilibrium" -- which is an economics
term meaning that all of a societies resources are fully utilised).

In general terms, most right-Libertarians' reject the concept of
equilibrium as such and instead stress that the economy is inherently a
dynamic (this is a key aspect of the Austrian school of economics). Such
a position is correct, of course, as such noted socialists as Karl Marx
and Michal Kalecki and capitalist economists as Keynes recognised long
ago. There seems to be two main schools of thought on the nature of
disequilibrium. One, inspired by von Mises, maintains that the actions
of the entrepreneur/capitalist results in the market co-ordinating
supply and demand and another, inspired by Joseph Schumpeter, who
question whether markets co-ordinate because entrepreneurs are
constantly innovating and creating new markets, products and techniques.

Of course both actions happen and we suspect that the differences in the
two approaches are not important. The important thing to remember is
that "anarcho"-capitalists and right-libertarians in general reject the
notion of equilibrium -- but when discussing their utopia they do not
actually indicate this! For example, most "anarcho"-capitalists will
maintain that the existence of government (and/or unions) causes
unemployment by either stopping capitalists investing in new lines of
industry or forcing up the price of labour above its market clearing
level (by, perhaps, restricting immigration, minimum wages, taxing
profits). Thus, we are assured, the worker will be better off in "pure"
capitalism because of the unprecedented demand for labour it will
create. However, full employment of labour is an equilibrium in economic
terms and that, remember, is impossible due to the dynamic nature of the
system. When pressed, they will usually admit there will be periods of
unemployment as the market adjusts or that full unemployment actually
means under a certain percentage of unemployment. Thus, if you (rightly)
reject the notion of equilibrium you also reject the idea of full
employment and so the labour market becomes a buyers market and labour
is at a massive disadvantage.

The right-libertarian case is based upon logical deduction, and the
premises required to show that laissez-faire will be stable are somewhat
incredible. If banks do not set the wrong interest rate, if companies do
not extend too much trade credit, if workers are willing to accept (real
wage related) pay cuts, if workers altruistically do not abuse their
market power in a fully employed society, if interest rates provide the
correct information, if capitalists predict the future relatively well,
if banks and companies do not suffer from isolation paradoxes, then,
perhaps, laissez-faire will be stable.

So, will laissez-faire capitalism be stable? Let us see by analysing the
assumptions of right-libertarianism -- namely that there will be full
employment and that a system of private banks will stop the business
cycle. We will start on the banking system first (in section
[10.1](append1310.html#secf101)) followed by the effects of the labour
market on economic stability (in section
[10.2](append1310.html#secf102)). Then we will indicate, using the
example of 19th century America, that actually existing ("impure")
laissez-faire was very unstable.

Explaining booms and busts by state action plays an ideological
convenience as it exonerates market processes as the source of
instability within capitalism. We hope to indicate in the next two
sections why the business cycle is inherent in the system (see also
sections [C.7](secC7.html), [C.8](secC8.html) and [C.9](secC9.html)).

10.1 Would privatising banking make capitalism stable?
------------------------------------------------------

It is claimed that the existence of the state (or, for minimal statists,
government policy) is the cause of the business cycle (recurring
economic booms and slumps). This is because the government either sets
interest rates too low or expands the money supply (usually by easing
credit restrictions and lending rates, sometimes by just printing fiat
money). This artificially increases investment as capitalists take
advantage of the artificially low interest rates. The real balance
between savings and investment is broken, leading to over-investment, a
drop in the rate of profit and so a slump (which is quite socialist in a
way, as many socialists also see over-investment as the key to
understanding the business cycle, although they obviously attribute the
slump to different causes -- namely the nature of capitalist production,
not that the credit system does not play its part -- see section
[C.7](secC7.html)).

In the words of Austrian Economist W. Duncan Reekie, *"[t]he business
cycle is generated by monetary expansion and contraction . . . When new
money is printed it appears as if the supply of savings has increased.
Interest rates fall and businessmen are misled into borrowing additional
founds to finance extra investment activity . . . This would be of no
consequence if it had been the outcome of [genuine saving] . . . -but
the change was government induced. The new money reaches factor owners
in the form of wages, rent and interest . . . the factor owners will
then spend the higher money incomes in their existing
consumption:investment proportions . . . Capital goods industries will
find their expansion has been in error and malinvestments have been
inoccured."* [**Markets, Entrepreneurs and Liberty**, pp. 68-9]

In other words, there has been *"wasteful mis-investment due to
government interference with the market."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 69] In
response to this (negative) influence in the workings of the market, it
is suggested by right-libertarians that a system of private banks should
be used and that interest rates are set by them, via market forces. In
this way an interest rate that matches the demand and supply for savings
will be reached and the business cycle will be no more. By truly
privatising the credit market, it is hoped by the business cycle will
finally stop.

Unsurprisingly, this particular argument has its weak points and in this
section of the FAQ we will try to show exactly why this theory is wrong.

Let us start with Reckie's starting point. He states that the *"main
problem"* of the slump is *"why is there suddenly a '**cluster**' of
business errors? Businessmen and entrepreneurs are market experts
(otherwise they would not survive) and why should they all make mistakes
simultaneously?"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 68] It is this *"cluster"* of
mistakes that the Austrians' take as evidence that the business cycle
comes from outside the workings of the market (i.e. is exogenous in
nature). Reekie argues that an *"error cluster only occurs when all
entrepreneurs have received the wrong signals on potential
profitability, and all have received the signals simultaneously through
government interference with the money supply."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 74]
But is this **really** the case?

The simple fact is that groups of (rational) individuals can act in the
same way based on the same information and this can lead to a collective
problem. For example, we do not consider it irrational that everyone in
a building leaves it when the fire alarm goes off and that the flow of
people can cause hold-ups at exits. Neither do we think that its unusual
that traffic jams occur, after all those involved are all trying to get
to work (i.e. they are reacting to the same desire). Now, is it so
strange to think that capitalists who all see the same opportunity for
profit in a specific market decide to invest in it? Or that the
aggregate outcome of these individually rational decisions may be
irrational (i.e. cause a glut in the market)?

In other words, a "cluster" of business failures may come about because
a group of capitalists, acting in isolation, over-invest in a given
market. They react to the same information (namely super profits in
market X), arrange loans, invest and produce commodities to meet demand
in that market. However, the aggregate result of these individually
rational actions is that the aggregate supply far exceeds demand,
causing a slump in that market and, perhaps, business failures. The
slump in this market (and the potential failure of some firms) has an
impact on the companies that supplied them, the companies that are
dependent on their employees wages/demand, the banks that supplied the
credit and so forth. The accumulative impact of this slump (or failures)
on the chain of financial commitments of which they are but one link can
be large and, perhaps, push an economy into general depression. Thus the
claim that it is something external to the system that causes depression
is flawed.

It could be claimed the interest rate is the problem, that it does not
accurately reflect the demand for investment or relate it to the supply
of savings. But, as we argued in section [C.8](secC8.html), it is not at
all clear that the interest rate provides the necessary information to
capitalists. They need investment information for their specific
industry, but the interest rate is cross-industry. Thus capitalists in
market X do not know if the investment in market X is increasing and so
this lack of information can easily cause "mal-investment" as
over-investment (and so over-production) occurs. As they have no way of
knowing what the investment decisions of their competitors are or now
these decisions will affect an already unknown future, capitalists may
over-invest in certain markets and the net effects of this aggregate
mistake can expand throughout the whole economy and cause a general
slump. In other words, a cluster of business failures can be accounted
for by the workings of the market itself and **not** the (existence of)
government.

This is **one** possible reason for an internally generated business
cycle but that is not the only one. Another is the role of class
struggle which we discuss in the [next section](append1310.html#secf102)
and yet another is the endogenous nature of the money supply itself.
This account of money (proposed strongly by, among others, the
post-Keynesian school) argues that the money supply is a function of the
demand for credit, which itself is a function of the level of economic
activity. In other words, the banking system creates as much money as
people need and any attempt to control that creation will cause economic
problems and, perhaps, crisis (interestingly, this analysis has strong
parallels with mutualist and individualist anarchist theories on the
causes of capitalist exploitation and the business cycle). Money, in
other words, emerges from **within** the system and so the
right-libertarian attempt to "blame the state" is simply wrong.

Thus what is termed "credit money" (created by banks) is an essential
part of capitalism and would exist without a system of central banks.
This is because money is created from within the system, in response to
the needs of capitalists. In a word, money is endogenous and credit
money an essential part of capitalism.

Right-libertarians do not agree. Reekie argues that *"[o]nce fractional
reserve banking is introduced, however, the supply of money substitutes
will include fiduciary media. The ingenuity of bankers, other financial
intermediaries and the endorsement and **guaranteeing of their
activities by governments and central banks** has ensured that the
quantity of fiat money is immense."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 73]

Therefore, what "anarcho"-capitalists and other right-libertarians seem
to be actually complaining about when they argue that "state action"
creates the business cycle by creating excess money is that the state
**allows** bankers to meet the demand for credit by creating it. This
makes sense, for the first fallacy of this sort of claim is how could
the state **force** bankers to expand credit by loaning more money than
they have savings. And this seems to be the normal case within
capitalism -- the central banks accommodate bankers activity, they do
not force them to do it. Alan Holmes, a senior vice president at the New
York Federal Reserve, stated that:

> *"In the real world, banks extend credit, creating deposits in the
> process, and look for the reserves later. The question then becomes
> one of whether and how the Federal Reserve will accommodate the demand
> for reserves. In the very short run, the Federal Reserve has little or
> no choice about accommodating that demand, over time, its influence
> can obviously be felt."* [quoted by Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p.
> 220]

(Although we must stress that central banks are **not** passive and do
have many tools for affecting the supply of money. For example, central
banks can operate "tight" money policies which can have significant
impact on an economy and, via creating high enough interest rates, the
demand for money.)

It could be argued that because central banks exist, the state creates
an "environment" which bankers take advantage off. By not being subject
to "free market" pressures, bankers could be tempted to make more loans
than they would otherwise in a "pure" capitalist system (i.e. create
credit money). The question arises, would "pure" capitalism generate
sufficient market controls to stop banks loaning in excess of available
savings (i.e. eliminate the creation of credit money/fiduciary media).

It is to this question we now turn.

As noted above, the demand for credit is generated from **within** the
system and the comments by Holmes reinforce this. Capitalists seek
credit in order to make money and banks create it precisely because they
are also seeking profit. What right-libertarians actually object to is
the government (via the central bank) **accommodating** this creation of
credit. If only the banks could be forced to maintain a savings to loans
ration of one, then the business cycle would stop. But is this likely?
Could market forces ensure that bankers pursue such a policy? We think
not -- simply because the banks are profit making institutions. As
post-Keynesianist Hyman Minsky argues, *"[b]ecause bankers live in the
same expectational climate as businessmen, profit-seeking bankers will
find ways of accommodating their customers. . . Banks and bankers are
not passive managers of money to lend or to invest; they are in business
to maximise profits. . ."* [quoted by L. Randall Wray, **Money and
Credit in Capitalist Economies**, p. 85]

This is recognised by Reekie, in passing at least (he notes that
*"fiduciary media could still exist if bankers offered them and clients
accepted them"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 73]). Bankers will tend to try and
accommodate their customers and earn as much money as possible. Thus
Charles P. Kindleberger comments that monetary expansion *"is systematic
and endogenous rather than random and exogenous"* seem to fit far better
the reality of capitalism that the Austrian and right-libertarian
viewpoint [**Manias, Panics, and Crashes**, p. 59] and post-Keynesian L.
Randall Wray argues that *"the money supply . . . is more obviously
endogenous in the monetary systems which predate the development of a
central bank."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 150]

In other words, the money supply cannot be directly controlled by the
central bank since it is determined by private decisions to enter into
debt commitments to finance spending. Given that money is generated from
**within** the system, can market forces ensure the non-expansion of
credit (i.e. that the demand for loans equals the supply of savings)? To
begin to answer this question we must note that investment is
*"essentially determined by expected profitability."* [Philip Arestis,
**The Post-Keynesian Approach to Economics**, p. 103] This means that
the actions of the banks cannot be taken in isolation from the rest of
the economy. Money, credit and banks are an essential part of the
capitalist system and they cannot be artificially isolated from the
expectations, pressures and influences of that system.

Let us assume that the banks desire to maintain a loans to savings ratio
of one and try to adjust their interest rates accordingly. Firstly,
changes in the rate of interest *"produce only a very small, if any,
movement in business investment"* according to empirical evidence [**Op.
Cit.**, pp. 82-83] and that *"the demand for credit is extremely
inelastic with respect to interest rates."* [L. Randall Wray, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 245] Thus, to keep the supply of savings in line with the
demand for loans, interest rates would have to increase greatly (indeed,
trying to control the money supply by controlling the monetary bases in
this way will only lead to very big fluctuations in interest rates). And
increasing interest rates has a couple of paradoxical effects.

According to economists Joseph Stiglitz and Andrew Weiss (in *"Credit
Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Knowledge"*, **American Economic
Review**, no. 71, pp. 393-410) interest rates are subject to what is
called the *"lemons problem"* (asymmetrical information between buyer
and seller). Stiglitz and Weiss applied the "lemons problem" to the
credit market and argued (and unknowingly repeated Adam Smith) that at a
given interest rate, lenders will earn lower return by lending to bad
borrowers (because of defaults) than to good ones. If lenders try to
increase interest rates to compensate for this risk, they may chase away
good borrowers, who are unwilling to pay a higher rate, while perversely
not chasing away incompetent, criminal, or malignantly optimistic
borrowers. This means that an increase in interest rates may actually
increase the possibilities of crisis, as more loans may end up in the
hands of defaulters.

This gives banks a strong incentive to keep interest rates lower than
they otherwise could be. Moreover, *"increases in interest rates make it
more difficult for economic agents to meet their debt repayments"*
[Philip Arestis, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 237-8] which means when interest
rates **are** raised, defaults will increase and place pressures on the
banking system. At high enough short-term interest rates, firms find it
hard to pay their interest bills, which cause/increase cash flow
problems and so *"[s]harp increases in short term interest rates . .
.leads to a fall in the present value of gross profits after taxes
(quasi-rents) that capital assets are expected to earn."* [Hyman Minsky,
**Post-Keynesian Economic Theory**, p. 45]

In addition, *"production of most investment goods is undertaken on
order and requires time for completion. A rise in interest rates is not
likely to cause firms to abandon projects in the process of production .
. . This does not mean . . . that investment is completely unresponsive
to interest rates. A large increase in interest rates causes a 'present
value reversal', forcing the marginal efficiency of capital to fall
below the interest rate. If the long term interest rate is also pushed
above the marginal efficiency of capital, the project may be
abandoned."* [Wray, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 172-3] In other words, investment
takes **time** and there is a lag between investment decisions and
actual fixed capital investment. So if interest rates vary during this
lag period, initially profitable investments may become white elephants.

As Michal Kalecki argued, the rate of interest must be lower than the
rate of profit otherwise investment becomes pointless. The incentive for
a firm to own and operate capital is dependent on the prospective rate
of profit on that capital relative to the rate of interest at which the
firm can borrow at. The higher the interest rate, the less promising
investment becomes.

If investment is unresponsive to all but very high interest rates (as we
indicated above), then a privatised banking system will be under intense
pressure to keep rates low enough to maintain a boom (by, perhaps,
creating credit above the amount available as savings). And if it does
this, over-investment and crisis is the eventual outcome. If it does not
do this and increases interest rates then consumption and investment
will dry up as interest rates rise and the defaulters (honest and
dishonest) increase and a crisis will eventually occur.

This is because increasing interest rates may increase savings **but**
it also reduce consumption (*"high interest rates also deter both
consumers and companies from spending, so that the domestic economy is
weakened and unemployment rises"* [Paul Ormerod, **The Death of
Economics**, p. 70]). This means that firms can face a drop off in
demand, causing them problems and (perhaps) leading to a lack of
profits, debt repayment problems and failure. An increase in interest
rates also reduces demand for investment goods, which also can cause
firms problems, increase unemployment and so on. So an increase in
interest rates (particularly a sharp rise) could reduce consumption and
investment (i.e. reduce aggregate demand) and have a ripple effect
throughout the economy which could cause a slump to occur.

In other words, interest rates and the supply and demand of
savings/loans they are meant to reflect may not necessarily move an
economy towards equilibrium (if such a concept is useful). Indeed, the
workings of a "pure" banking system without credit money may increase
unemployment as demand falls in both investment and consumption in
response to high interest rates and a general shortage of money due to
lack of (credit) money resulting from the "tight" money regime implied
by such a regime (i.e. the business cycle would still exist). This was
the case of the failed Monetarist experiments on the early 1980s when
central banks in America and Britain tried to pursue a "tight" money
policy. The "tight" money policy did not, in fact, control the money
supply. All it did do was increase interest rates and lead to a serious
financial crisis and a deep recession (as Wray notes, *"the central bank
uses tight money polices to raise interest rates"* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
262]). This recession, we must note, also broke the backbone of working
class resistance and the unions in both countries due to the high levels
of unemployment it generated. As intended, we are sure.

Such an outcome would not surprise anarchists, as this was a key feature
of the Individualist and Mutualist Anarchists' arguments against the
"money monopoly" associated with specie money. They argued that the
"money monopoly" created a "tight" money regime which reduced the demand
for labour by restricting money and credit and so allowed the
exploitation of labour (i.e. encouraged wage labour) and stopped the
development of non-capitalist forms of production. Thus Lysander
Spooner's comments that workers need *"**money capital** to enable them
to buy the raw materials upon which to bestow their labour, the
implements and machinery with which to labour . . . Unless they get this
capital, they must all either work at a disadvantage, or not work at
all. A very large portion of them, to save themselves from starvation,
have no alternative but to sell their labour to others . . ."* [**A
Letter to Grover Cleveland**, p. 39] It is interesting to note that
workers **did** do well during the 1950s and 1960s under a "liberal"
money regime than they did under the "tighter" regimes of the 1980s and
1990s.

We should also note that an extended period of boom will encourage banks
to make loans more freely. According to Minsky's *"financial instability
model"* crisis (see *"The Financial Instability Hypothesis"* in
**Post-Keynesian Economic Theory** for example) is essentially caused by
risky financial practices during periods of financial tranquillity. In
other words, *"stability is destabilising."* In a period of boom, banks
are happy and the increased profits from companies are flowing into
their vaults. Over time, bankers note that they can use a reserve system
to increase their income and, due to the general upward swing of the
economy, consider it safe to do so (and given that they are in
competition with other banks, they may provide loans simply because they
are afraid of losing customers to more flexible competitors). This
increases the instability within the system (as firms increase their
debts due to the flexibility of the banks) and produces the possibility
of crisis if interest rates are increased (because the ability of
business to fulfil their financial commitments embedded in debts
deteriorates).

Even if we assume that interest rates **do** work as predicted in
theory, it is false to maintain that there is one interest rate. This is
not the case. *"Concentration of capital leads to unequal access to
investment funds, which obstructs further the possibility of smooth
transitions in industrial activity. Because of their past record of
profitability, large enterprises have higher credit ratings and easier
access to credit facilities, and they are able to put up larger
collateral for a loan."* [Michael A. Bernstein, **The Great
Depression**, p. 106] As we noted in section [C.5.1](secC5.html#secc51),
the larger the firm, the lower the interest rate they have to pay. Thus
banks routinely lower their interest rates to their best clients even
though the future is uncertain and past performance cannot and does not
indicate future returns. Therefore it seems a bit strange to maintain
that the interest rate will bring savings and loans into line if there
are different rates being offered.

And, of course, private banks cannot affect the underlying fundamentals
that drive the economy -- like productivity, working class power and
political stability -- any more than central banks (although central
banks can influence the speed and gentleness of adjustment to a crisis).

Indeed, given a period of full employment a system of private banks may
actually speed up the coming of a slump. As we argue in the [next
section](append1310.html#secf101), full employment results in a profits
squeeze as firms face a tight labour market (which drives up costs) and,
therefore, increased workers' power at the point of production and in
their power of exit. In a central bank system, capitalists can pass on
these increasing costs to consumers and so maintain their profit margins
for longer. This option is restricted in a private banking system as
banks would be less inclined to devalue their money. This means that
firms will face a profits squeeze sooner rather than later, which will
cause a slump as firms cannot make ends meet. As Reekie notes, inflation
*"can temporarily reduce employment by postponing the time when
misdirected labour will be laid off"* but as Austrian's (like
Monetarists) think *"inflation is a monetary phenomenon"* he does not
understand the real causes of inflation and what they imply for a "pure"
capitalist system [**Op. Cit.**, p. 67, p. 74]. As Paul Ormerod points
out *"the claim that inflation is always and everywhere purely caused by
increases in the money supply, and that there the rate of inflation
bears a stable, predictable relationship to increases in the money
supply is ridiculous."* And he notes that *"[i]ncreases in the rate of
inflation tend to be linked to falls in unemployment, and vice versa"*
which indicates its **real** causes -- namely in the balance of class
power and in the class struggle. [**The Death of Economics**, p. 96, p.
131]

Moreover, if we do take the Austrian theory of the business cycle at
face value we are drawn to conclusion that in order to finance
investment savings must be increased. But to maintain or increase the
stock of loanable savings, inequality must be increased. This is
because, unsurprisingly, rich people save a larger proportion of their
income than poor people and the proportion of profits saved are higher
than the proportion of wages. But increasing inequality (as we argued in
section [3.1](append133.html#secf31)) makes a mockery of
right-libertarian claims that their system is based on freedom or
justice.

This means that the preferred banking system of "anarcho"-capitalism
implies increasing, not decreasing, inequality within society. Moreover,
most firms (as we indicated in section [C.5.1](secC5.html#secc51)) fund
their investments with their own savings which would make it hard for
banks to loan these savings out as they could be withdrawn at any time.
This could have serious implications for the economy, as banks refuse to
fund new investment simply because of the uncertainty they face when
accessing if their available savings can be loaned to others (after all,
they can hardly loan out the savings of a customer who is likely to
demand them at any time). And by refusing to fund new investment, a boom
could falter and turn to slump as firms do not find the necessary orders
to keep going.

So, would market forces create "sound banking"? The answer is probably
not. The pressures on banks to make profits come into conflict with the
need to maintain their savings to loans ration (and so the confidence of
their customers). As Wray argues, *"as banks are profit seeking firms,
they find ways to increase their liabilities which don't entail
increases in reserve requirements"* and *"[i]f banks share the profit
expectations of prospective borrowers, they can create credit to allow
[projects/investments] to proceed."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 295, p. 283] This
can be seen from the historical record. As Kindleberger notes, *"the
market will create new forms of money in periods of boom to get around
the limit"* imposed on the money supply [**Op. Cit.**, p. 63]. Trade
credit is one way, for example. Under the Monetarist experiments of
1980s, there was *"deregulation and central bank constraints raised
interest rates and created a moral hazard -- banks made increasingly
risky loans to cover rising costs of issuing liabilities. Rising
competition from nonbanks and tight money policy forced banks to lower
standards and increase rates of growth in an attempt to 'grow their way
to profitability'"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 293]

Thus credit money ("fiduciary media") is an attempt to overcome the
scarcity of money within capitalism, particularly the scarcity of specie
money. The pressures that banks face within "actually existing"
capitalism would still be faced under "pure" capitalism. It is likely
(as Reekie acknowledges) that credit money would still be created in
response to the demands of business people (although not at the same
level as is currently the case, we imagine). The banks, seeking profits
themselves and in competition for customers, would be caught between
maintaining the value of their business (i.e. their money) and the needs
to maximise profits. As a boom develops, banks would be tempted to
introduce credit money to maintain it as increasing the interest rate
would be difficult and potentially dangerous (for reasons we noted
above). Thus, if credit money is not forth coming (i.e. the banks stick
to the Austrian claims that loans must equal savings) then the rise in
interest rates required will generate a slump. If it is forthcoming,
then the danger of over-investment becomes increasingly likely. All in
all, the business cycle is part of capitalism and **not** caused by
"external" factors like the existence of government.

As Reekie notes, to Austrians *"ignorance of the future is endemic"*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 117] but you would be forgiven for thinking that this
is not the case when it comes to investment. An individual firm cannot
know whether its investment project will generate the stream of returns
necessary to meet the stream of payment commitments undertaken to
finance the project. And neither can the banks who fund those projects.
Even **if** a bank does not get tempted into providing credit money in
excess of savings, it cannot predict whether other banks will do the
same or whether the projects it funds will be successful. Firms, looking
for credit, may turn to more flexible competitors (who practice reserve
banking to some degree) and the inflexible bank may see its market share
and profits decrease. After all, commercial banks *"typically establish
relations with customers to reduce the uncertainty involved in making
loans. Once a bank has entered into a relationship with a customer, it
has strong incentives to meet the demands of that customer."* [Wray,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 85]

There are example of fully privatised banks. For example, in the United
States (*"which was without a central bank after 1837"*) *"the major
banks in New York were in a bind between their roles as profit seekers,
which made them contributors to the instability of credit, and as
possessors of country deposits against whose instability they had to
guard."* [Kindleberger, **Op. Cit.**, p. 85]

In Scotland, the banks were unregulated between 1772 and 1845 but *"the
leading commercial banks accumulated the notes of lessor ones, as the
Second Bank of the United States did contemporaneously in [the USA],
ready to convert them to specie if they thought they were getting out of
line. They served, that is, as an informal controller of the money
supply. For the rest, as so often, historical evidence runs against
strong theory, as demonstrated by the country banks in England from 1745
to 1835, wildcat banking in Michigan in the 1830s, and the latest
experience with bank deregulation in Latin America."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
82] And we should note there were a few banking "wars" during the period
of deregulation in Scotland which forced a few of the smaller banks to
fail as the bigger ones refused their money and that there was a major
bank failure in the Ayr Bank.

Kendleberger argues that central banking *"arose to impose control on
the instability of credit"* and did not cause the instability which
right-libertarians maintain it does. And as we note in section
[10.3](append1310.html#secf103), the USA suffered massive economic
instability during its period without central banking. Thus, **if**
credit money **is** the cause of the business cycle, it is likely that a
"pure" capitalism will still suffer from it just as much as "actually
existing" capitalism (either due to high interest rates or
over-investment).

In general, as the failed Monetarist experiments of the 1980s prove,
trying to control the money supply is impossible. The demand for money
is dependent on the needs of the economy and any attempt to control it
will fail (and cause a deep depression, usually via high interest
rates). The business cycle, therefore, is an endogenous phenomenon
caused by the normal functioning of the capitalist economic system.
Austrian and right-libertarian claims that *"slump flows boom, but for a
totally unnecessary reason: government inspired mal-investment"*
[Reekie, **Op. Cit.**, p. 74] are simply wrong. Over-investment **does**
occur, but it is **not** *"inspired"* by the government. It is
*"inspired"* by the banks need to make profits from loans and from
businesses need for investment funds which the banks accommodate. In
other words, by the nature of the capitalist system.

10.2 How does the labour market effect capitalism?
--------------------------------------------------

In many ways, the labour market is the one that affects capitalism the
most. The right-libertarian assumption (like that of mainstream
economics) is that markets clear and, therefore, the labour market will
also clear. As this assumption has rarely been proven to be true in
actuality (i.e. periods of full employment within capitalism are few and
far between), this leaves its supporters with a problem -- reality
contradicts the theory.

The theory predicts full employment but reality shows that this is not
the case. Since we are dealing with logical deductions from assumptions,
obviously the theory cannot be wrong and so we must identify external
factors which cause the business cycle (and so unemployment). In this
way attention is diverted away from the market and its workings -- after
all, it is assumed that the capitalist market works -- and onto
something else. This "something else" has been quite a few different
things (most ridiculously, sun spots in the case of one of the founders
of marginalist economics, William Stanley Jevons). However, these days
most pro-free market capitalist economists and right-libertarians have
now decided it is the state.

In this section of the FAQ we will present a case that maintains that
the assumption that markets clear is false at least for one, unique,
market -- namely, the market for labour. As the fundamental assumption
underlying "free market" capitalism is false, the logically consistent
superstructure built upon comes crashing down. Part of the reason why
capitalism is unstable is due to the commodification of labour (i.e.
people) and the problems this creates. The state itself can have
positive and negative impacts on the economy, but removing it or its
influence will not solve the business cycle.

Why is this? Simply due to the nature of the labour market.

Anarchists have long realised that the capitalist market is based upon
inequalities and changes in power. Proudhon argued that *"[t]he
manufacturer says to the labourer, 'You are as free to go elsewhere with
your services as I am to receive them. I offer you so much.' The
merchant says to the customer, 'Take it or leave it; you are master of
your money, as I am of my goods. I want so much.' Who will yield? The
weaker."* He, like all anarchists, saw that domination, oppression and
exploitation flow from inequalities of market/economic power and that
the *"power of invasion lies in superior strength."* [**What is
Property?**, p. 216, p. 215]

This applies with greatest force to the labour market. While mainstream
economics and right-libertarian variations of it refuse to acknowledge
that the capitalist market is a based upon hierarchy and power,
anarchists (and other socialists) do not share this opinion. And because
they do not share this understanding with anarchists, right-libertarians
will never be able to understand capitalism or its dynamics and
development. Thus, when it comes to the labour market, it is essential
to remember that the balance of power within it is the key to
understanding the business cycle. Thus the economy must be understood as
a system of power.

So how does the labour market effect capitalism? Let us consider a
growing economy, on that is coming out of a recession. Such a growing
economy stimulates demand for employment and as unemployment falls, the
costs of finding workers increase and wage and condition demands of
existing workers intensify. As the economy is growing and labour is
scare, the threat associated with the hardship of unemployment is
weakened. The share of profits is squeezed and in reaction to this
companies begin to cut costs (by reducing inventories, postponing
investment plans and laying off workers). As a result, the economy moves
into a downturn. Unemployment rises and wage demands are moderated.
Eventually, this enables the share of profits first of all to stabilise,
and then rise. Such an *"interplay between profits and unemployment as
the key determinant of business cycles"* is *"observed in the empirical
data."* [Paul Ormerod, **The Death of Economics**, p. 188]

Thus, as an economy approaches full employment the balance of power on
the labour market changes. The sack is no longer that great a threat as
people see that they can get a job elsewhere easily. Thus wages and
working conditions increase as companies try to get new (and keep)
existing employees and output is harder to maintain. In the words of
economist William Lazonick, labour *"that is able to command a higher
price than previously because of the appearance of tighter labour
markets is, by definition, labour that is highly mobile via the market.
And labour that is highly mobile via the market is labour whose supply
of effort is difficult for managers to control in the production
process. Hence, the advent of tight labour markets generally results in
more rapidly rising average costs . . .as well as upward shifts in the
average cost curve. . ."* [**Business Organisation and the Myth of the
Market Economy**, p. 106]

In other words, under conditions of full-employment *"employers are in
danger of losing the upper hand."* [Juliet B. Schor, **The Overworked
American**, p. 75] Schor argues that *"employers have a structural
advantage in the labour market, because there are typically more
candidates ready and willing to endure this work marathon [of long
hours] than jobs for them to fill."* [p. 71] Thus the labour market is
usually a buyers market, and so the sellers have to compromise. In the
end, workers adapt to this inequality of power and instead of getting
what they want, they want what they get.

But under full employment this changes. As we argued in section
[B.4.4](secB4.html#secb44) and section [C.7](secC7.html), in such a
situation it is the bosses who have to start compromising. And they do
not like it. As Schor notes, America *"has never experienced a sustained
period of full employment. The closest we have gotten is the late 1960s,
when the overall unemployment rate was under 4 percent for four years.
But that experience does more to prove the point than any other example.
The trauma caused to business by those years of a tight labour market
was considerable. Since then, there has been a powerful consensus that
the nation cannot withstand such a low rate of unemployment."* [**Op.
Cit.**, pp. 75-76]

So, in other words, full employment is not good for the capitalist
system due to the power full employment provides workers. Thus
unemployment is a necessary requirement for a successful capitalist
economy and not some kind of aberration in an otherwise healthy system.
Thus "anarcho"-capitalist claims that "pure" capitalism will soon result
in permanent full employment are false. Any moves towards full
employment will result in a slump as capitalists see their profits
squeezed from below by either collective class struggle or by individual
mobility in the labour market.

This was recognised by Individualist Anarchists like Benjamin Tucker,
who argued that mutual banking would *"give an unheard of impetus to
business, and consequently create an unprecedented demand for labour, --
a demand which would always be in excess of the supply, directly
contrary of the present condition of the labour market."* [**The
Anarchist Reader**, pp. 149-150] In other words, full employment would
end capitalist exploitation, drive non-labour income to zero and ensure
the worker the full value of her labour -- in other words, end
capitalism. Thus, for most (if not all) anarchists the exploitation of
labour is only possible when unemployment exists and the supply of
labour exceeds the demand for it. Any move towards unemployment will
result in a profits squeeze and either the end of capitalism or an
economic slump.

Indeed, as we argued in the [last section](append1310.html#secf101), the
extended periods of (approximately) full employment until the 1960s had
the advantage that any profit squeeze could (in the short run anyway) be
passed onto working class people in the shape of inflation. As prices
rise, labour is made cheaper and profits margins supported. This option
is restricted under a "pure" capitalism (for reasons we discussed in the
[last section](append1310.html#secf101)) and so "pure" capitalism will
be affected by full employment faster than "impure" capitalism.

As an economy approaches full employment, *"hiring new workers suddenly
becomes much more difficult. They are harder to find, cost more, and are
less experiences. Such shortages are extremely costly for a firm."*
[Schor, **Op. Cit.**, p. 75] This encourages a firm to pass on these
rises to society in the form of price rises, so creating inflation.
Workers, in turn, try to maintain their standard of living. *"Every
general increase in labour costs in recent years,"* note J. Brecher and
J. Costello in the late 1970s, *"has followed, rather than preceded, an
increase in consumer prices. Wage increases have been the result of
workers' efforts to catch up after their incomes have already been
eroded by inflation. Nor could it easily be otherwise. All a businessman
has to do to raise a price . . . [is to] make an announcement. . . Wage
rates . . . are primarily determined by contracts"* and so cannot be
easily adjusted in the short term. [**Common Sense for Bad Times**, p,
120]

These full employment pressures will still exist with "pure" capitalism
(and due to the nature of the banking system will not have the safety
value of inflation). This means that periodic profit squeezes will
occur, due to the nature of a tight labour market and the increased
power of workers this generates. This in turn means that a "pure"
capitalism will be subject to periods of unemployment (as we argued in
section [C.9](secC9.html)) and so still have a business cycle. This is
usually acknowledged by right-libertarians in passing, although they
seem to think that this is purely a "short-term" problem (it seems a
strange "short-term" problem that continually occurs).

But such an analysis is denied by right-libertarians. For them
government action, combined with the habit of many labour unions to
obtain higher than market wage rates for their members, creates and
exacerbates mass unemployment. This flows from the deductive logic of
much capitalist economics. The basic assumption of capitalism is that
markets clear. So if unemployment exists then it can only be because the
price of labour (wages) is too high (Austrian Economist W. Duncan Reekie
argues that unemployment will *"disappear provided real wages are not
artificially high"* [**Markets, Entrepreneurs and Liberty**, p. 72]).

Thus the assumption provokes the conclusion -- unemployment is caused by
an unclearing market as markets always clear. And the cause for this is
either the state or unions. But what if the labour market **cannot**
clear without seriously damaging the power and profits of capitalists?
What if unemployment is required to maximise profits by weakening
labours' bargaining position on the market and so maximising the
capitalists power? In that case unemployment is caused by capitalism,
not by forces external to it.

However, let us assume that the right-libertarian theory is correct. Let
us assume that unemployment is all the fault of the selfish unions and
that a job-seeker *"who does not want to wait will always get a job in
the unhampered market economy."* [von Mises, **Human Action**, p. 595]

Would crushing the unions reduce unemployment? Let us assume that the
unions have been crushed and government has been abolished (or, at the
very least, become a minimum state). The aim of the capitalist class is
to maximise their profits and to do this they invest in labour saving
machinery and otherwise attempt to increase productivity. But increasing
productivity means that the prices of goods fall and falling prices mean
increasing real wages. It is high real wages that, according to
right-libertarians, that cause unemployment. So as a reward for
increasing productivity, workers will have to have their money wages cut
in order to stop unemployment occurring! For this reason some employers
might refrain from cutting wages in order to avoid damage to morale -
potentially an important concern.

Moreover, wage contracts involve **time** -- a contract will usually
agree a certain wage for a certain period. This builds in rigidity into
the market, wages cannot be adjusted as quickly as other commodity
prices. Of course, it could be argued that reducing the period of the
contract and/or allowing the wage to be adjusted could overcome this
problem. However, if we reduce the period of the contract then workers
are at a suffer disadvantage as they will not know if they have a job
tomorrow and so they will not be able to easily plan their future (an
evil situation for anyone to be in). Moreover, even without formal
contracts, wage renegotiation can be expensive. After all, it takes time
to bargain (and time is money under capitalism) and wage cutting can
involve the risk of the loss of mutual good will between employer and
employee. And would **you** give your boss the power to "adjust" your
wages as he/she thought was necessary? To do so would imply an
altruistic trust in others not to abuse their power.

Thus a "pure" capitalism would be constantly seeing employment increase
and decrease as productivity levels change. There exist important
reasons why the labour market need not clear which revolve around the
avoidance/delaying of wage cuts by the actions of capitalists
themselves. Thus, given a choice between cutting wages for all workers
and laying off some workers without cutting the wages of the remaining
employees, it is unsurprising that capitalists usually go for the later.
After all, the sack is an important disciplining device and firing
workers can make the remaining employees more inclined to work harder
and be more obedient.

And, of course, many employers are not inclined to hire over-qualified
workers. This is because, once the economy picks up again, their worker
has a tendency to move elsewhere and so it can cost them time and money
finding a replacement and training them. This means that involuntary
unemployment can easily occur, so reducing tendencies towards full
employment even more. In addition, one of the assumptions of the
standard marginalist economic model is one of decreasing returns to
scale. This means that as employment increases, costs rise and so prices
also rise (and so real wages fall). But in reality many industries have
**increasing** returns to scale, which means that as production
increases unit costs fall, prices fall and so real wages rise. Thus in
such an economy unemployment would increase simply because of the nature
of the production process!

Moreover, as we argued in-depth in section [C.9](secC9.html), a cut in
money wages is not a neutral act. A cut in money wages means a reduction
in demand for certain industries, which may have to reduce the wages of
its employees (or fire them) to make ends meet. This could produce a
accumulative effect and actually **increase** unemployment rather than
reduce it.

In addition, there are no "self-correcting" forces at work in the labour
market which will quickly bring employment back to full levels. This is
for a few reasons. Firstly, the supply of labour cannot be reduced by
cutting back production as in other markets. All we can do is move to
other areas and hope to find work there. Secondly, the supply of labour
can sometimes adjust to wage decreases in the wrong direction. Low wages
might drive workers to offer a greater amount of labour (i.e. longer
hours) to make up for any short fall (or to keep their job). This is
usually termed the *"efficiency wage"* effect. Similarly, another family
member may seek employment in order to maintain a given standard of
living. Falling wages may cause the number of workers seeking employment
to **increase**, causing a full further fall in wages and so on (and
this is ignoring the effects of lowering wages on demand discussed in
section [C.9](secC9.html)).

The paradox of piece work is an important example of this effect. As
Schor argues, *"piece-rate workers were caught in a viscous downward
spiral of poverty and overwork. . . When rates were low, they found
themselves compelled to make up in extra output what they were losing on
each piece. But the extra output produced glutted the market and drove
rates down further."* [Juliet C. Schor, **The Overworked American**, p,
58]

Thus, in the face of reducing wages, the labour market may see an
accumulative move away from (rather than towards) full employment, The
right-libertarian argument is that unemployment is caused by real wages
being too high which in turn flows from the assumption that markets
clear. If there is unemployment, then the price of the commodity labour
is too high -- otherwise supply and demand would meet and the market
clear. But if, as we argued above, unemployment is essential to
discipline workers then the labour market **cannot** clear except for
short periods. If the labour market clears, profits are squeezed. Thus
the claim that unemployment is caused by "too high" real wages is false
(and as we argue in section [C.9](secC9.html), cutting these wages will
result in deepening any slump and making recovery longer to come about).

In other words, the assumption that the labour market must clear is
false, as is any assumption that reducing wages will tend to push the
economy quickly back to full employment. The nature of wage labour and
the "commodity" being sold (i.e. human labour/time/liberty) ensure that
it can never be the same as others. This has important implications for
economic theory and the claims of right-libertarians, implications that
they fail to see due to their vision of labour as a commodity like any
other.

The question arises, of course, of whether, during periods of full
employment, workers could not take advantage of their market power and
gain increased workers' control, create co-operatives and so reform away
capitalism. This was the argument of the Mutualist and Individualist
anarchists and it does have its merits. However, it is clear (see
section [J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512)) that bosses hate to have their
authority reduced and so combat workers' control whenever they can. The
logic is simple, if workers increase their control within the workplace
the manager and bosses may soon be out of a job and (more importantly)
they may start to control the allocation of profits. Any increase in
working class militancy may provoke capitalists to stop/reduce
investment and credit and so create the economic environment (i.e.
increasing unemployment) necessary to undercut working class power.

In other words, a period of full unemployment is not sufficient to
reform capitalism away. Full employment (nevermind any struggle over
workers' control) will reduce profits and if profits are reduced then
firms find it hard to repay debts, fund investment and provide profits
for shareholders. This profits squeeze would be enough to force
capitalism into a slump and any attempts at gaining workers'
self-management in periods of high employment will help push it over the
edge (after all, workers' control without control over the allocation of
any surplus is distinctly phoney). Moreover, even if we ignore the
effects of full employment may not last due to problems associated with
over-investment (see section [C.7.2](secC7.html#secc72)), credit and
interest rate problems (see section [10.1](append1310.html#secf101)) and
realisation/aggregate demand disjoints. Full employment adds to the
problems associated with the capitalist business cycle and so, if class
struggle and workers power did not exist or cost problem, capitalism
would still not be stable.

If equilibrium is a myth, then so is full employment. It seems somewhat
ironic that "anarcho"-capitalists and other right-libertarians maintain
that there will be equilibrium (full employment) in the one market
within capitalism it can never actually exist in! This is usually
quietly acknowledged by most right-libertarians, who mention in passing
that some "temporary" unemployment **will** exist in their system -- but
"temporary" unemployment is not full employment. Of course, you could
maintain that all unemployment is "voluntary" and get round the problem
by denying it, but that will not get us very far.

So it is all fine and well saying that "libertarian" capitalism would be
based upon the maxim *"From each as they choose, to each as they are
chosen."* [Robert Nozick, **Anarchy, State, and Utopia**, p. 160] But if
the labour market is such that workers have little option about what
they "choose" to give and fear that they will **not** be chosen, then
they are at a disadvantage when compared to their bosses and so
"consent" to being treated as a resource from the capitalist can make a
profit from. And so this will result in any "free" contract on the
labour market favouring one party at the expense of the other -- as can
be seen from "actually existing capitalism".

Thus any "free exchange" on the labour market will usually **not**
reflect the true desires of working people (and who will make all the
"adjusting" and end up wanting what they get). Only when the economy is
approaching full employment will the labour market start to reflect the
true desires of working people and their wage start to approach its full
product. And when this happens, profits are squeezed and capitalism goes
into slump and the resulting unemployment disciplines the working class
and restores profit margins. Thus full employment will be the exception
rather than the rule within capitalism (and that is a conclusion which
the historical record indicates).

In other words, in a normally working capitalist economy any labour
contracts will not create relationships based upon freedom due to the
inequalities in power between workers and capitalists. Instead, any
contracts will be based upon domination, **not** freedom. Which prompts
the question, how is libertarian capitalism **libertarian** if it erodes
the liberty of a large class of people?

10.3 Was laissez-faire capitalism stable?
-----------------------------------------

Firstly, we must state that a pure laissez-faire capitalist system has
not existed. This means that any evidence we present in this section can
be dismissed by right-libertarians for precisely this fact -- it was not
"pure" enough. Of course, if they were consistent, you would expect them
to shun all historical and current examples of capitalism or activity
within capitalism, but this they do not. The logic is simple -- if X is
good, then it is permissible to use it. If X is bad, the system is not
pure enough.

However, as right-libertarians **do** use historical examples so shall
we. According to Murray Rothbard, there was *"quasi-laissez-faire
industrialisation [in] the nineteenth century"* [**The Ethics of
Liberty**, p. 264] and so we will use the example of nineteenth century
America -- as this is usually taken as being the closest to pure
laissez-faire -- in order to see if laissez-faire is stable or not.

Yes, we are well aware that 19th century USA was far from laissez-faire
-- there was a state, protectionism, government economic activity and so
on -- but as this example has been often used by right-Libertarians'
themselves (for example, Ayn Rand) we think that we can gain a lot from
looking at this imperfect approximation of "pure" capitalism (and as we
argued in section [8](append138.html), it is the "quasi" aspects of the
system that counted in industrialisation, **not** the laissez-faire
ones).

So, was 19th century America stable? No, it most definitely was not.

Firstly, throughout that century there were a continual economic booms
and slumps. The last third of the 19th century (often considered as a
heyday of private enterprise) was a period of profound instability and
anxiety. Between 1867 and 1900 there were 8 complete business cycles.
Over these 396 months, the economy expanded during 199 months and
contracted during 197. Hardly a sign of great stability (since the end
of world war II, only about a fifth of the time has spent in periods of
recession or depression, by way of comparison). Overall, the economy
went into a slump, panic or crisis in 1807, 1817, 1828, 1834, 1837,
1854, 1857, 1873, 1882, and 1893 (in addition, 1903 and 1907 were also
crisis years).

Part of this instability came from the eras banking system. *"Lack of a
central banking system,"* writes Richard Du Boff, *"until the Federal
Reserve act of 1913 made financial panics worse and business cycle
swings more severe"* [**Accumulation and Power**, p. 177] It was in
response to this instability that the Federal Reserve system was
created; and as Doug Henwood notes *"the campaign for a more rational
system of money and credit was not a movement of Wall Street vs.
industry or regional finance, but a broad movement of elite bankers and
the managers of the new corporations as well as academics and business
journalists. The emergence of the Fed was the culmination of attempts to
define a standard of value that began in the 1890s with the emergence of
the modern professionally managed corporation owned not by its managers
but dispersed public shareholders."* [**Wall Street**, p. 93] Indeed,
the Bank of England was often forced to act as lender of last resort to
the US, which had no central bank.

In the decentralised banking system of the 19th century, during panics
thousands of banks would hoard resources, so starving the system for
liquidity precisely at the moment it was most badly needed. The creation
of trusts was one way in which capitalists tried to manage the system's
instabilities (at the expense of consumers) and the corporation was a
response to the outlawing of trusts. *"By internalising lots of the
competitive system's gaps -- by bring more transactions within the same
institutional walls -- corporations greatly stabilised the economy."*
[Henwood, **Op. Cit.**, p. 94]

All during the hey-day of laissez faire we also find popular protests
against the money system used, namely specie (in particular gold), which
was considered as a hindrance to economic activity and expansion (as
well as being a tool for the rich). The Individualist Anarchists, for
example, considered the money monopoly (which included the use of specie
as money) as the means by which capitalists ensured that *"the labourers
. . . [are] kept in the condition of wage labourers,"* and reduced *"to
the conditions of servants; and subject to all such extortions as their
employers . . . may choose to practice upon them"*, indeed they became
the *"mere tools and machines in the hands of their employers"*. With
the end of this monopoly, *"[t]he amount of money, capable of being
furnished . . . [would assure that all would] be under no necessity to
act as a servant, or sell his or her labour to others."* [Lysander
Spooner, **A Letter to Grover Cleveland**, p. 47, p. 39, p. 50, p. 41]
In other words, a specie based system (as desired by many
"anarcho"-capitalists) was considered a key way of maintaining wage
labour and exploitation.

Interestingly, since the end of the era of the Gold Standard (and so
commodity money) popular debate, protest and concern about money has
disappeared. The debate and protest was in response to the **effects**
of commodity money on the economy -- with many people correctly viewing
the seriously restrictive monetary regime of the time responsible for
economic problems and crisis as well as increasing inequalities. Instead
radicals across the political spectrum urged a more flexible regime, one
that did not cause wage slavery and crisis by reducing the amount of
money in circulation when it could be used to expand production and
reduce the impact of slumps. Needless to say, the Federal Reserve system
in the USA was far from the institution these populists wanted (after
all, it is run by and for the elite interests who desired its creation).

That the laissez-faire system was so volatile and panic-ridden suggests
that "anarcho"-capitalist dreams of privatising everything, including
banking, and everything will be fine are very optimistic at best (and,
ironically, it was members of the capitalist class who lead the movement
towards state-managed capitalism in the name of "sound money").
