1 Are "anarcho"-capitalists really anarchists?
==============================================

In a word, no. While "anarcho"-capitalists obviously try to associate
themselves with the anarchist tradition by using the word "anarcho" or
by calling themselves "anarchists", their ideas are distinctly at odds
with those associated with anarchism. As a result, any claims that their
ideas are anarchist or that they are part of the anarchist tradition or
movement are false.

"Anarcho"-capitalists claim to be anarchists because they say that they
oppose government. As such, as noted in the [last
section](append13int.html), they use a dictionary definition of
anarchism. However, this fails to appreciate that anarchism is a
**political theory**, not a dictionary definition. As dictionaries are
rarely politically sophisticated things, this means that they fail to
recognise that anarchism is more than just opposition to government, it
is also marked a opposition to capitalism (i.e. exploitation and private
property). Thus, opposition to government is a necessary but not
sufficient condition for being an anarchist -- you also need to be
opposed to exploitation and capitalist private property. As
"anarcho"-capitalists do not consider interest, rent and profits (i.e.
capitalism) to be exploitative nor oppose capitalist property rights,
they are not anarchists.

Moreover, "anarcho"-capitalism is inherently self-refuting. This can be
seen from leading "anarcho"-capitalist Murray Rothbard. he thundered
against the evil of the state, arguing that it *"arrogates to itself a
monopoly of force, of ultimate decision-making power, over a given area
territorial area."* In and of itself, this definition is unremarkable.
That a few people (an elite of rulers) claim the right to rule others
must be part of any sensible definition of the state or government.
However, the problems begin for Rothbard when he notes that
*"[o]bviously, in a free society, Smith has the ultimate decision-making
power over his own just property, Jones over his, etc."* [**The Ethics
of Liberty**, p. 170 and p. 173] The logical contradiction in this
position should be obvious, but not to Rothbard. It shows the power of
ideology, the ability of means words (the expression *"private
property"*) to turn the bad (*"ultimate decision-making power over a
given area"*) into the good (*"ultimate decision-making power over a
given area"*).

Now, this contradiction can be solved in only **one** way -- the owners
of the *"given area"* are also its users. In other words, a system of
possession (or "occupancy and use") as favoured by anarchists. However,
Rothbard is a capitalist and supports private property. In other words,
wage labour and landlords. This means that he supports a divergence
between ownership and use and this means that this *"ultimate
decision-making power"* extends to those who **use,** but do not own,
such property (i.e. tenants and workers). The statist nature of private
property is clearly indicated by Rothbard's words -- the property owner
in an "anarcho"-capitalist society possesses the *"ultimate
decision-making power"* over a given area, which is also what the state
has currently. Rothbard has, ironically, proved by his own definition
that "anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchist.

Rothbard does try to solve this obvious contradiction, but utterly
fails. He simply ignores the crux of the matter, that capitalism is
based on hierarchy and, therefore, cannot be anarchist. He does this by
arguing that the hierarchy associated with capitalism is fine as long as
the private property that produced it was acquired in a "just" manner.
In so doing he yet again draws attention to the identical authority
structures and social relationships of the state and property. As he
puts it:

> *"**If** the State may be said too properly **own** its territory,
> then it is proper for it to make rules for everyone who presumes to
> live in that area. It can legitimately seize or control private
> property because there **is** no private property in its area, because
> it really owns the entire land surface. **So long** as the State
> permits its subjects to leave its territory, then, it can be said to
> act as does any other owner who sets down rules for people living on
> his property."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 170]

Obviously Rothbard argues that the state does not "justly" own its
territory -- but given that the current distribution of property is just
as much the result of violence and coercion as the state, his argument
is seriously flawed. It amounts, as we note in [section
4](append134.html), to little more than an ***"immaculate conception of
property"*** unrelated to reality. Even assuming that private property
was produced by the means Rothbard assumes, it does not justify the
hierarchy associated with it as the current and future generations of
humanity have, effectively, been excommunicated from liberty by previous
ones. If, as Rothbard argues, property is a natural right and the basis
of liberty then why should the many be excluded from their birthright by
a minority? In other words, Rothbard denies that liberty should be
universal. He chooses property over liberty while anarchists choose
liberty over property.

Even worse, the possibility that private property can result in
**worse** violations of individual freedom (at least of workers) than
the state of its citizens was implicitly acknowledged by Rothbard. He
uses as a hypothetical example a country whose King is threatened by a
rising "libertarian" movement. The King responses by *"employ[ing] a
cunning stratagem,"* namely he *"proclaims his government to be
dissolved, but just before doing so he arbitrarily parcels out the
entire land area of his kingdom to the 'ownership' of himself and his
relatives."* Rather than taxes, his subjects now pay rent and he can
*"regulate to regulate the lives of all the people who presume to live
on"* his property as he sees fit. Rothbard then asks:

> *"Now what should be the reply of the libertarian rebels to this pert
> challenge? If they are consistent utilitarians, they must bow to this
> subterfuge, and resign themselves to living under a regime no less
> despotic than the one they had been battling for so long. Perhaps,
> indeed, **more** despotic, for now the king and his relatives can
> claim for themselves the libertarians' very principle of the absolute
> right of private property, an absoluteness which they might not have
> dared to claim before."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 54-5]

So not only does the property owner have the same monopoly of power over
a given area as the state, it is **more** despotic as it is based on the
*"absolute right of private property"*! And remember, Rothbard is
arguing **in favour** of "anarcho"-capitalismAnd remember, Rothbard is
arguing **in favour** of "anarcho"-capitalism (*"if you have unbridled
capitalism, you will have all kinds of authority: you will have
**extreme** authority."* [Chomksy, **Understanding Power**, p. 200]). So
in practice, private property is a major source of oppression and
authoritarianism within society -- there is little or no freedom within
capitalist production (as Bakunin noted, *"the worker sells his person
and his liberty for a given time"*). So, in stark contrast to
anarchists, "anarcho"-capitalists have no problem with factory fascism
(i.e. wage labour), a position which seems highly illogical for a theory
calling itself libertarian. If it were truly libertarian, it would
oppose all forms of domination, not just statism. This position flows
from the "anarcho"-capitalist definition of freedom as the absence of
coercion and will be discussed in [section 2](append132.html) in more
detail.

Of course, Rothbard has yet another means to escape the obvious, namely
that the market will limit the abuses of the property owners. If workers
do not like their ruler then they can seek another. However, this reply
completely ignores the reality of economic and social power. Thus the
"consent" argument fails because it ignores the social circumstances of
capitalism which limit the choice of the many. Anarchists have long
argued that, as a class, workers have little choice but to "consent" to
capitalist hierarchy. The alternative is either dire poverty or
starvation.

"Anarcho"-capitalists dismiss such claims by denying that there is such
a thing as economic power. Rather, it is simply freedom of contract.
Anarchists consider such claims as a joke. To show why, we need only
quote (yet again) Rothbard on the abolition of slavery and serfdom in
the 19th century. He argued, correctly, that the *"**bodies** of the
oppressed were freed, but the property which they had worked and
eminently deserved to own, remained in the hands of their former
oppressors. With economic power thus remaining in their hands, the
former lords soon found themselves virtual masters once more of what
were now free tenants or farm labourers. The serfs and slaves had tasted
freedom, but had been cruelly derived of its fruits."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
74]

To say the least, anarchists fail to see the logic in this position.
Contrast this with the standard "anarcho"-capitalist claim that if
market forces ("voluntary exchanges") result in the creation of *"free
tenants or farm labourers"* then they are free. Yet labourers
dispossessed by market forces are in exactly the same social and
economic situation as the ex-serfs and ex-slaves. If the latter do not
have the fruits of freedom, neither do the former. Rothbard sees the
obvious *"economic power"* in the latter case, but denies it in the
former. It is only Rothbard's ideology that stops him from drawing the
obvious conclusion -- identical economic conditions produce identical
social relationships and so capitalism is marked by *"economic power"*
and *"virtual masters."* The only solution is for "anarcho"-capitalists
to simply say the ex-serfs and ex-slaves were actually free to choose
and, consequently, Rothbard was wrong. It might be inhuman, but at least
it would be consistent!

Rothbard's perspective is alien to anarchism. For example, as
individualist anarchist William Bailie noted, under capitalism there is
a class system marked by *"a dependent industrial class of
wage-workers"* and *"a privileged class of wealth-monopolisers, each
becoming more and more distinct from the other as capitalism advances."*
This has turned property into *"a social power, an economic force
destructive of rights, a fertile source of injustice, a means of
enslaving the dispossessed."* He concludes: *"Under this system equal
liberty cannot obtain."* Bailie notes that the modern *"industrial world
under capitalistic conditions"* have *"arisen under the **regime** of
status"* (and so *"law-made privileges"*) however, it seems unlikely
that he would have concluded that such a class system would be fine if
it had developed naturally or the current state was abolished while
leaving the class structure intact (as we note in [section
G.4](secG4.html), Tucker recognised that even the *"freest competition"*
was powerless against the *"enormous concentration of wealth"*
associated with modern capitalism). [**The Individualist Anarchists**,
p. 121]

Therefore anarchists recognise that "free exchange" or "consent" in
unequal circumstances will reduce freedom as well as increasing
inequality between individuals and classes. In other words, as we
discuss in [section 3](append133.html), inequality will produce social
relationships which are based on hierarchy and domination, **not**
freedom. As Noam Chomsky put it:

> *"Anarcho-capitalism, in my opinion, is a doctrinal system which, if
> ever implemented, would lead to forms of tyranny and oppression that
> have few counterparts in human history. There isn't the slightest
> possibility that its (in my view, horrendous) ideas would be
> implemented, because they would quickly destroy any society that made
> this colossal error. The idea of 'free contract' between the potentate
> and his starving subject is a sick joke, perhaps worth some moments in
> an academic seminar exploring the consequences of (in my view, absurd)
> ideas, but nowhere else."* [**Noam Chomsky on Anarchism**, interview
> with Tom Lane, December 23, 1996]

Clearly, then, by its own arguments "anarcho"-capitalism is not
anarchist. This should come as no surprise to anarchists. Anarchism, as
a political theory, was born when Proudhon wrote **What is Property?**
specifically to refute the notion that workers are free when capitalist
property forces them to seek employment by landlords and capitalists. He
was well aware that in such circumstances property *"violates equality
by the rights of exclusion and increase, and freedom by despotism . . .
[and has] perfect identity with robbery."* He, unsurprisingly, talks of
the *"proprietor, to whom [the worker] has sold and surrendered his
liberty."* For Proudhon, anarchy was *"the absence of a master, of a
sovereign"* while *"proprietor"* was *"synonymous"* with *"sovereign"*
for he *"imposes his will as law, and suffers neither contradiction nor
control."* This meant that *"property engenders despotism,"* as *"each
proprietor is sovereign lord within the sphere of his property."*
[**What is Property**, p. 251, p. 130, p. 264 and pp. 266-7] It must
also be stressed that Proudhon's classic work is a lengthy critique of
the kind of apologetics for private property Rothbard espouses to
salvage his ideology from its obvious contradictions.

Ironically, Rothbard repeats the same analysis as Proudhon but draws the
**opposite** conclusions and expects to be considered an anarchist!
Moreover, it seems equally ironic that "anarcho"-capitalism calls itself
"anarchist" while basing itself on the arguments that anarchism was
created in opposition to. As shown, "anarcho"-capitalism makes as much
sense as "anarcho-statism" -- an oxymoron, a contradiction in terms. The
idea that "anarcho"-capitalism warrants the name "anarchist" is simply
false. Only someone ignorant of anarchism could maintain such a thing.
While you expect anarchist theory to show this to be the case, the
wonderful thing is that "anarcho"-capitalism itself does the same.

Little wonder Bob Black argues that *"[t]o demonise state
authoritarianism while ignoring identical albeit contract-consecrated
subservient arrangements in the large-scale corporations which control
the world economy is fetishism at its worst."* [**Libertarian as
Conservative**] The similarities between capitalism and statism are
clear -- and so why "anarcho"-capitalism cannot be anarchist. To reject
the authority (the *"ultimate decision-making power"*) of the state and
embrace that of the property owner indicates not only a highly illogical
stance but one at odds with the basic principles of anarchism. This
whole-hearted support for wage labour and capitalist property rights
indicates that "anarcho"-capitalists are not anarchists because they do
not reject all forms of **archy.** They obviously support the hierarchy
between boss and worker (wage labour) and landlord and tenant.
Anarchism, by definition, is against all forms of archy, including the
hierarchy generated by capitalist property. To ignore the obvious archy
associated with capitalist property is highly illogical.

In addition, we must note that such inequalities in power and wealth
will need "defending" from those subject to them ("anarcho"-capitalists
recognise the need for private police and courts to defend property from
theft -- and, anarchists add, to defend the theft and despotism
associated with property!). Due to its support of private property (and
thus authority), "anarcho"-capitalism ends up retaining a state in its
"anarchy"; namely a **private** state whose existence its proponents
attempt to deny simply by refusing to call it a state, like an ostrich
hiding its head in the sand (see [section 6](append136.html) for more on
this and why "anarcho"-capitalism is better described as "private state"
capitalism). As Albert Meltzer put it:

> *"Common-sense shows that any capitalist society might dispense with a
> 'State' . . . but it could not dispense with organised government, or
> a privatised form of it, if there were people amassing money and
> others working to amass it for them. The philosophy of
> 'anarcho-capitalism' dreamed up by the 'libertarian' New Right, has
> nothing to do with Anarchism as known by the Anarchist movement
> proper. It is a lie . . . Patently unbridled capitalism . . . needs
> some force at its disposal to maintain class privileges, either form
> the State itself or from private armies. What they believe in is in
> fact a limited State -- that us, one in which the State has one
> function, to protect the ruling class, does not interfere with
> exploitation, and comes as cheap as possible for the ruling class. The
> idea also serves another purpose . . . a moral justification for
> bourgeois consciences in avoiding taxes without feeling guilty about
> it."* [**Anarchism: Arguments For and Against**, p. 50]

For anarchists, this need of capitalism for some kind of state is
unsurprising. For *"Anarchy without socialism seems equally as
impossible to us [as socialism without anarchy], for in such a case it
could not be other than the domination of the strongest, and would
therefore set in motion right away the organisation and consolidation of
this domination; that is to the constitution of government."* [Errico
Malatesta, **Life and Ideas**, p. 148] Because of this, the
"anarcho"-capitalist rejection of anarchist ideas on capitalist property
economics and the need for equality, they cannot be considered
anarchists or part of the anarchist tradition.

Thus anarchism is far more than the common dictionary definition of "no
government" -- it also entails being against all forms of **archy**,
including those generated by capitalist property. This is clear from the
roots of the word "anarchy." As we noted in [section A.1](secA1.html),
the word anarchy means "no rulers" or "contrary to authority." As
Rothbard himself acknowledges, the property owner is the ruler of their
property and, therefore, those who use it. For this reason
"anarcho"-capitalism cannot be considered as a form of anarchism -- a
real anarchist must logically oppose the authority of the property owner
along with that of the state. As "anarcho"-capitalism does not
explicitly (or implicitly, for that matter) call for economic
arrangements that will end wage labour and usury it cannot be considered
anarchist or part of the anarchist tradition.

Political theories should be identified by their actual features and
history rather than labels. Once we recognise that, we soon find out
that "anarcho"-capitalism is an oxymoron. Anarchists and
"anarcho"-capitalists are not part of the same movement or tradition.
Their ideas and aims are in direct opposition to those of all kinds of
anarchists.

While anarchists have always opposed capitalism, "anarcho"-capitalists
have embraced it. And due to this embrace their "anarchy" will be marked
by extensive differences in wealth and power, differences that will show
themselves up in relationships based upon subordination and hierarchy
(such as wage labour), **not** freedom (little wonder that Proudhon
argued that *"property is despotism"* -- it creates authoritarian and
hierarchical relationships between people in a similar way to statism).

Their support for "free market" capitalism ignores the impact of wealth
and power on the nature and outcome of individual decisions within the
market (see sections [2](append132.html) and [3](append133.html) for
further discussion). For example, as we indicate in sections
[J.5.10](secJ5.html#secj510), [J.5.11](secJ5.html#secj511) and
[J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512), wage labour is less efficient than
self-management in production but due to the structure and dynamics of
the capitalist market, "market forces" will actively discourage
self-management due to its empowering nature for workers. In other
words, a developed capitalist market will promote hierarchy and
unfreedom in production in spite of its effects on individual workers
and their wants (see also [section 10.2](append1310.html#secf102)). Thus
"free market" capitalism tends to re-enforce inequalities of wealth and
power, **not** eliminate them.

Furthermore, any such system of (economic and social) power will require
extensive force to maintain it and the "anarcho"-capitalist system of
competing "defence firms" will simply be a new state, enforcing
capitalist power, property rights and law.

Overall, the lack of concern for meaningful freedom within production
and the effects of vast differences in power and wealth within society
as a whole makes "anarcho"-capitalism little better than "anarchism for
the rich." Emma Goldman recognised this when she argued that *"'Rugged
individualism' has meant all the 'individualism' for the masters . . .
in whose name political tyranny and social oppression are defended and
held up as virtues while every aspiration and attempt of man to gain
freedom . . . is denounced as . . . evil in the name of that same
individualism."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 112] And, as such, is no
anarchism at all.

So, unlike anarchists, "anarcho"-capitalists do not seek the *"abolition
of the proletariat"* (to use Proudhon's expression) via changing
capitalist property rights and institutions. Thus the
"anarcho"-capitalist and the anarchist have different starting positions
and opposite ends in mind and so they cannot be considered part of the
same (anarchist) tradition. As we discuss further in later sections, the
"anarcho"-capitalist claims to being anarchists are bogus simply because
they reject so much of the anarchist tradition as to make what they do
accept non-anarchist in theory and practice. Little wonder Peter
Marshall said that *"few anarchists would accept the
'anarcho-capitalists' into the anarchist camp since they do not share a
concern for economic equality and social justice."* [**Demanding the
Impossible**, p. 565]

1.1 Why is the failure to renounce hierarchy the Achilles Heel of right-wing libertarianism
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Any capitalist system will produce vast differences in economic (and
social) wealth and power. As we argue in [section
3.1](append133.html#secf31), such differences will reflect themselves in
the market and any "free" contracts agreed there will create
hierarchical relationships. Thus capitalism is marked by hierarchy (see
[section B.1.2](secB1.html#secb12)) and, unsurprisingly,
right-libertarians and "anarcho"-capitalists fail to oppose such "free
market" generated hierarchy.

Both groups approve of it in the capitalist workplace or rented
accommodation and the right-Libertarians also approve of it in a
'minimal' state to protect private property ("anarcho"-capitalists, in
contrast, approve of the use of private defence firms to protect
property). But the failure of these two movements to renounce hierarchy
is their weakest point. For anti-authoritarianism has sunk deep roots
into the modern psyche, as a legacy of the sixties.

Many people who do not even know what anarchism is have been profoundly
affected by the personal liberation and counterculture movements of the
past thirty years, epitomised by the popular bumper sticker, *"Question
Authority."* As a result, society now tolerates much more choice than
ever before in matters of religion, sexuality, art, music, clothing, and
other components of lifestyle. We need only recall the conservatism that
reigned in such areas during the fifties to see that the idea of liberty
has made tremendous advances in just a few decades.

Although this liberatory impulse has so far been confined almost
entirely to the personal and cultural realms, it may yet be capable of
spilling over and affecting economic and political institutions,
provided it continues to grow. The Right is well aware of this, as seen
in its ongoing campaigns for "family values," school prayer, suppression
of women's rights, fundamentalist Christianity, sexual abstinence before
marriage, and other attempts to revive the Ozzie-and-Harriet mindset of
the Good Old Days. This is where the efforts of "cultural anarchists" --
artists, musicians, poets, and others -- are important in keeping alive
the ideal of personal freedom and resistance to authority as a necessary
foundation for economic and political restructuring.

Indeed, the libertarian right (as a whole) support restrictions on
freedom **as long as its not the state that is doing it**! Their support
for capitalism means that they have no problem with bosses dictating
what workers do during working hours (nor outside working hours, if the
job requires employees to take drug tests or not be gay in order to keep
it). If a private landlord or company decrees a mandatory rule or mode
of living, workers/tenets must "love it or leave it!" Of course, that
the same argument also applies to state laws is one hotly denied by
right-Libertarians -- a definite case of not seeing the wood for the
trees (see [section 2.3](append132.html#secf23)).

Of course, the "anarcho"-capitalist will argue, workers and tenants can
find a more liberal boss or landlord. This, however, ignores two key
facts. Firstly, being able to move to a more liberal state hardly makes
state laws less offensive (as they themselves will be the first to point
out). Secondly, looking for a new job or home is not that easy. Just a
moving to a new state can involve drastic upheavals, so change changing
jobs and homes. Moreover, the job market is usually a buyers market (it
has to be in capitalism, otherwise profits are squeezed -- see sections
[C.7](secC7.html) and [10.2](append1310.html#secf102)) and this means
that workers are not usually in a position (unless they organise) to
demand increased liberties at work.

It seems somewhat ironic, to say the least, that right-libertarians
place rights of property over the rights of self-ownership, even though
(according to their ideology) self-ownership is the foundational right
from which property rights are derived. Thus in right-libertarianism the
rights of property owners to discriminate and govern the property-less
are more important than the freedom from discrimination (i.e. to be
yourself) or the freedom to govern oneself at all times.

So, when it boils down to it, right-libertarians are not really bothered
about restrictions on liberty and, indeed, they will defend private
restrictions on liberty with all their might. This may seem a strange
position for self-proclaimed "libertarians" to take, but it flows
naturally from their definition of freedom (see [section
2](append132.html) for a full discussion of this). but by not attacking
hierarchy beyond certain forms of statism, the 'libertarian' right
fundamentally undermines its claim to be libertarian. Freedom cannot be
compartmentalised, but is holistic. The denial of liberty in, say, the
workplace, quickly results in its being denied elsewhere in society (due
to the impact of the inequalities it would produce) , just as the
degrading effects of wage labour and the hierarchies with which is it
bound up are felt by the worker outside work.

Neither the Libertarian Party nor so-called "anarcho"-capitalism is
**genuinely** anti-authoritarian, as those who are truly dedicated to
liberty must be.

1.2 How libertarian is right-Libertarian theory?
------------------------------------------------

The short answer is, not very. Liberty not only implies but also
requires independent, critical thought (indeed, anarchists would argue
that critical thought requires free development and evolution and that
it is precisely **this** which capitalist hierarchy crushes). For
anarchists a libertarian theory, if it is to be worthy of the name, must
be based upon critical thought and reflect the key aspect that
characterises life - change and the ability to evolve. To hold up dogma
and base "theory" upon assumptions (as opposed to facts) is the opposite
of a libertarian frame of mind. A libertarian theory must be based upon
reality and recognise the need for change and the existence of change.
Unfortunately, right-Libertarianism is marked more by ideology than
critical analysis.

Right-Libertarianism is characterised by a strong tendency of creating
theories based upon assumptions and deductions from these axioms (for a
discussion on the pre-scientific nature of this methodology and of its
dangers, see the [next section](append131.html#secf13)). Robert Nozick,
for example, in **Anarchy, State, and Utopia** makes no attempt to
provide a justification of the property rights his whole theory is based
upon. His main assumption is that *"[i]ndividuals have rights, and there
are certain things no person or group may do to them (without violating
their rights)."* [**Anarchy, State and Utopia**, p. ix] While this does
have its intuitive appeal, it is not much to base a political ideology
upon. After all, what rights people consider as valid can be pretty
subjective and have constantly evolved during history. To say that
"individuals have rights" is to open up the question "what rights?"
Indeed, as we argue in greater length in [section 2](append132.html),
such a rights based system as Nozick desires can and does lead to
situations developing in which people "consent" to be exploited and
oppressed and that, intuitively, many people consider supporting the
"violation" of these "certain rights" (by creating other ones) simply
because of their evil consequences.

In other words, starting from the assumption "people have [certain]
rights" Nozick constructs a theory which, when faced with the reality of
unfreedom and domination it would create for the many, justifies this
unfreedom as an expression of liberty. In other words, regardless of the
outcome, the initial assumptions are what matter. Nozick's intuitive
rights system can lead to some very non-intuitive outcomes.

And does Nozick prove the theory of property rights he assumes? He
states that *"we shall not formulate [it] here."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 150]
Moreover, it is not formulated anywhere else in his book. And if it is
not formulated, what is there to defend? Surely this means that his
Libertarianism is without foundations? As Jonathan Wolff notes, Nozick's
*"Libertarian property rights remain substantially undefended."*
[**Robert Nozick: Property, Justice and the Minimal State**, p. 117]
Given that the right to acquire property is critical to his whole theory
you would think it important enough to go into in some detail (or at
least document). After all, unless he provides us with a firm basis for
property rights then his entitlement theory is nonsense as no one has
the right to (private) property.

It could be argued that Nozick **does** present enough information to
allow us to piece together a possible argument in favour of property
rights based on his modification of the *"Lockean Proviso"* (although he
does not point us to these arguments). However, assuming this is the
case, such a defence actually fails (see [section
B.3.4](secB3.html#secb34) for more on this). If individuals **do** have
rights, these rights do not include property rights in the form Nozick
assumes (but does not prove). Nozick appears initially convincing
because what he assumes with regards to property is a normal feature of
the society we are in (we would be forgiven when we note here that
feeble arguments pass for convincing when they are on the same side as
the prevailing sentiment).

Similarly, both Murray Rothbard and Ayn Rand (who is infamous for
repeating *"A is A"* ad infinitum) do the same - base their ideologies
on assumptions (see [section 11](append1311.html) for more on this).

Therefore, we see that most of the leading right-Libertarian ideologues
base themselves on assumptions about what "Man" is or the rights they
should have (usually in the form that people have (certain) rights
because they are people). From these theorems and assumptions they build
their respective ideologies, using logic to deduce the conclusions that
their assumptions imply. Such a methodology is unscientific and, indeed,
a relic of religious (pre-scientific) society (see [next
section](append131.html#secf13)) but, more importantly, can have
negative effects on maximising liberty. This is because this
"methodology" has distinct problems. Murray Bookchin argues:

> *"Conventional reason rests on identity, not change; its fundamental
> principle is that **A equals A,** the famous 'principle of identity,'
> which means that any given phenomenon can be only itself and cannot be
> other than what we immediately perceive it to be at a given moment in
> time. It does not address the problem of change. A human being is an
> infant at one time, a child at another, an adolescent at still
> another, and finally a youth and an adult. When we analyse an infant
> by means of conventional reason, we are not exploring what it is
> **becoming** in the process of developing into a child."* [*"A
> Philosophical Naturalism"*, **Society and Nature** No.2, p. 64]

In other words, right-Libertarian theory is based upon ignoring the
fundamental aspect of life - namely **change** and **evolution.**
Perhaps it will be argued that identity also accounts for change by
including potentiality -- which means, that we have the strange
situation that A can **potentially** be A! If A is not actually A, but
only has the potential to be A, then A is not A. Thus to include change
is to acknowledge that A does not equal A -- that individuals and
humanity evolves and so what constitutes A also changes. To maintain
identity and then to deny it seems strange.

That change is far from the "A is A" mentality can be seen from Murray
Rothbard who goes so far as to state that *"one of the notable
attributes of natural law"* is *"its applicability to all men [sic!],
regardless of time or place. Thus ethical law takes its place alongside
physical or 'scientific' natural laws."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p.
42] Apparently the "nature of man" is the only living thing in nature
that does not evolve or change! Of course, it could be argued that by
"natural law" Rothbard is only referring to his method of deducing his
(and, we stress, they are just his -- not natural) "ethical laws" -- but
his methodology starts by assuming certain things about "man." Whether
these assumptions seem far or not is besides the point, by using the
term "natural law" Rothbard is arguing that any actions that violate
**his** ethical laws are somehow "against nature" (but if they were
against nature, they could not occur -- see [section 11](append137.html)
for more on this). Deductions from assumptions is a Procrustean bed for
humanity (as Rothbard's ideology shows).

So, as can be seen, many leading right-Libertarians place great store by
the axiom "A is A" or that "man" has certain rights simply because "he"
is a "man". And as Bookchin points out, such conventional reason
*"doubtless plays an indispensable role in mathematical thinking and
mathematical sciences . . . and in the nuts-and-bolts of dealing with
everyday life"* and so is essential to *"understand or design mechanical
entities."* [**Ibid.**, p.67] But the question arises, is such reason
useful when considering people and other forms of life?

Mechanical entities are but one (small) aspect of human life.
Unfortunately for right-Libertarians (and fortunately for the rest of
humanity), human beings are **not** mechanical entities but instead are
living, breathing, feeling, hoping, dreaming, **changing** living
organisms. They are not mechanical entities and any theory that uses
reason based on such (non-living) entities will flounder when faced with
living ones. In other words, right-Libertarian theory treats people as
the capitalist system tries to -- namely as commodities, as things.
Instead of human beings, whose ideas, ideals and ethics change, develop
and grow, capitalism and capitalist ideologues try to reduce human life
to the level of corn or iron (by emphasising the unchanging "nature" of
man and their starting assumptions/rights).

This can be seen from their support for wage labour, the reduction of
human activity to a commodity on the market. While paying lip service to
liberty and life, right-libertarianism justifies the commodification of
labour and life, which within a system of capitalist property rights can
result in the treating of people as means to an end as opposed to an end
in themselves (see sections [2](append132.html) and
[3.1](append133.html#secf31)).

And as Bookchin points out, *"in an age of sharply conflicting values
and emotionally charges ideals, such a way of reasoning is often
repellent. Dogmatism, authoritarianism, and fear seem all-pervasive."*
[**Ibid.**, p. 68] Right-Libertarianism provides more than enough
evidence for Bookchin's summary with its support for authoritarian
social relationships, hierarchy and even slavery (see [section
2](append132.html)).

This mechanical viewpoint is also reflected in their lack of
appreciation that social institutions and relationships evolve over time
and, sometimes, fundamentally change. This can best be seen from
property. Right-libertarians fail to see that over time (in the words of
Proudhon) property *"changed its nature."* Originally, *"the word
**property** was synonymous with . . . **individual possession**"* but
it became more *"complex"* and turned into **private property** -- *"the
right to use it by his neighbour's labour."* The changing of use-rights
to (capitalist) property rights created relations of domination and
exploitation between people absent before. For the right-Libertarian,
both the tools of the self-employed artisan and the capital of a
transnational corporation are both forms of "property" and (so)
basically identical. In practice, of course, the social relations they
create and the impact they have on society are totally different. Thus
the mechanical mind-set of right-Libertarianism fails to understand how
institutions, like property, evolve and come to replace whatever freedom
enhancing features they had with oppression (indeed, von Mises argued
that *"[t]here may possibly be a difference of opinion about whether a
particular institution is socially beneficial or harmful. But once it
has been judged [by whom, we ask] beneficial, one can no longer contend
that, for some inexplicable reason, it must be condemned as immoral"*
[**Liberalism**, p. 34] So much for evolution and change!).

Anarchism, in contrast, is based upon the importance of critical thought
informed by an awareness that life is in a constant process of change.
This means that our ideas on human society must be informed by the
facts, not by what we wish was true. For Bookchin, an evaluation of
conventional wisdom (as expressed in *"the law of identity"*) is
essential and its conclusions have *"enormous importance for how we
behave as ethical beings, the nature of nature, and our place in the
natural world. Moreover. . . these issues directly affect the kind of
society, sensibility, and lifeways we wish to foster."* [Bookchin, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 69-70]

Bookchin is correct. While anarchists oppose hierarchy in the name of
liberty, right-libertarians support authority and hierarchy, all of
which deny freedom and restrict individual development. This is
unsurprising because the right-libertarian ideology rejects change and
critical thought based upon the scientific method and so is
fundamentally **anti-life** in its assumptions and **anti-human** in its
method. Far from being a libertarian set of ideas, right-Libertarianism
is a mechanical set of dogmas that deny the fundamental nature of life
(namely change) and of individuality (namely critical thought and
freedom). Moreover, in practice their system of (capitalist) rights
would soon result in extensive restrictions on liberty and authoritarian
social relationships (see sections [2](append132.html) and
[3](append133.html)) -- a strange result of a theory proclaiming itself
"libertarian" but one consistent with its methodology.

From a wider viewpoint, such a rejection of liberty by
right-libertarians is unsurprising. They do, after all, support
capitalism. Capitalism produces an inverted set of ethics, one in which
capital (dead labour) is more important that people (living labour).
After all, workers are usually easier to replace than investments in
capital and the person who owns capital commands the person who "only"
owns his life and productive abilities. And as Oscar Wilde once noted,
crimes against property *"are the crimes that the English law, valuing
what a man has more than what a man is, punishes with the harshest and
most horrible severity."* [**The Soul of Man Under Socialism**]

This mentality is reflected in right-libertarianism when it claims that
stealing food is a crime while starving to death (due to the action of
market forces/power and property rights) is no infringement of your
rights (see [section 4.2](append134.html#secf42) for a similar argument
with regards to water). It can also be seen when right-libertarian's
claim that the taxation *"of earnings from labour"* (e.g. of one dollar
from a millionaire) is *"**on a par with** forced labour"* [Nozick,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 169] while working in a sweatshop for 14 hours a day
(enriching said millionaire) does not affect your liberty as you
"consent" to it due to market forces (although, of course, many rich
people have earned their money **without** labouring themselves -- their
earnings derive from the wage labour of others so would taxing those,
non-labour, earnings be "forced labour"?) Interestingly, the
Individualist Anarchist Ben Tucker argued that an income tax was *"a
recognition of the fact that industrial freedom and equality of
opportunity no longer exist here [in the USA in the 1890s] even in the
imperfect state in which they once did exist"* [quoted by James Martin,
**Men Against the State**, p. 263] which suggests a somewhat different
viewpoint on this matter than Nozick or Rothbard.

That capitalism produces an inverted set of ethics can be seen when the
Ford produced the Pinto. The Pinto had a flaw in it which meant that if
it was hit in a certain way in a crash the fuel tank exploded. The Ford
company decided it was more "economically viable" to produce that car
and pay damages to those who were injured or the relatives of those who
died than pay to change the invested capital. The needs for the owners
of capital to make a profit came before the needs of the living.
Similarly, bosses often hire people to perform unsafe work in dangerous
conditions and fire them if they protest. Right-libertarian ideology is
the philosophical equivalent. Its dogma is "capital" and it comes before
life (i.e. "labour").

As Bakunin once put it, *"you will always find the idealists in the very
act of practical materialism, while you will see the materialists
pursuing and realising the most grandly ideal aspirations and
thoughts."* [**God and the State**, p. 49] Hence we see right
"libertarians" supporting sweat shops and opposing taxation -- for, in
the end, money (and the power that goes with it) counts far more in that
ideology than ideals such as liberty, individual dignity, empowering,
creative and productive work and so forth for all. The central flaw of
right-libertarianism is that it does not recognise that the workings of
the capitalist market can easily ensure that the majority end up
becoming a resource for others in ways far worse than that associated
with taxation. The legal rights of self-ownership supported by
right-libertarians does not mean that people have the ability to avoid
what is in effect enslavement to another (see sections
[2](append132.html) and [3](append133.html)).

Right-Libertarian theory is not based upon a libertarian methodology or
perspective and so it is hardly surprising it results in support for
authoritarian social relationships and, indeed, slavery (see [section
2.6](append132.html#secf26)).

1.3 Is right-Libertarian theory scientific in nature?
-----------------------------------------------------

Usually, no. The scientific approach is **inductive,** much of the
right-libertarian approach is **deductive.** The first draws
generalisations from the data, the second applies preconceived
generalisations to the data. A completely deductive approach is
pre-scientific, however, which is why many right-Libertarians cannot
legitimately claim to use a scientific method. Deduction does occur in
science, but the generalisations are primarily based on other data, not
*a priori* assumptions, and are checked against data to see if they are
accurate. Anarchists tend to fall into the inductive camp, as Kropotkin
put it:

> *"Precisely this natural-scientific method applied to economic facts,
> enables us to prove that the so-called 'laws' of middle-class
> sociology, including also their political economy, are not laws at
> all, but simply guesses, or mere assertions which have never been
> verified at all."* [**Kropotkin's Revolutionary Pamphlets**, p. 153]

The idea that natural-scientific methods can be applied to economic and
social life is one that many right-libertarians reject. Instead they
favour the deductive (pre-scientific) approach (this we must note is not
limited purely to Austrian economists, many more mainstream capitalist
economists also embrace deduction over induction).

The tendency for right-Libertarianism to fall into dogmatism (or *a
priori* theorems, as they call it) and its implications can best be seen
from the work of Ludwig von Mises and other economists from the
right-Libertarian "Austrian school." Of course, not all
right-libertarians necessarily subscribe to this approach (Murray
Rothbard for one did) but its use by so many leading lights of both
schools of thought is significant and worthy of comment. And as we are
concentrating on **methodology** it is not essential to discuss the
starting assumptions. The assumptions (such as, to use Rothbard's words,
the Austrian's *"fundamental axiom that individual human beings act"*)
may be correct, incorrect or incomplete -- but the method of using them
advocated by von Mises ensures that such considerations are irrelevant.

Von Mises (a leading member of the Austrian school of economics) begins
by noting that social and economic theory *"is not derived from
experience; it is prior to experience..."* Which is back to front. It is
obvious that experience of capitalism is necessary in order to develop a
viable theory about how it works. Without the experience, any theory is
just a flight of fantasy. The actual specific theory we develop is
therefore derived from experience, informed by it and will have to get
checked against reality to see if it is viable. This is the scientific
method - any theory must be checked against the facts. However, von
Mises goes on to argue at length that *"no kind of experience can ever
force us to discard or modify **a priori** theorems; they are logically
prior to it and cannot be either proved by corroborative experience or
disproved by experience to the contrary . . ."*

And if this does not do justice to a full exposition of the
phantasmagoria of von Mises' *a priorism*, the reader may take some joy
(or horror) from the following statement:

> *"If a contradiction appears between a theory and experience, **we
> must always assume** that a condition pre-supposed by the theory was
> not present, or else there is some error in our observation. The
> disagreement between the theory and the facts of experience frequently
> forces us to think through the problems of the theory again. **But so
> long as a rethinking of the theory uncovers no errors in our thinking,
> we are not entitled to doubt its truth**"* [emphasis added -- the
> quotes presented here are cited in **Ideology and Method in
> Economics** by Homa Katouzian, pp. 39-40]

In other words, if reality is in conflict with your ideas, do not adjust
your views because reality must be at fault! The scientific method would
be to revise the theory in light of the facts. It is not scientific to
reject the facts in light of the theory! This anti-scientific
perspective is at the heart of his economics as experience *"can never .
. . prove or disprove any particular theorem"*:

> *"What assigns economics to its peculiar and unique position in the
> orbit of pure knowledge and of the practical utilisation of knowledge
> is the fact that its particular theorems are not open to any
> verification or falsification on the grounds of experience . . .. . .
> The ultimate yardstick of an economic theorem's correctness or
> incorrectness is solely reason unaided by experience."* [**Human
> Action**, p. 858]

Von Mises rejects the scientific approach as do all Austrian Economists.
Murray Rothbard states approvingly that *"Mises indeed held not only
that economic theory does not need to be 'tested' by historical fact but
also that it **cannot** be so tested."* [*"Praxeology: The Methodology
of Austrian Economics"* in **The Foundation of Modern Austrian
Economics**, p. 32] Similarly, von Hayek wrote that economic theories
can *"never be verified or falsified by reference to facts. All that we
can and must verify is the presence of our assumptions in the particular
case."* [**Individualism and Economic Order**, p. 73]

This may seen somewhat strange to non-Austrians. How can we ignore
reality when deciding whether a theory is a good one or not? If we
cannot evaluate our ideas, how can we consider them anything bar dogma?
The Austrian's maintain that we cannot use historical evidence because
every historical situation is unique. Thus we cannot use *"complex
heterogeneous historical facts as if they were repeatable homogeneous
facts"* like those in a scientist's experiment [Rothbard, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 33]. While such a position **does** have an element of truth about
it, the extreme *a priorism* that is drawn from this element is
radically false (just as extreme empiricism is also false, but for
different reasons).

Those who hold such a position ensure that their ideas cannot be
evaluated beyond logical analysis. As Rothbard makes clear, *"since
praxeology begins with a true axiom, A, all that can be deduced from
this axiom must also be true. For if A implies be, and A is true, then B
must also be true."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 19-20] But such an approach
makes the search for truth a game without rules. The Austrian economists
(and other right-libertarians) who use this method are free to theorise
anything they want, without such irritating constrictions as facts,
statistics, data, history or experimental confirmation. Their only guide
is logic. But this is no different from what religions do when they
assert the logical existence of God. Theories ungrounded in facts and
data are easily spun into any belief a person wants. Starting
assumptions and trains of logic may contain inaccuracies so small as to
be undetectable, yet will yield entirely false conclusions.

In addition, trains of logic may miss things which are only brought to
light by actual experiences (after all, the human mind is not all
knowing or all seeing). To ignore actual experience is to loose that
input when evaluating a theory. Hence our comments on the irrelevance of
the assumptions used -- the methodology is such that incomplete or
incorrect assumptions or steps cannot be identified in light of
experience. This is because one way of discovering if a given chain of
logic requires checking is to test its conclusions against available
evidence (although von Mises did argue that the *"ultimate yardstick"*
was *"solely reason unaided by experience"*). If we **do** take
experience into account and rethink a given theory in the light of
contradictory evidence, the problem remains that a given logical chain
may be correct, but incomplete or concentrate on or stress inappropriate
factors. In other words, our logical deductions may be correct but our
starting place or steps wrong and as the facts are to be rejected in the
light of the deductive method, we cannot revise our ideas.

Indeed, this approach could result in discarding (certain forms of)
human behaviour as irrelevant (which the Austrian system claims using
empirical evidence does). For there are too many variables that can have
an influence upon individual acts to yield conclusive results explaining
human behaviour. Indeed, the deductive approach may ignore as irrelevant
certain human motivations which have a decisive impact on an outcome.
There could be a strong tendency to project "right-libertarian person"
onto the rest of society and history, for example, and draw
inappropriate insights into the way human society works or has worked.
This can be seen, for example, in attempts to claim pre-capitalist
societies as examples of "anarcho"-capitalism in action.

Moreover, deductive reasoning cannot indicate the relative significance
of assumptions or theoretical factors. That requires empirical study. It
could be that a factor considered important in the theory actually turns
out to have little effect in practice and so the derived axioms are so
weak as to be seriously misleading.

In such a purely ideal realm, observation and experience are distrusted
(when not ignored) and instead theory is the lodestone. Given the bias
of most theorists in this tradition, it is unsurprising that this style
of economics can always be trusted to produce results proving free
markets to be the finest principle of social organisation. And, as an
added bonus, reality can be ignored as it is **never** "pure" enough
according to the assumptions required by the theory. It could be argued,
because of this, that many right-libertarians insulate their theories
from criticism by refusing to test them or acknowledge the results of
such testing (indeed, it could also be argued that much of
right-libertarianism is more a religion than a political theory as it is
set-up in such a way that it is either true or false, with this being
determined not by evaluating facts but by whether you accept the
assumptions and logical chains presented with them).

Strangely enough, while dismissing the "testability" of theories many
right-Libertarians (including Murray Rothbard) **do** investigate
historical situations and claim them as examples of how well their ideas
work in practice. But why does historical fact suddenly become useful
when it can be used to bolster the right-Libertarian argument? Any such
example is just as "complex" as any other and the good results indicated
may not be accountable to the assumptions and steps of the theory but to
other factors totally ignored by it. If economic (or other) theory is
untestable then **no** conclusions can be drawn from history, including
claims for the superiority of laissez-faire capitalism. You cannot have
it both ways -- although we doubt that right-libertarians will stop
using history as evidence that their ideas work.

Perhaps the Austrian desire to investigate history is not so strange
after all. Clashes with reality make a-priori deductive systems implode
as the falsifications run back up the deductive changes to shatter the
structure built upon the original axioms. Thus the desire to find
**some** example which proves their ideology must be tremendous.
However, the deductive a-priori methodology makes them unwilling to
admit to being mistaken -- hence their attempts to downplay examples
which refute their dogmas. Thus we have the desire for historical
examples while at the same time they have extensive ideological
justifications that ensure reality only enters their world-view when it
agrees with them. In practice, the latter wins as real-life refuses to
be boxed into their dogmas and deductions.

Of course it is sometimes argued that it is **complex** data that is the
problem. Let use assume that this is the case. It is argued that when
dealing with complex information it is impossible to use aggregate data
without first having more simple assumptions (i.e. that "humans act").
Due to the complexity of the situation, it is argued, it is impossible
to aggregate data because this hides the individual activities that
creates it. Thus "complex" data cannot be used to invalidate assumptions
or theories. Hence, according to Austrians, the axioms derived from the
"simple fact" that "humans act" are the only basis for thinking about
the economy.

Such a position is false in two ways.

Firstly, the aggregation of data **does** allow us to understand complex
systems. If we look at a chair, we cannot find out whether it is
comfortable, its colour, whether it is soft or hard by looking at the
atoms that make it up. To suggest that you can is to imply the existence
of green, soft, comfortable atoms. Similarly with gases. They are
composed to countless individual atoms but scientists do not study them
by looking at those atoms and their actions. Within limits, this is also
valid for human action. For example, it would be crazy to maintain from
historical data that interest rates will be a certain percentage a week
but it is valid to maintain that interest rates are known to be related
to certain variables in certain ways. Or that certain experiences will
tend to result in certain forms of psychological damage. General
tendencies and "rules of thumb" can be evolved from such study and these
can be used to **guide** current practice and theory. By aggregating
data you can produce valid information, rules of thumb, theories and
evidence which would be lost if you concentrated on "simple data" (such
as "humans act"). Therefore, empirical study produces facts which vary
across time and place, and yet underlying and important patterns can be
generated (patterns which can be evaluated against **new** data and
improved upon).

Secondly, the simple actions themselves influence and are influenced in
turn by overall (complex) facts. People act in different ways in
different circumstances (something we can agree with Austrians about,
although we refuse to take it to their extreme position of rejecting
empirical evidence as such). To use simple acts to understand complex
systems means to miss the fact that these acts are not independent of
their circumstances. For example, to claim that the capitalist market is
"just" the resultant of bilateral exchanges ignores the fact that the
market activity shapes the nature and form of these bilateral exchanges.
The "simple" data is dependent on the "complex" system -- and so the
complex system **cannot** be understood by looking at the simple actions
in isolation. To do so would be to draw incomplete and misleading
conclusions (and it is due to these interrelations that we argue that
aggregate data should be used critically). This is particularly
important when looking at capitalism, where the "simple" acts of
exchange in the labour market are dependent upon and shaped by
circumstances outside these acts.

So to claim that (complex) data cannot be used to evaluate a theory is
false. Data can be useful when seeing whether a theory is confirmed by
reality. This is the nature of the scientific method -- you compare the
results expected by your theory to the facts and if they do not match
you check your facts **and** check your theory. This may involve
revising the assumptions, methodology and theories you use if the
evidence is such as to bring them into question. For example, if you
claim that capitalism is based on freedom but that the net result of
capitalism is to produce relations of domination between people then it
would be valid to revise, for example, your definition of freedom rather
than deny that domination restricts freedom (see [section
2](append132.html) on this). But if actual experience is to be
distrusted when evaluating theory, we effectively place ideology above
people -- after all, how the ideology affects people in **practice** is
irrelevant as experiences cannot be used to evaluate the (logically
sound but actually deeply flawed) theory.

Moreover, there is a slight arrogance in the "Austrian" dismissal of
empirical evidence. If, as they argue, the economy is just too complex
to allow us to generalise from experience then how can one person
comprehend it sufficiently to create an economic ideology as the
Austrian's suggest? Surely no one mind (or series of minds) can produce
a model which accurately reflects such a complex system? To suggest that
one can deduce a theory for an exceedingly complex social system from
the theoretical work based on an analysis technique which deliberately
ignores that reality as being unreliable seems to require a deliberate
suspension of one's reasoning faculties. Of course, it may be argued
that such a task is possible, given a small enough subset of economic
activity. However, such a process is sure to lead its practitioners
astray as the subset is not independent of the whole and, consequently,
can be influenced in ways the ideologist does not (indeed, cannot) take
into account. Simply put, even the greatest mind cannot comprehend the
complexities of real life and so empirical evidence needs to inform any
theory seeking to describe and explain it. To reject it is simply to
retreat into dogmatism and ideology, which is precisely what right-wing
libertarians generally do.

Ultimately, this dismissal of empirical evidence seems little more than
self-serving. It's utility to the ideologist is obvious. It allows them
to speculate to their hearts content, building models of the economy
with no bearing to reality. Their models and the conclusions it
generates need never be bothered with reality -- nor the effects of
their dogma. Which shows its utility to the powerful. It allows them to
spout comments like "the free market benefits all" while the rich get
richer and allows them to brush aside any one who points out such
troublesome facts.

That this position is self-serving can be seen from the fact that most
right libertarians are very selective about applying von Mises'
argument. As a rule of thumb, it is only applied when the empirical
evidence goes against capitalism. In such circumstances the fact that
the current system is not a free market will also be mentioned. However,
if the evidence seems to bolster the case for propertarianism then
empirical evidence becomes all the rage. Needless to say, the fact that
we do not have a free market will be conveniently forgotten. Depending
on the needs of the moment, fundamental facts are dropped and retrieved
to bolster the ideology.

As we indicated above (in [section 1.2](append131.html#secf12)) and will
discuss in more depth later (in [section 11](append1311.html)) most of
the leading right-Libertarian theorists base themselves on such
deductive methodologies, starting from assumptions and "logically"
drawing conclusions from them. The religious undertones of such
methodology can best be seen from the roots of right-Libertarian
"Natural law" theory.

Carole Pateman, in her analysis of Liberal contract theory, indicates
the religious nature of the "Natural Law" argument so loved by the
theorists of the "Radical Right." She notes that for Locke (the main
source of the Libertarian Right's Natural Law cult) *"natural law"* was
equivalent of *"God's Law"* and that *"God's law exists externally to
and independently of individuals."* [**The Problem of Political
Obligation**, p. 154] No role for critical thought there, only
obedience. Most modern day "Natural Law" supporters forget to mention
this religious undercurrent and instead talk of about "Nature" (or "the
market") as the deity that creates Law, not God, in order to appear
"rational." So much for science.

Such a basis in dogma and religion can hardly be a firm foundation for
liberty and indeed "Natural Law" is marked by a deep authoritarianism:

> *"Locke's traditional view of natural law provided individual's with
> an external standard which they could recognise, but which they did
> not voluntarily choose to order their political life."* [Pateman,
> **Op. Cit.**, p. 79]

In [section 11](append1311.html) we discuss the authoritarian nature of
"Natural Law" and will not do so here. However, here we must point out
the political conclusions Locke draws from his ideas. In Pateman's
words, Locke believed that *"obedience lasts only as long as protection.
His individuals are able to take action themselves to remedy their
political lot. . . but this does not mean, as is often assumed, that
Locke's theory gives direct support to present-day arguments for a right
of civil disobedience. . . His theory allows for two alternatives only:
either people go peacefully about their daily affairs under the
protection of a liberal, constitutional government, or they are in
revolt against a government which has ceased to be 'liberal' and has
become arbitrary and tyrannical, so forfeiting its right to obedience."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 77]

Locke's "rebellion" exists purely to reform a **new** 'liberal'
government, not to change the existing socio-economic structure which
the 'liberal' government exists to protect. His theory, therefore,
indicates the results of a priorism, namely a denial of any form of
social dissent which may change the "natural law" as defined by Locke.
This perspective can be found in Rothbard who lambasted the
individualist anarchists for arguing that juries should judge the law as
well as the facts. For Rothbard, the law would be drawn up by jurists
and lawyers, not ordinary people (see [section
1.4](append131.html#secf14) for details). The idea that those subject to
laws should have a say in forming them is rejected in favour of elite
rule. As von Mises put it:

> *"The flowering of human society depends on two factors: the
> intellectual power of outstanding men to conceive sound social and
> economic theories, and the ability of these or other men to make these
> ideologies palatable to the majority."* [**Human Action**, p. 864]

Yet such a task would require massive propaganda work and would only,
ultimately, succeed by removing the majority from any say in the running
of society. Once that is done then we have to believe that the ruling
elite will be altruistic in the extreme and not abuse their position to
create laws and processes which defended what **they** thought was
"legitimate" property, property rights and what constitutes
"aggression." Which, ironically, contradicts the key capitalist notion
that people are driven by self-gain. The obvious conclusion from such
argument is that any right-libertarian regime would have to exclude
change. If people can change the regime they are under they may change
it in ways that right libertarian's do not support. The provision for
ending amendments to the regime or the law would effectively ban most
opposition groups or parties as, by definition, they could do nothing
once in office (for minimal state "libertarians") or in the market for
"defence" agencies (for "anarcho"-capitalists). How this differs from a
dictatorship is hard to say -- after all, most dictatorships have
parliamentary bodies which have no power but which can talk a lot.
Perhaps the knowledge that it is **private** police enforcing
**private** power will make those subject to the regime maximise their
utility by keeping quiet and not protesting. Given this, von Mises'
praise for fascism in the 1920s may be less contradictory than it first
appears (see [section 6.5](append136.html#secf65)) as it successfully
"deterred democracy" by crushing the labour, socialist and anarchist
movements across the world.

So, von Mises, von Hayek and most right-libertarians reject the
scientific method in favour of ideological correctness -- if the facts
contradict your theory then they can be dismissed as too "complex" or
"unique". Facts, however, should inform theory and any theory's
methodology should take this into account. To dismiss facts out of hand
is to promote dogma. This is not to suggest that a theory should be
modified very time new data comes along -- that would be crazy as unique
situations **do** exist, data can be wrong and so forth -- but it does
suggest that if your theory **continually** comes into conflict with
reality, its time to rethink the theory and not assume that facts cannot
invalidate it. A true libertarian would approach a contradiction between
reality and theory by evaluating the facts available and changing the
theory is this is required, not by ignoring reality or dismissing it as
"complex".

Thus, much of right-Libertarian theory is neither libertarian nor
scientific. Much of right-libertarian thought is highly axiomatic, being
logically deduced from such starting axioms as *"self-ownership"* or
*"no one should initiate force against another"*. Hence the importance
of our discussion of von Mises as this indicates the dangers of this
approach, namely the tendency to ignore/dismiss the consequences of
these logical chains and, indeed, to justify them in terms of these
axioms rather than from the facts. In addition, the methodology used is
such as that it would be fair to argue that right-libertarians get to
critique reality but reality can never be used to critique
right-libertarianism -- for any empirical data presented as evidence as
be dismissed as "too complex" or "unique" and so irrelevant (unless it
can be used to support their claims, of course).

Hence W. Duncan Reekie's argument (quoting leading Austrian economist
Israel Kirzner) that *"empirical work 'has the function of establishing
the **applicability** of particular theorems, and thus **illustrating**
their operation' . . . Confirmation of theory is not possible because
there is no constants in human action, nor is it necessary because
theorems themselves describe relationships logically developed from
hypothesised conditions. Failure of a logically derived axiom to fit the
facts does not render it invalid, rather it 'might merely indicate
inapplicability' to the circumstances of the case.'"* [**Markets,
Entrepreneurs and Liberty**, p. 31]

So, if facts confirm your theory, your theory is right. If facts do not
confirm your theory, it is still right but just not applicable in this
case! Which has the handy side effect of ensuring that facts can
**only** be used to support the ideology, **never** to refute it (which
is, according to this perspective, impossible anyway). As Karl Popper
argued, a *"theory which is not refutable by any conceivable event is
non-scientific."* [**Conjectures and Refutations**, p. 36] In other
words (as we noted above), if reality contradicts your theory, ignore
reality!

Kropotkin hoped *"that those who believe in [current economic doctrines]
will themselves become convinced of their error as soon as they come to
see the necessity of verifying their quantitative deductions by
quantitative investigation."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 178] However, the
Austrian approach builds so many barriers to this that it is doubtful
that this will occur. Indeed, right-libertarianism, with its focus on
exchange rather than its consequences, seems to be based upon justifying
domination in terms of their deductions than analysing what freedom
actually means in terms of human existence (see [section
2](append132.html) for a fuller discussion).

The real question is why are such theories taken seriously and arouse
such interest. Why are they not simply dismissed out of hand, given
their methodology and the authoritarian conclusions they produce? The
answer is, in part, that feeble arguments can easily pass for convincing
when they are on the same side as the prevailing sentiment and social
system. And, of course, there is the utility of such theories for ruling
elites - *"[a]n ideological defence of privileges, exploitation, and
private power will be welcomed, regardless of its merits."* [Noam
Chomsky, **The Chomsky Reader**, p. 188]

1.4 Is "anarcho"-capitalism a new form of individualist anarchism?
------------------------------------------------------------------

Some "anarcho"-capitalists shy away from the term, preferring such
expressions as "market anarchist" or "individualist anarchist." This
suggests that there is some link between their ideology and that of
Tucker. However, the founder of "anarcho"-capitalism, Murray Rothbard,
refused that label for, while *"strongly tempted,"* he could not do so
because *"Spooner and Tucker have in a sense pre-empted that name for
their doctrine and that from that doctrine I have certain differences."*
Somewhat incredibly Rothbard argued that on the whole politically
*"these differences are minor,"* economically *"the differences are
substantial, and this means that my view of the consequences of putting
our more of less common system into practice is very far from theirs."*
[*"The Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An Economist's View"*, **Journal of
Libertarian Studies**, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 7]

What an understatement! Individualist anarchists advocated an economic
system in which there would have been very little inequality of wealth
and so of power (and the accumulation of capital would have been minimal
without profit, interest and rent). Removing this social and economic
basis would result in **substantially** different political regimes.
This can be seen from the fate of Viking Iceland, where a substantially
communal and anarchistic system was destroyed from within by increasing
inequality and the rise of tenant farming (see [section
9](append139.html) for details). In other words, politics is not
isolated from economics. As David Wieck put it, Rothbard *"writes of
society as though some part of it (government) can be extracted and
replaced by another arrangement while other things go on before, and he
constructs a system of police and judicial power without any
consideration of the influence of historical and economic context."*
[*"Anarchist Justice,"* in **Nomos XIX**, Pennock and Chapman, eds., p.
227]

Unsurprisingly, the political differences he highlights **are**
significant, namely *"the role of law and the jury system"* and *"the
land question."* The former difference relates to the fact that the
individualist anarchists *"allow[ed] each individual free-market court,
and more specifically, each free-market jury, totally free rein over
judicial decision."* This horrified Rothbard. The reason is obvious, as
it allows real people to judge the law as well as the facts, modifying
the former as society changes and evolves. For Rothbard, the idea that
ordinary people should have a say in the law is dismissed. Rather, *"it
would not be a very difficult task for Libertarian lawyers and jurists
to arrive at a rational and objective code of libertarian legal
principles and procedures."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 7-8] Of course, the fact
that *"lawyers"* and *"jurists"* may have a radically different idea of
what is just than those subject to their laws is not raised by Rothbard,
never mind answered. While Rothbard notes that juries may defend the
people against the state, the notion that they may defend the people
against the authority and power of the rich is not even raised. That is
why the rich have tended to oppose juries as well as popular assemblies.

Unsurprisingly, the few individualist anarchists that remained pointed
this out. Laurance Labadie, the son of Tucker associate Joseph Labadie,
argued in response to Rothbard as follows:

> *"Mere common sense would suggest that any court would be influenced
> by experience; and any free-market court or judge would in the very
> nature of things have some precedents guiding them in their
> instructions to a jury. But since no case is exactly the same, a jury
> would have considerable say about the heinousness of the offence in
> each case, realising that circumstances alter cases, and prescribing
> penalty accordingly. This appeared to Spooner and Tucker to be a more
> flexible and equitable administration of justice possible or feasible,
> human beings being what they are.. . .*
> "But when Mr. Rothbard quibbles about the jurisprudential ideas of
> Spooner and Tucker, and at the same time upholds **presumably in his
> courts** the very economic evils which are at bottom the very reason
> for human contention and conflict, he would seem to be a man who
> chokes at a gnat while swallowing a camel." [quoted by Mildred J.
> Loomis and Mark A. Sullivan, *"Laurance Labadie: Keeper Of The
> Flame"*, pp. 116-30, **Benjamin R. Tucker and the Champions of
> Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton and Sullivan (eds.), p. 124]

In other words, to exclude the general population from any say in the
law and how it changes is hardly a *"minor"* difference! Particularly if
you are proposing an economic system which is based on inequalities of
wealth, power and influence and the means of accumulating more. It is
like a supporter of the state saying that it is a *"minor"* difference
if you favour a dictatorship rather than a democratically elected
government. As Tucker argued, *"it is precisely in the tempering of the
rigidity of enforcement that one of the chief excellences of Anarchism
consists . . . under Anarchism all rules and laws will be little more
than suggestions for the guidance of juries, and that all disputes . . .
will be submitted to juries which will judge not only the facts but the
law, the justice of the law, its applicability to the given
circumstances, and the penalty or damage to be inflicted because of its
infraction . . . under Anarchism the law . . . will be regarded as
**just** in proportion to its flexibility, instead of now in proportion
to its rigidity."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, pp. 160-1] In
others, the law will evolve to take into account changing social
circumstances and, as a consequence, public opinion on specific events
and rights. Tucker's position is fundamentally **democratic** and
evolutionary while Rothbard's is autocratic and fossilised.

On the land question, Rothbard opposed the individualist position of
"occupancy and use" as it *"would automatically abolish all rent
payments for land."* Which was **precisely** why the individualist
anarchists advocated it! In a predominantly rural economy, this would
result in a significant levelling of income and social power as well as
bolstering the bargaining position of non-land workers by reducing
unemployment. He bemoans that landlords cannot charge rent on their
*"justly-acquired private property"* without noticing that is begging
the question as anarchists deny that this is *"justly-acquired"* land.
Unsurprising, Rothbard considers *"the property theory"* of land
ownership as John Locke's, ignoring the fact that the first
self-proclaimed anarchist book was written to refute that kind of
theory. His argument simply shows how far from anarchism his ideology
is. For Rothbard, it goes without saying that the landlord's *"freedom
of contract"* tops the worker's freedom to control their own work and
live and, of course, their right to life. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 8 and p. 9]
However, for anarchists, *"the land is indispensable to our existence,
consequently a common thing, consequently insusceptible of
appropriation."* [Proudhon, **What is Property?**, p. 107]

The reason question is why Rothbard considers this a **political**
difference rather than an economic one. Unfortunately, he does not
explain. Perhaps because of the underlying **socialist** perspective
behind the anarchist position? Or perhaps the fact that feudalism and
monarchism was based on the owner of the land being its ruler suggests a
political aspect to the ideology best left unexplored? Given that the
idea of grounding rulership on land ownership receded during the Middle
Ages, it may be unwise to note that under "anarcho"-capitalism the
landlord and capitalist would, likewise, be sovereign over the land
**and** those who used it? As we noted in [section 1](append131.html),
this is the conclusion that Rothbard does draw. As such, there **is** a
political aspect to this difference.

Moreover. *"the expropriation of the mass of the people from the soil
forms the basis of the capitalist mode of production."* [Marx,
**Capital**, vol. 1, p. 934] For there are *"two ways of oppressing men:
either directly by brute force, by physical violence; or indirectly by
denying them the means of life and this reducing them to a state of
surrender."* In the second case, government is *"an organised instrument
to ensure that dominion and privilege will be in the hands of those who
. . . have cornered all the means of life, first and foremost the land,
which they make use of to keep the people in bondage and to make them
work for their benefit."* [Malatesta, **Anarchy**, p. 21] Privatising
the coercive functions of said government hardly makes much difference.

Of course, Rothbard is simply skimming the surface. There are two main
ways "anarcho"-capitalists differ from individualist anarchists. The
first one is the fact that the individualist anarchists are socialists.
The second is on whether equality is essential or not to anarchism. Each
will be discussed in turn.

Unlike both Individualist (and social) anarchists, "anarcho"-capitalists
support capitalism (a "pure" free market type, which has never existed
although it has been approximated occasionally). This means that they
reject totally the ideas of anarchists with regards to property and
economic analysis. For example, like all supporters of capitalists they
consider rent, profit and interest as valid incomes. In contrast, all
Anarchists consider these as exploitation and agree with the
Individualist Anarchist Benjamin Tucker when he argued that
*"**[w]hoever** contributes to production is alone entitled. **What**
has no rights that **who** is bound to respect. **What** is a thing.
**Who** is a person. Things have no claims; they exist only to be
claimed. The possession of a right cannot be predicted of dead material,
but only a living person."*[quoted by Wm. Gary Kline, **The
Individualist Anarchists**, p. 73]

This, we must note, is the fundamental critique of the capitalist theory
that capital is productive. In and of themselves, fixed costs do not
create value. Rather value is creation depends on how investments are
developed and used once in place. Because of this the Individualist
Anarchists, like other anarchists, considered non-labour derived income
as usury, unlike "anarcho"-capitalists. Similarly, anarchists reject the
notion of capitalist property rights in favour of possession (including
the full fruits of one's labour). For example, anarchists reject private
ownership of land in favour of a "occupancy and use" regime. In this we
follow Proudhon's **What is Property?** and argue that *"property is
theft"*. Rothbard, as noted, rejected this perspective.

As these ideas are an **essential** part of anarchist politics, they
cannot be removed without seriously damaging the rest of the theory.
This can be seen from Tucker's comments that *"**Liberty** insists. . .
[on] the abolition of the State and the abolition of usury; on no more
government of man by man, and no more exploitation of man by man."*
[cited by Eunice Schuster in **Native American Anarchism**, p. 140]. He
indicates that anarchism has specific economic **and** political ideas,
that it opposes capitalism along with the state. Therefore anarchism was
never purely a "political" concept, but always combined an opposition to
oppression with an opposition to exploitation. The social anarchists
made exactly the same point. Which means that when Tucker argued that
*"**Liberty** insists on Socialism. . . - true Socialism, Anarchistic
Socialism: the prevalence on earth of Liberty, Equality, and
Solidarity"* he knew exactly what he was saying and meant it
wholeheartedly. [**Instead of a Book**, p. 363]

So because "anarcho"-capitalists embrace capitalism and reject
socialism, they cannot be considered anarchists or part of the anarchist
tradition.

Which brings us nicely to the second point, namely a lack of concern for
equality. In stark contrast to anarchists of all schools, inequality is
not seen to be a problem with "anarcho"-capitalists (see [section
3](append133.html)). However, it is a truism that not all "traders" are
equally subject to the market (i.e. have the same market power). In many
cases, a few have sufficient control of resources to influence or
determine price and in such cases, all others must submit to those terms
or not buy the commodity. When the commodity is labour power, even this
option is lacking -- workers have to accept a job in order to live. As
we argue in [section 10.2](append1310.html#secf102), workers are usually
at a disadvantage on the labour market when compared to capitalists, and
this forces them to sell their liberty in return for making profits for
others. These profits increase inequality in society as the property
owners receive the surplus value their workers produce. This increases
inequality further, consolidating market power and so weakens the
bargaining position of workers further, ensuring that even the freest
competition possible could not eliminate class power and society
(something B. Tucker recognised as occurring with the development of
trusts within capitalism -- see [section G.4](secG4.html)).

By removing the underlying commitment to abolish non-labour income, any
"anarchist" capitalist society would have vast differences in wealth and
so power. Instead of a government imposed monopolies in land, money and
so on, the economic power flowing from private property and capital
would ensure that the majority remained in (to use Spooner's words)
*"the condition of servants"* (see sections [2](append132.html) and
[3.1](append133.html#secf31) for more on this). The Individualist
Anarchists were aware of this danger and so supported economic ideas
that opposed usury (i.e. rent, profit and interest) and ensured the
worker the full value of her labour. While not all of them called these
ideas "socialist" it is clear that these ideas **are** socialist in
nature and in aim (similarly, not all the Individualist Anarchists
called themselves anarchists but their ideas are clearly anarchist in
nature and in aim).

This combination of the political and economic is essential as they
mutually reinforce each other. Without the economic ideas, the political
ideas would be meaningless as inequality would make a mockery of them.
As Kline notes, the Individualist Anarchists' *"proposals were designed
to establish true equality of opportunity . . . and they expected this
would result in a society without great wealth or poverty. In the
absence of monopolistic factors which would distort competition, they
expected a society largely of self-employed workmen with no significant
disparity of wealth between any of them since all would be required to
live at their own expense and not at the expense of exploited fellow
human beings."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 103-4]

Because of the evil effects of inequality on freedom, both social and
individualist anarchists desired to create an environment in which
circumstances would not drive people to sell their liberty to others at
a disadvantage. In other words, they desired an equalisation of market
power by opposing interest, rent and profit and capitalist definitions
of private property. Kline summarises this by saying *"the American
[individualist] anarchists exposed the tension existing in liberal
thought between private property and the ideal of equal access. The
Individual Anarchists were, at least, aware that existing conditions
were far from ideal, that the system itself working against the majority
of individuals in their efforts to attain its promises. Lack of capital,
the means to creation and accumulation of wealth, usually doomed a
labourer to a life of exploitation. This the anarchists knew and they
abhorred such a system."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 102]

And this desire for bargaining equality is reflected in their economic
ideas and by removing these underlying economic ideas of the
individualist anarchists, "anarcho"-capitalism makes a mockery of any
ideas they do appropriate. Essentially, the Individualist Anarchists
agreed with Rousseau that in order to prevent extreme inequality of
fortunes you deprive people of the means to accumulate in the first
place and **not** take away wealth from the rich. An important point
which "anarcho"-capitalism fails to understand or appreciate.

There are, of course, overlaps between individualist anarchism and
"anarcho"-capitalism, just as there are overlaps between it and Marxism
(and social anarchism, of course). However, just as a similar analysis
of capitalism does not make individualist anarchists Marxists, so
apparent similarities between individualist anarchism does not make it a
forerunner of "anarcho"-capitalism. For example, both schools support
the idea of "free markets." Yet the question of markets is fundamentally
second to the issue of property rights for what is exchanged on the
market is dependent on what is considered legitimate property. In this,
as Rothbard notes, individualist anarchists and "anarcho"-capitalists
differ and different property rights produce different market structures
and dynamics. This means that capitalism is not the only economy with
markets and so support for markets cannot be equated with support for
capitalism. Equally, opposition to markets is **not** the defining
characteristic of socialism (as we note in [section
G.2.1](secG2.html#secg21)). As such, it **is** possible to be a market
socialist (and many socialist are). This is because "markets" and
"property" do not equate to capitalism:

> *"Political economy confuses, on principle, two very different kinds
> of private property, one of which rests on the labour of the producers
> himself, and the other on the exploitation of the labour of others. It
> forgets that the latter is not only the direct antithesis of the
> former, but grows on the former's tomb and nowhere else.*
>
> "In Western Europe, the homeland of political economy, the process of
> primitive accumulation is more of less accomplished. . . .
>
> "It is otherwise in the colonies. There the capitalist regime
> constantly comes up against the obstacle presented by the producer,
> who, as owner of his own conditions of labour, employs that labour to
> enrich himself instead of the capitalist. The contradiction of these
> two diametrically opposed economic systems has its practical
> manifestation here in the struggle between them." [Karl Marx,
> **Capital**, vol. 1, p. 931]

Individualist anarchism is obviously an aspect of this struggle between
the system of peasant and artisan production of early America and the
state encouraged system of private property and wage labour.
"Anarcho"-capitalists, in contrast, assume that generalised wage labour
would remain under their system (while paying lip-service to the
possibilities of co-operatives -- and if an "anarcho"-capitalist thinks
that co-operative will become the dominant form of workplace
organisation, then they are some kind of market socialist, **not** a
capitalist). It is clear that their end point (a pure capitalism, i.e.
generalised wage labour) is directly the opposite of that desired by
anarchists. This was the case of the Individualist Anarchists who
embraced the ideal of (non-capitalist) laissez faire competition -- they
did so, as noted, to **end** exploitation, **not** to maintain it.
Indeed, their analysis of the change in American society from one of
mainly independent producers into one based mainly upon wage labour has
many parallels with, of all people, Karl Marx's presented in chapter 33
of **Capital**. Marx, correctly, argues that *"the capitalist mode of
production and accumulation, and therefore capitalist private property,
have for their fundamental condition the annihilation of that private
property which rests on the labour of the individual himself; in other
words, the expropriation of the worker."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 940] He
notes that to achieve this, the state is used:

> *"How then can the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colonies be healed?
> . . . Let the Government set an artificial price on the virgin soil, a
> price independent of the law of supply and demand, a price that
> compels the immigrant to work a long time for wages before he can earn
> enough money to buy land, and turn himself into an independent
> farmer."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 938]

Moreover, tariffs are introduced with *"the objective of manufacturing
capitalists artificially"* for the *"system of protection was an
artificial means of manufacturing manufacturers, or expropriating
independent workers, of capitalising the national means of production
and subsistence, and of forcibly cutting short the transition . . . to
the modern mode of production,"* to capitalism [**Op. Cit.**, p. 932 and
pp. 921-2]

It is this process which Individualist Anarchism protested against, the
use of the state to favour the rising capitalist class. However, unlike
social anarchists, many individualist anarchists were not consistently
against wage labour. This is the other significant overlap between
"anarcho"-capitalism and individualist anarchism. However, they were
opposed to exploitation and argued (unlike "anarcho"-capitalism) that in
their system workers bargaining powers would be raised to such a level
that their wages would equal the full product of their labour. However,
as we discuss in [section G.1.1](secG1.html#secg11) the social context
the individualist anarchists lived in must be remembered. America at the
times was a predominantly rural society and industry was not as
developed as it is now wage labour would have been minimised (Spooner,
for example, explicitly envisioned a society made up mostly entirely of
self-employed workers). As Kline argues:

> *"Committed as they were to equality in the pursuit of property, the
> objective for the anarchist became the construction of a society
> providing equal access to those things necessary for creating wealth.
> The goal of the anarchists who extolled mutualism and the abolition of
> all monopolies was, then, a society where everyone willing to work
> would have the tools and raw materials necessary for production in a
> non-exploitative system . . . the dominant vision of the future
> society . . . [was] underpinned by individual, self-employed
> workers."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 95]

As such, a limited amount of wage labour within a predominantly
self-employed economy does not make a given society capitalist any more
than a small amount of governmental communities within an predominantly
anarchist world would make it statist. As Marx argued. when *"the
separation of the worker from the conditions of labour and from the soil
. . . does not yet exist, or only sporadically, or on too limited a
scale . . . Where, amongst such curious characters, is the 'field of
abstinence' for the capitalists? . . . Today's wage-labourer is
tomorrow's independent peasant or artisan, working for himself. He
vanishes from the labour-market -- but not into the workhouse."* There
is a *"constant transformation of wage-labourers into independent
producers, who work for themselves instead of for capital"* and so *"the
degree of exploitation of the wage-labourer remain[s] indecently low."*
In addition, the *"wage-labourer also loses, along with the relation of
dependence, the feeling of dependence on the abstemious capitalist."*
[**Op. Cit.**, pp. 935-6]

Saying that, as we discuss in [section G.4](secG4.html), individualist
anarchist support for wage labour is at odds with the ideas of Proudhon
and, far more importantly, in contradiction to many of the stated
principles of the individualist anarchists themselves. In particular,
wage labour violates "occupancy and use" as well as having more than a
passing similarity to the state. However, these problems can be solved
by consistently applying the principles of individualist anarchism,
unlike "anarcho"-capitalism, and that is why it is a real school of
anarchism. In other words, a system of **generalised** wage labour would
not be anarchist nor would it be non-exploitative. Moreover, the social
context these ideas were developed in and would have been applied ensure
that these contradictions would have been minimised. If they had been
applied, a genuine anarchist society of self-employed workers would, in
all likelihood, have been created (at least at first, whether the market
would increase inequalities is a moot point -- see [section
G.4](secG4.html)).

We must stress that the social situation is important as it shows how
apparently superficially similar arguments can have radically different
aims and results depending on who suggests them and in what
circumstances. As noted, during the rise of capitalism the bourgeoisie
were not shy in urging state intervention against the masses.
Unsurprisingly, working class people generally took an anti-state
position during this period. The individualist anarchists were part of
that tradition, opposing what Marx termed *"primitive accumulation"* in
favour of the pre-capitalist forms of property and society it was
destroying.

However, when capitalism found its feet and could do without such
obvious intervention, the possibility of an "anti-state" capitalism
could arise. Such a possibility became a definite once the state started
to intervene in ways which, while benefiting the system as a whole, came
into conflict with the property and power of individual members of the
capitalist and landlord class. Thus social legislation which attempted
to restrict the negative effects of unbridled exploitation and
oppression on workers and the environment were having on the economy
were the source of much outrage in certain bourgeois circles:

> *"Quite independently of these tendencies [of individualist anarchism]
> . . . the anti-state bourgeoisie (which is also anti-statist, being
> hostile to any social intervention on the part of the State to protect
> the victims of exploitation -- in the matter of working hours,
> hygienic working conditions and so on), and the greed of unlimited
> exploitation, had stirred up in England a certain agitation in favour
> of pseudo-individualism, an unrestrained exploitation. To this end,
> they enlisted the services of a mercenary pseudo-literature . . .
> which played with doctrinaire and fanatical ideas in order to project
> a species of 'individualism' that was absolutely sterile, and a
> species of 'non-interventionism' that would let a man die of hunger
> rather than offend his dignity."* [Max Nettlau, **A Short History of
> Anarchism**, p. 39]

This perspective can be seen when Tucker denounced Herbert Spencer as a
champion of the capitalistic class for his vocal attacks on social
legislation which claimed to benefit working class people but stays
strangely silent on the laws passed to benefit (usually indirectly)
capital and the rich. "Anarcho"-capitalism is part of that tradition,
the tradition associated with a capitalism which no longer needs obvious
state intervention as enough wealth as been accumulated to keep workers
under control by means of market power.

As with the original nineteenth century British "anti-state" capitalists
like Spencer and Herbert, Rothbard *"completely overlooks the role of
the state in building and maintaining a capitalist economy in the West.
Privileged to live in the twentieth century, long after the battles to
establish capitalism have been fought and won, Rothbard sees the state
solely as a burden on the market and a vehicle for imposing the still
greater burden of socialism. He manifests a kind of historical
nearsightedness that allows him to collapse many centuries of human
experience into one long night of tyranny that ended only with the
invention of the free market and its 'spontaneous' triumph over the
past. It is pointless to argue, as Rothbard seems ready to do, that
capitalism would have succeeded without the bourgeois state; the fact is
that all capitalist nations have relied on the machinery of government
to create and preserve the political and legal environments required by
their economic system."* That, of course, has not stopped him
*"critis[ing] others for being unhistorical."* [Stephen L Newman,
**Liberalism at Wit's End**, pp. 77-8 and p. 79]

In other words, there is substantial differences between the victims of
a thief trying to stop being robbed and be left alone to enjoy their
property and the successful thief doing the same! Individualist
Anarchist's were aware of this. For example, Victor Yarros stressed this
key difference between individualist anarchism and the
proto-"libertarian" capitalists of "voluntaryism":

> *"[Auberon Herbert] believes in allowing people to retain all their
> possessions, no matter how unjustly and basely acquired, while getting
> them, so to speak, to swear off stealing and usurping and to promise
> to behave well in the future. We, on the other hand, while insisting
> on the principle of private property, in wealth honestly obtained
> under the reign of liberty, do not think it either unjust or unwise to
> dispossess the landlords who have monopolised natural wealth by force
> and fraud. We hold that the poor and disinherited toilers would be
> justified in expropriating, not alone the landlords, who notoriously
> have no equitable titles to their lands, but **all** the financial
> lords and rulers, all the millionaires and very wealthy individuals. .
> . . Almost all possessors of great wealth enjoy neither what they nor
> their ancestors rightfully acquired (and if Mr. Herbert wishes to
> challenge the correctness of this statement, we are ready to go with
> him into a full discussion of the subject). . . .*
> "If he holds that the landlords are justly entitled to their lands,
> let him make a defence of the landlords or an attack on our unjust
> proposal." [quoted by Carl Watner, *"The English Individualists As
> They Appear In Liberty,"* pp. 191-211, **Benjamin R. Tucker and the
> Champions of Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton and Sullivan (eds.), pp.
> 199-200]

Significantly, Tucker and other individualist anarchists saw state
intervention has a result of capital manipulating legislation to gain an
advantage on the so-called free market which allowed them to exploit
labour and, as such, it benefited the **whole** capitalist class.
Rothbard, at best, acknowledges that **some** sections of big business
benefit from the current system and so fails to have the comprehensive
understanding of the dynamics of capitalism as a **system** (rather as
an ideology). This lack of understanding of capitalism as a historic and
dynamic system rooted in class rule and economic power is important in
evaluating "anarcho"-capitalist claims to anarchism. Marxists are not
considered anarchists as they support the state as a means of transition
to an anarchist society. Much the same logic can be applied to
right-wing libertarians (even if they do call themselves
"anarcho"-capitalists). This is because they do not seek to correct the
inequalities produced by previous state action before ending it nor do
they seek to change the definitions of "private property" imposed by the
state. In effect, they argue that the "dictatorship of the bourgeoisie"
should "wither away" and be limited to defending the property
accumulated in a few hands. Needless to say, starting from the current
(coercively produced) distribution of property and then eliminating
"force" simply means defending the power and privilege of ruling
minorities:

> *"The modern Individualism initiated by Herbert Spencer is, like the
> critical theory of Proudhon, a powerful indictment against the dangers
> and wrongs of government, but its practical solution of the social
> problem is miserable -- so miserable as to lead us to inquire if the
> talk of 'No force' be merely an excuse for supporting landlord and
> capitalist domination."* [**Act For Yourselves**, p. 98]
