7 How does the history of "anarcho"-capitalism show that it is not anarchist?
=============================================================================

Of course, "anarcho"-capitalism does have historic precedents and
"anarcho"-capitalists spend considerable time trying to co-opt various
individuals into their self-proclaimed tradition of "anti-statist"
liberalism. That, in itself, should be enough to show that anarchism and
"anarcho"-capitalism have little in common as anarchism developed in
opposition to liberalism and its defence of capitalism. Unsurprisingly,
these "anti-state" liberals tended to, at best, refuse to call
themselves anarchists or, at worse, explicitly deny they were
anarchists.

One "anarcho"-capitalist overview of their tradition is presented by
David M. Hart. His perspective on anarchism is typical of the school,
noting that in his essay anarchism or anarchist *"are used in the sense
of a political theory which advocates the maximum amount of individual
liberty, a necessary condition of which is the elimination of
governmental or other organised force."* [David M. Hart, *"Gustave de
Molinari and the Anti-statist Liberal Tradition: Part I"*, pp. 263-290,
**Journal of Libertarian Studies**, vol. V, no. 3, p. 284] Yet anarchism
has **never** been solely concerned with abolishing the state. Rather,
anarchists have always raised economic and social demands and goals
along with their opposition to the state. As such, anti-statism may be a
necessary condition to be an anarchist, but not a sufficient one to
count a specific individual or theory as anarchist.

Specifically, anarchists have turned their analysis onto private
property noting that the hierarchical social relationships created by
inequality of wealth (for example, wage labour) restricts individual
freedom. This means that if we do seek *"the maximum of individual
liberty"* then our analysis cannot be limited to just the state or
government. Consequently, to limit anarchism as Hart does requires
substantial rewriting of history, as can be seen from his account of
William Godwin.

Hart tries to co-opt of William Godwin into the ranks of "anti-state"
liberalism, arguing that he *"defended individualism and the right to
property."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 265] He, of course, quotes from Godwin to
support his claim yet strangely truncates Godwin's argument to exclude
his conclusion that *"[w]hen the laws of morality shall be clearly
understood, their excellence universally apprehended, and themselves
seen to be coincident with each man's private advantage, the idea of
property in this sense will remain, but no man will have the least
desire, for purposes of ostentation or luxury, to possess more than his
neighbours."* [**An Enquiry into Political Justice**, p. 199] In other
words, personal property (possession) would still exist but not private
property in the sense of capital or inequality of wealth.

This analysis is confirmed in book 8 of Godwin's classic work entitled
***"On Property."*** Needless to say, Hart fails to mention this
analysis, unsurprising as it was later reprinted as a socialist
pamphlet. Godwin thought that the *"subject of property is the key-stone
that completes the fabric of political justice."* Like Proudhon, Godwin
subjects property as well as the state to an anarchist analysis. For
Godwin, there were *"three degrees"* of property. The first is
possession of things you need to live. The second is *"the empire to
which every man is entitled over the produce of his own industry."* The
third is *"that which occupies the most vigilant attention in the
civilised states of Europe. It is a system, in whatever manner
established, by which one man enters into the faculty of disposing of
the produce of another man's industry."* He notes that it is *"clear
therefore that the third species of property is in direct contradiction
to the second."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 701 and p. 710-2]

Godwin, unlike classical liberals, saw the need to *"point out the evils
of accumulated property,"* arguing that the the *"spirit of oppression,
the spirit of servility, and the spirit of fraud . . . are the immediate
growth of the established administration of property. They are alike
hostile to intellectual and moral improvement."* Like the socialists he
inspired, Godwin argued that *"it is to be considered that this
injustice, the unequal distribution of property, the grasping and
selfish spirit of individuals, is to be regarded as one of the original
sources of government, and, as it rises in its excesses, is continually
demanding and necessitating new injustice, new penalties and new
slavery."* He stressed, *"let it never be forgotten that accumulated
property is usurpation."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 732, pp. 717-8, and p. 718]

Godwin argued against the current system of property and in favour of
*"the justice of an equal distribution of the good things of life."*
This would be based on *"[e]quality of conditions, or, in other words,
an equal admission to the means of improvement and pleasure"* as this
*"is a law rigorously enjoined upon mankind by the voice of justice."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 725 and p. 736] Thus his anarchist ideas were applied
to private property, noting like subsequent anarchists that economic
inequality resulted in the loss of liberty for the many and,
consequently, an anarchist society would see a radical change in
property and property rights. As Kropotkin noted, Godwin *"stated in
1793 in a quite definite form the political and economic principle of
Anarchism."* Little wonder he, like so many others, argued that Godwin
was *"the first theoriser of Socialism without government -- that is to
say, of Anarchism."* [**Environment and Evolution**, p. 62 and p. 26]
For Kropotkin, anarchism was by definition not restricted to purely
political issues but also attacked economic hierarchy, inequality and
injustice. As Peter Marshall confirms, *"Godwin's economics, like his
politics, are an extension of his ethics."* [**Demanding the
Impossible**, p. 210]

Godwin's theory of property is significant because it reflected what was
to become standard nineteenth century socialist thought on the matter.
In Britain, his ideas influenced Robert Owen and, as a result, the early
socialist movement in that country. His analysis of property, as noted,
predated Proudhon's classic anarchist analysis. As such, to state, as
Hart did, that Godwin simply *"concluded that the state was an evil
which had to be reduced in power if not eliminated completely"* while
not noting his analysis of property gives a radically false presentation
of his ideas. [Hart, **Op. Cit.**, p. 265] However, it does fit into his
flawed assertion that anarchism is purely concerned with the state. Any
evidence to the contrary is simply ignored.

7.1 Are competing governments anarchism?
----------------------------------------

No, of course not. Yet according to "anarcho"-capitalism, it is. This
can be seen from the ideas of Gustave de Molinari.

Hart is on firmer ground when he argues that the 19th century French
economist Gustave de Molinari is the true founder of
"anarcho"-capitalism. With Molinari, he argues, *"the two different
currents of anarchist thought converged: he combined the political
anarchism of Burke and Godwin with the nascent economic anarchism of
Adam Smith and Say to create a new forms of anarchism"* that has been
called *"anarcho-capitalism, or free market anarchism."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 269] Of course, Godwin (like other anarchists) did not limit his
anarchism purely to "political" issues and so he discussed *"economic
anarchism"* as well in his critique of private property (as Proudhon
also did later). As such, to artificially split anarchism into political
and economic spheres is both historically and logically flawed. While
some dictionaries limit "anarchism" to opposition to the state,
anarchists did and do not.

The key problem for Hart is that Molinari refused to call himself an
anarchist. He did not even oppose government, as Hart himself notes
Molinari proposed a system of insurance companies to provide defence of
property and *"called these insurance companies 'governments' even
though they did not have a monopoly within a given geographical area."*
As Hart notes, Molinari was the sole defender of such free-market
justice at the time in France. [David M. Hart, *"Gustave de Molinari and
the Anti-statist Liberal Tradition: Part II"*, pp. 399-434,Journal of
Libertarian Studies, vol. V, no. 4, p. 415 and p. 411] Molinari was
clear that he wanted *"a regime of free government,"* counterpoising
*"monopolist or communist governments"* to *"free governments."* This
would lead to *"freedom of government"* rather than its abolition (not
freedom **from** government). For Molinarie the future would not bring
*"the suppression of the state which is the dream of the anarchists . .
. It will bring the diffusion of the state within society. That is . . .
'a free state in a free society.'"* [quoted by Hart, **Op. Cit.**, p.
429, p. 411 and p. 422] As such, Molinari can hardly be considered an
anarchist, even if "anarchist" is limited to purely being against
government.

Moreover, in another sense Molinari was in favour of the state. As we
discuss in [section 6](append136.html), these companies would have a
monopoly within a given geographical area -- they have to in order to
enforce the property owner's power over those who use, but do not own,
the property in question. The key contradiction can be seen in
Molinari's advocating of company towns, privately owned communities (his
term was a *"proprietary company"*). Instead of taxes, people would pay
rent and the *"administration of the community would be either left in
the hands of the company itself or handled special organisations set up
for this purpose."* Within such a regime *"those with the most property
had proportionally the greater say in matters which affected the
community."* If the poor objected then they could simply leave. [**Op.
Cit.**, pp. 421-2 and p. 422]

Given this, the idea that Molinari was an anarchist in any form can be
dismissed. His system was based on privatising government, not
abolishing it (as he himself admitted). This would be different from the
current system, of course, as landlords and capitalists would be hiring
force directly to enforce their decisions rather than relying on a state
which they control indirectly. This system, as we proved in [section
6](append136.html), would not be anarchist as can be seen from American
history. There capitalists and landlords created their own private
police forces and armies, which regularly attacked and murdered union
organisers and strikers. As an example, there is Henry Ford's Service
Department (private police force):

> *"In 1932 a hunger march of the unemployed was planned to march up to
> the gates of the Ford plant at Dearborn. . . The machine guns of the
> Dearborn police and the Ford Motor Company's Service Department killed
> [four] and wounded over a score of others. . . Ford was fundamentally
> and entirely opposed to trade unions. The idea of working men
> questioning his prerogatives as an owner was outrageous . . . [T]he
> River Rouge plant. . . was dominated by the autocratic regime of
> Bennett's service men. Bennett . . organise[d] and train[ed] the three
> and a half thousand private policemen employed by Ford. His task was
> to maintain discipline amongst the work force, protect Ford's property
> [and power], and prevent unionisation. . . Frank Murphy, the mayor of
> Detroit, claimed that 'Henry Ford employs some of the worst gangsters
> in our city.' The claim was well based. Ford's Service Department
> policed the gates of his plants, infiltrated emergent groups of union
> activists, posed as workers to spy on men on the line. . . Under this
> tyranny the Ford worker had no security, no rights. So much so that
> any information about the state of things within the plant could only
> be freely obtained from ex-Ford workers."* [Huw Beynon, **Working for
> Ford**, pp. 29-30]

The private police attacked women workers handing out pro-union
handbills and gave them *"a severe beating."* At Kansas and Dallas
*"similar beatings were handed out to the union men."* This use of
private police to control the work force was not unique. General Motors
*"spent one million dollars on espionage, employing fourteen detective
agencies and two hundred spies at one time [between 1933 and 1936]. The
Pinkerton Detective Agency found anti-unionism its most lucrative
activity."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 34 and p. 32] We must also note that the
Pinkerton's had been selling their private police services for decades
before the 1930s. For over 60 years the Pinkerton Detective Agency had
*"specialised in providing spies, agent provocateurs, and private armed
forces for employers combating labour organisations."* By 1892 it *"had
provided its services for management in seventy major labour disputes,
and its 2 000 active agents and 30 000 reserves totalled more than the
standing army of the nation."* [Jeremy Brecher, **Strike!**, p. 55] With
this force available, little wonder unions found it so hard to survive
in the USA.

Only an "anarcho"-capitalist would deny that this is a private
government, employing private police to enforce private power. Given
that unions could be considered as "defence" agencies for workers, this
suggests a picture of how "anarcho"-capitalism may work in practice
radically different from the pictures painted by its advocates. The
reason is simple, it does not ignore inequality and subjects economics
to an anarchist analysis. Little wonder, then, that Proudhon stressed
that it *"becomes necessary for the workers to form themselves into
democratic societies, with equal conditions for all members, on pain of
a relapse into feudalism."* Anarchism, in other words, would see
*"[c]apitalistic and proprietary exploitation stopped everywhere, the
wage system abolished"* and so *"the economic organisation [would]
replac[e] the governmental and military system."* [**The General Idea of
the Revolution**, p. 227 and p. 281] Clearly, the idea that Proudhon
shared the same political goal as Molinari is a joke. He would have
dismissed such a system as little more than an updated form of feudalism
in which the property owner is sovereign and the workers subjects (see
[section B.4](secB4.html) for more details).

Unsurprisingly, Molinari (unlike the individualist anarchists) attacked
the jury system, arguing that its obliged people to *"perform the duties
of judges. This is pure communism."* People would *"judge according to
the colour of their opinions, than according to justice."* [quoted by
Hart, **Op. Cit.**, p. 409] As the jury system used amateurs (i.e.
ordinary people) rather than full-time professionals it could not be
relied upon to defend the power and property rights of the rich. As we
noted in [section 1.4](append131.html#secf14), Rothbard criticised the
individualist anarchists for supporting juries for essentially the same
reasons.

But, as is clear from Hart's account, Molinari had little concern that
working class people should have a say in their own lives beyond
consuming goods. His perspective can be seen from his lament about those
*"colonies where slavery has been abolished without the compulsory
labour being replaced with an equivalent quantity of free [sic!] labour
[i.e., wage labour], there has occurred the opposite of what happens
everyday before our eyes. Simple workers have been seen to exploit in
their turn the industrial **entrepreneurs,** demanding from them wages
which bear absolutely no relation to the legitimate share in the product
which they ought to receive. The planters were unable to obtain for
their sugar a sufficient price to cover the increase in wages, and were
obliged to furnish the extra amount, at first out of their profits, and
then out of their very capital. A considerable number of planters have
been ruined as a result . . . It is doubtless better that these
accumulations of capital should be destroyed than that generations of
men should perish [Marx: 'how generous of M. Molinari'] but would it not
be better if both survived?"* [quoted by Karl Marx, **Capital**, vol. 1,
p. 937f]

So workers exploiting capital is the *"opposite of what happens everyday
before our eyes"*? In other words, it is normal that entrepreneurs
*"exploit"* workers under capitalism? Similarly, what is a *"legitimate
share"* which workers *"ought to receive"*? Surely that is determined by
the eternal laws of supply and demand and not what the capitalists (or
Molinari) thinks is right? And those poor former slave drivers, they
really do deserve our sympathy. What horrors they face from the
impositions subjected upon them by their ex-chattels -- they had to
reduce their profits! How dare their ex-slaves refuse to obey them in
return for what their ex-owners think was their *"legitimate share in
the produce"*! How *"simple"* these workers are, not understanding the
sacrifices their former masters suffer nor appreciating how much more
difficult it is for their ex-masters to create *"the product"* without
the whip and the branding iron to aid them! As Marx so rightly comments:
*"And what, if you please, is this 'legitimate share', which, according
to [Molinari's] own admission, the capitalist in Europe daily neglects
to pay? Over yonder, in the colonies, where the workers are so 'simple'
as to 'exploit' the capitalist, M. Molinari feels a powerful itch to use
police methods to set on the right road that law of supply and demand
which works automatically everywhere else."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 937f]

An added difficulty in arguing that Molinari was an anarchist is that he
was a contemporary of Proudhon, the first self-declared anarchist, and
lived in a country with a vigorous anarchist movement. Surely if he was
really an anarchist, he would have proclaimed his kinship with Proudhon
and joined in the wider movement. He did not, as Hart notes as regards
Proudhon:

> *"their differences in economic theory were considerable, and it is
> probably for this reason that Molinari refused to call himself an
> anarchist in spite of their many similarities in political theory.
> Molinari refused to accept the socialist economic ideas of Proudhon .
> . . in Molinari's mind, the term 'anarchist' was intimately linked
> with socialist and statist economic views."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 415]

Yet Proudhon's economic views, like Godwin's, flowed from his anarchist
analysis and principles. They cannot be arbitrarily separated as Hart
suggests. So while arguing that *"Molinari was just as much an anarchist
as Proudhon,"* Hart forgets the key issue. Proudhon was aware that
private property ensured that the proletarian did not exercise
*"self-government"* during working hours, i.e. was not a self-governing
individual. As for Hart claiming that Proudhon had *"statist economic
views"* it simply shows how far an "anarcho"-capitalist perspective is
from genuine anarchism. Proudhon's economic analysis, his critique of
private property and capitalism, flowed from his anarchism and was an
integral aspect of it.

To restrict anarchism purely to opposition to the state, Hart is
impoverishing anarchist theory and denying its history. Given that
anarchism was born from a critique of private property as well as
government, this shows the false nature of Hart's claim that *"Molinari
was the first to develop a theory of free-market, proprietary anarchism
that extended the laws of the market and a rigorous defence of property
to its logical extreme."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 415 and p. 416] Hart shows
how far from anarchism Molinari was as Proudhon had turned his anarchist
analysis to property, showing that *"defence of property"* lead to the
oppression of the many by the few in social relationships identical to
those which mark the state. Moreover, Proudhon, argued the state would
always be required to defend such social relations. Privatising it would
hardly be a step forward.

Unsurprisingly, Proudhon dismissed the idea that the laissez faire
capitalists shared his goals. *"The school of Say,"* Proudhon argued,
was *"the chief focus of counter-revolution next to the Jesuits"* and
*"has for ten years past seemed to exist only to protect and applaud the
execrable work of the monopolists of money and necessities, deepening
more and more the obscurity of a science naturally difficult and full of
complications."* Much the same can be said of "anarcho"- capitalists,
incidentally. For Proudhon, *"the disciples of Malthus and of Say, who
oppose with all their might any intervention of the State in matters
commercial or industrial, do not fail to avail themselves of this
seemingly liberal attitude, and to show themselves more revolutionary
than the Revolution. More than one honest searcher has been deceived
thereby."* However, this apparent "anti-statist" attitude of supporters
of capitalism is false as pure free market capitalism cannot solve the
social question, which arises because of capitalism itself. As such, it
was impossible to abolish the state under capitalism. Thus *"this
inaction of Power in economic matters was the foundation of government.
What need should we have of a political organisation, if Power once
permitted us to enjoy economic order?"* Instead of capitalism, Proudhon
advocated the *"constitution of Value,"* the *"organisation of credit,"*
the elimination of interest, the *"establishment of workingmen's
associations"* and *"the use of a just price."* [**The General Idea of
the Revolution**, p. 225, p. 226 and p. 233]

Clearly, then, the claims that Molinari was an anarchist fail as he,
unlike his followers, were aware of what anarchism actually stood for.
Hart, in his own way, acknowledges this:

> *"In spite of his protestations to the contrary, Molinari should be
> considered an anarchist thinker. His attack on the state's monopoly of
> defence must surely warrant the description of anarchism. His
> reluctance to accept this label stemmed from the fact that the
> socialists had used it first to describe a form of non-statist society
> which Molinari definitely opposed. Like many original thinkers,
> Molinari had to use the concepts developed by others to describe his
> theories. In his case, he had come to the same political conclusions
> as the communist anarchists although he had been working within the
> liberal tradition, and it is therefore not surprising that the terms
> used by the two schools were not compatible. It would not be until the
> latter half of the twentieth century that radical, free-trade liberals
> would use the word 'anarchist' to describe their beliefs."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 416]

It should be noted that Proudhon was **not** a communist-anarchist, but
the point remains. The aims of anarchism were recognised by Molinari as
being inconsistent with his ideology. Consequently, he (rightly) refused
the label. If only his self-proclaimed followers in the *"latter half of
the twentieth century"* did the same anarchists would not have to bother
with them!

As such, it seems ironic that the founder of "anarcho"-capitalism should
have come to the same conclusion as modern day anarchists on the subject
of whether his ideas are a form of anarchism or not!

7.2 Is government compatible with anarchism?
--------------------------------------------

Of course not, but ironically this is the conclusion arrived at by
Hart's analyst of the British "voluntaryists," particularly Auberon
Herbert. Voluntaryism was a fringe part of the right-wing individualist
movement inspired by Herbert Spencer, a spokesman for free market
capitalism in the later half of the nineteenth century. As with
Molinari, there is a problem with presenting this ideology as anarchist,
namely that its leading light, Herbert, explicitly rejected the label
"anarchist."

Herbert was clearly aware of individualist anarchism and distanced
himself from it. He argued that such a system would be *"pandemonium."*
He thought that people should *"not direct our attacks - as the
anarchists do - **against all government** , against government in
itself"* but *"only against the overgrown, the exaggerated, the
insolent, unreasonable and indefensible forms of government, which are
found everywhere today."* Government should be *"strictly limited to its
legitimate duties in defence of self-ownership and individual rights."*
He stressed that *"we are governmentalists . . . formally constituted by
the nation, employing in this matter of force the majority method."*
Moreover, Herbert knew of, and rejected, individualist anarchism,
considering it to be *"founded on a fatal mistake."* [**Essay X: The
Principles Of Voluntaryism And Free Life**] As such, claims that he was
an anarchist or "anarcho"-capitalist cannot be justified.

Hart is aware of this slight problem, quoting Herbert's claim that he
aimed for *"regularly constituted government, generally accepted by all
citizens for the protection of the individual."* [quoted by Hart, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 86] Like Molinari, Herbert was aware that anarchism was a
form of socialism and that the political aims could not be artificially
separated from its economic and social aims. As such, he was right
**not** to call his ideas anarchism as it would result in confusion
(particularly as anarchism was a much larger movement than his). As Hart
acknowledges, *"Herbert faced the same problems that Molinari had with
labelling his philosophy. Like Molinari, he rejected the term
'anarchism,' which he associated with the socialism of Proudhon and . .
. terrorism."* While *"quite tolerant"* of individualist anarchism, he
thought they *"were mistaken in their rejections of 'government.'"*
However, Hart knows better than Herbert about his own ideas, arguing
that his ideology *"is in fact a new form of anarchism, since the most
important aspect of the modern state, the monopoly of the use of force
in a given area, is rejected in no uncertain terms by both men."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 86] He does mention that Benjamin Tucker called Herbert a
*"true anarchist in everything but name,"* but Tucker denied that
Kropotkin was an anarchist suggesting that he was hardly a reliable
guide. [quoted by Hart, **Op. Cit.**, p. 87] As it stands, it seems that
Tucker was mistaken in his evaluation of Herbert's politics.

Economically, Herbert was not an anarchist, arguing that the state
should protect Lockean property rights. Of course, Hart may argue that
these economic differences are not relevant to the issue of Herbert's
anarchism but that is simply to repeat the claim that anarchism is
simply concerned with government, a claim which is hard to support. This
position cannot be maintained, given that both Herbert and Molinari
defended the right of capitalists and landlords to force their employees
and tenants to follow their orders. Their "governments" existed to
defend the capitalist from rebellious workers, to break unions, strikes
and occupations. In other words, they were a monopoly of the use of
force in a given area to enforce the monopoly of power in a given area
(namely, the wishes of the property owner). While they may have argued
that this was "defence of liberty," in reality it is defence of power
and authority.

What about if we just look at the political aspects of his ideas? Did
Herbert actually advocate anarchism? No, far from it. He clearly
demanded a minimal state based on voluntary taxation. The state would
not use force of any kind, *"except for purposes of restraining force."*
He argued that in his system, while *"the state should compel no
services and exact no payments by force,"* it *"should be free to
conduct many useful undertakings . . . in competition with all voluntary
agencies . . . in dependence on voluntary payments."* [Herbert, **Op.
Cit.**] As such, *"the state"* would remain and unless he is using the
term "state" in some highly unusual way, it is clear that he means a
system where individuals live under a single elected government as their
common law maker, judge and defender within a given territory.

This becomes clearer once we look at how the state would be organised.
In his essay *"A Politician in Sight of Haven,"* Herbert does discuss
the franchise, stating it would be limited to those who paid a voluntary
*"income tax,"* anyone *"paying it would have the right to vote; those
who did not pay it would be -- as is just -- without the franchise.
There would be no other tax."* The law would be strictly limited, of
course, and the *"government . . . must confine itself simply to the
defense of life and property, whether as regards internal or external
defense."* In other words, Herbert was a minimal statist, with his
government elected by a majority of those who choose to pay their income
tax and funded by that (and by any other voluntary taxes they decided to
pay). Whether individuals and companies could hire their own private
police in such a regime is irrelevant in determining whether it is an
anarchy.

This can be best seen by comparing Herbert with Ayn Rand. No one would
ever claim Rand was an anarchist, yet her ideas were extremely similar
to Herbert's. Like Herbert, Rand supported laissez-faire capitalism and
was against the "initiation of force." Like Herbert, she extended this
principle to favour a government funded by voluntary means [*"Government
Financing in a Free Society,"* **The Virtue of Selfishness**, pp.
116-20] Moreover, like Herbert, she explicitly denied being an anarchist
and, again like Herbert, thought the idea of competing defence agencies
("governments") would result in chaos. The similarities with Herbert are
clear, yet no "anarcho"-capitalist would claim that Rand was an
anarchist, yet they do claim that Herbert was.

This position is, of course, deeply illogical and flows from the
non-anarchist nature of "anarcho"-capitalism. Perhaps unsurprisingly,
when Rothbard discusses the ideas of the "voluntaryists" he fails to
address the key issue of who determines the laws being enforced in
society. For Rothbard, the key issue is **who** is enforcing the law,
not where that law comes from (as long, of course, as it is a law code
he approves of). The implications of this is significant, as it implies
that "anarchism" need not be opposed to either the state nor government!
This can be clearly seen from Rothbard's analysis of voluntary taxation.

Rothbard, correctly, notes that Herbert advocated voluntary taxation as
the means of funding a state whose basic role was to enforce Lockean
property rights. For Rothbard, the key issue was **not** who determines
the law but who enforces it. For Rothbard, it should be privatised
police and courts and he suggests that the *"voluntary taxationists have
never attempted to answer this problem; they have rather stubbornly
assumed that no one would set up a competing defence agency within a
State's territorial limits."* If the state **did** bar such firms, then
that system is not a genuine free market. However, *"if the government
**did** permit free competition in defence service, there would soon no
longer be a central government over the territory. Defence agencies,
police and judicial, would compete with one another in the same
uncoerced manner as the producers of any other service on the market."*
[**Power and Market**, p. 122 and p. 123]

However, this misses the point totally. The key issue that Rothbard
ignores is who determines the laws which these private "defence"
agencies would enforce. If the laws are determined by a central
government, then the fact that citizen's can hire private police and
attend private courts does not stop the regime being statist. We can
safely assume Rand, for example, would have had no problem with
companies providing private security guards or the hiring of private
detectives within the context of her minimal state. Ironically, Rothbard
stresses the need for such a monopoly legal system:

> *"While 'the government' would cease to exist, the same cannot be said
> for a constitution or a rule of law, which, in fact, would take on in
> the free society a far more important function than at present. For
> the freely competing judicial agencies would have to be guided by a
> body of absolute law to enable them to distinguish objectively between
> defence and invasion. This law, embodying elaborations upon the basic
> injunction to defend person and property from acts of invasion, would
> be codified in the basic legal code. Failure to establish such a code
> of law would tend to break down the free market, for then defence
> against invasion could not be adequately achieved."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
> 123-4]

So if you violate the *"absolute law"* defending (absolute) property
rights then you would be in trouble. The problem now lies in determining
who sets that law. Rothbard is silent on how his system of monopoly laws
are determined or specified. The "voluntaryists" did propose a solution,
namely a central government elected by the majority of those who
voluntarily decided to pay an income tax. In the words of Herbert:

> *"We agree that there must be a central agency to deal with crime - an
> agency that defends the liberty of all men, and employs force against
> the uses of force; but my central agency rests upon voluntary support,
> whilst Mr. Levy's central agency rests on compulsory support."*
> [quoted by Carl Watner, *"The English Individualists As They Appear In
> Liberty,"* pp. 191-211, **Benjamin R. Tucker and the Champions of
> Liberty**, p. 194]

And all Rothbard is concerned over private cops would exist or not! This
lack of concern over the existence of the state and government flows
from the strange fact that "anarcho"-capitalists commonly use the term
"anarchism" to refer to any philosophy that opposes all forms of
initiatory coercion. Notice that government does not play a part in this
definition, thus Rothbard can analyse Herbert's politics without
commenting on who determines the law his private "defence" agencies
enforce. For Rothbard, *"an anarchist society"* is defined *"as one
where there is no legal possibility for coercive aggression against the
person and property of any individual."* He then moved onto the state,
defining that as an *"institution which possesses one or both (almost
always both) of the following properties: (1) it acquires its income by
the physical coercion known as 'taxation'; and (2) it acquires and
usually obtains a coerced monopoly of the provision of defence service
(police and courts) over a given territorial area."* [*"Society without
a State"*, in **Nomos XIX**, Pennock and Chapman (eds.)., p. 192]

This is highly unusual definition of "anarchism," given that it utterly
fails to mention or define government. This, perhaps, is understandable
as any attempt to define it in terms of *"monopoly of decision-making
power"* results in showing that capitalism is statist (see [section
1](append131.html) for a summary). The key issue here is the term
*"legal possibility."* That suggestions a system of laws which determine
what is *"coercive aggression"* and what constitutes what is and what is
not legitimate "property." Herbert is considered by
"anarcho"-capitalists as one of them. Which brings us to a strange
conclusion, that for "anarcho"-capitalists you can have a system of
"anarchism" in which there is a government and state -- as long as the
state does not impose taxation nor stop private police forces from
operating!

As Rothbard argues *"if a government based on voluntary taxation permits
free competition, the result will be the purely free-market system . . .
The previous government would now simply be one competing defence agency
among many on the market."* [**Power and Market**, p. 124] That the
government is specifying what is and is not legal does not seem to
bother him or even cross his mind. Why should it, when the existence of
government is irrelevant to his definition of anarchism and the state?
That private police are enforcing a monopoly law determined by the
government seems hardly a step in the right direction nor can it be
considered as anarchism. Perhaps this is unsurprising, for under his
system there would be *"a basic, common Law Code"* which *"all would
have to abide by"* as well as *"some way of resolving disputes that will
gain a majority consensus in society . . . whose decision will be
accepted by the great majority of the public."* [*"Society without a
State,"* **Op. Cit.**, p. 205]

At least Herbert is clear that this would be a government system, unlike
Rothbard who assumes a monopoly law but seems to think that this is not
a government or a state. As David Wieck argued, this is illogical for
according to Rothbard *"all 'would have to' conform to the same legal
code"* and this can only be achieved by means of *"the forceful action
of adherents to the code against those who flout it"* and so *"in his
system **there would stand over against every individual the legal
authority of all the others.** An individual who did not recognise
private property as legitimate would surely perceive this as a tyranny
of law, a tyranny of the majority or of the most powerful -- in short, a
hydra-headed state. If the law code is itself unitary, then this
multiple state might be said to have properly a single head -- the law .
. . But it looks as though one might still call this 'a state,' under
Rothbard's definition, by satisfying **de facto** one of his pair of
sufficient conditions: 'It asserts and usually obtains a coerced
monopoly of provision of defence service (police and courts) over a
given territorial area' . . . Hobbes's individual sovereign would seem
to have become many sovereigns -- with but one law, however, and in
truth, therefore, a single sovereign in Hobbes's more important sense of
the latter term. One might better, and less confusingly, call this a
libertarian state than an anarchy."* [*"Anarchist Justice"*, in **Nomos
XIX**, Pennock and Chapman (eds.)., pp. 216-7]

The obvious recipients of the coercion of the new state would be those
who rejected the authority of their bosses and landlords, those who
reject the Lockean property rights Rothbard and Herbert hold dear. In
such cases, the rebels and any "defence agency" (like, say, a union)
which defended them would be driven out of business as it violated the
law of the land. How this is different from a state banning competing
agencies is hard to determine. This is a *"difficulty"* argues Wieck,
which *"results from the attachment of a principle of private property,
and of unrestricted accumulation of wealth, to the principle of
individual liberty. This increases sharply the possibility that many
reasonable people who respect their fellow men and women will find
themselves outside the law because of dissent from a property
interpretation of liberty."* Similarly, there is the economic results of
capitalism. *"One can imagine,"* Wieck continues, *"that those who lose
out badly in the free competition of Rothbard's economic system, perhaps
a considerable number, might regard the legal authority as an alien
power, state for them, based on violence, and might be quite unmoved by
the fact that, just as under nineteenth century capitalism, a principle
of liberty was the justification for it all."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 217 and
pp. 217-8]

7.3 Can there be a "right-wing" anarchism?
------------------------------------------

Hart, of course, mentions the individualist anarchists, calling Tucker's
ideas *"**laissez faire** liberalism."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 87] However,
Tucker called his ideas *"socialism"* and presented a left-wing critique
of most aspects of liberalism, particularly its Lockean based private
property rights. Tucker based much of his ideas on property on Proudhon,
so if Hart dismisses the latter as a socialist then this must apply to
the former. Given that he notes that there are *"two main kinds of
anarchist thought,"* namely *"communist anarchism which denies the right
of an individual to seek profit, charge rent or interest and to own
property"* and a *"'right-wing' proprietary anarchism, which vigorously
defends these rights"* then Tucker, like Godwin, would have to be placed
in the *"left-wing"* camp. [*"Gustave de Molinari and the Anti-statist
Liberal Tradition: Part II"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 427] Tucker, after all,
argued that he aimed for the end of profit, interest and rent and
attacked private property in land and housing beyond "occupancy and
use."

As can be seen, Hart's account of the history of "anti-state" liberalism
is flawed. Godwin is included only by ignoring his views on property,
views which in many ways reflects the later "socialist" (i.e. anarchist)
analysis of Proudhon. He then discusses a few individuals who were alone
in their opinions even within extreme free market right and all of whom
knew of anarchism and explicitly rejected the name for their respective
ideologies. In fact, they preferred the term *"government"* to describe
their systems which, on the face of it, would be hard to reconcile with
the usual "anarcho"-capitalist definition of anarchism as being "no
government." Hart's discussion of individualist anarchism is equally
flawed, failing to discuss their economic views (just as well, as its
links to "left-wing" anarchism would be obvious).

However, the similarities of Molinari's views with what later became
known as "anarcho"-capitalism are clear. Hart notes that with Molinari's
death in 1912, *"liberal anti-statism virtually disappeared until it was
rediscovered by the economist Murray Rothbard in the late 1950's"*
[*"Gustave de Molinari and the Anti-statist Liberal Tradition: Part
III"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 88] While this fringe is somewhat bigger than
previously, the fact remains that the ideas expounded by Rothbard are
just as alien to the anarchist tradition as Molinari's. It is a shame
that Rothbard, like his predecessors, did not call his ideology
something other than anarchism. Not only would it have been more
accurate, it would also have lead to much less confusion and no need to
write this section of the FAQ! As it stands, the only reason why
"anarcho"-capitalism is considered a form of "anarchism" by some is
because one person (Rothbard) decided to steal the name of a well
established and widespread political and social theory and movement and
apply it to an ideology with little, if anything, in common with it.

As Hart inadvertently shows, it is not a firm base to build a claim.
That anyone can consider "anarcho"-capitalism as anarchist simply flows
from a lack of knowledge about anarchism. As numerous anarchists have
argued. For example, *"Rothbard's conjunction of anarchism with
capitalism,"* according to David Wieck, *"results in a conception that
is entirely outside the mainstream of anarchist theoretical writings or
social movements . . . this conjunction is a self-contradiction."* He
stressed that *"the main traditions of anarchism are entirely different.
These traditions, and theoretical writings associated with them, express
the perspectives and the aspirations, and also, sometimes, the rage, of
the oppressed people in human society: not only those economically
oppressed, although the major anarchist movements have been mainly
movements of workers and peasants, but also those oppressed by power in
all those social dimensions . . . including of course that of political
power expressed in the state."* In other words, *"anarchism represents .
. . a moral commitment (Rothbard's anarchism I take to be diametrically
opposite)."* [*"Anarchist Justice"*, in **Nomos XIX**, Pennock and
Chapman (eds.), p. 215, p. 229 and p. 234]

It is a shame that some academics consider only the word Rothbard uses
as relevant rather than the content and its relation to anarchist theory
and history. If they did, they would soon realise that the expressed
opposition of so many anarchists to "anarcho"-capitalism is something
which cannot be ignored or dismissed. In other words, a "right-wing"
anarchist cannot and does not exist, no matter how often they use that
word to describe their ideology. As Bob Black put it, *"a right-wing
anarchist is just a minarchist who'd abolish the state to his own
satisfaction by calling it something else . . . They don't denounce what
the state does, they just object to who's doing it."* [**Libertarian as
Conservative**]

The reason is simple. Anarchist economics and politics cannot be
artificially separated, they are linked. Godwin and Proudhon did not
stop their analysis at the state. They extended it the social
relationships produced by inequality of wealth, i.e. economic power as
well as political power. To see why, we need only consult Rothbard's
work. As noted in the [last section](append137.html#secf72), for
Rothbard the key issue with the "voluntary taxationists" was not who
determined the *"body of absolute law"* but rather who enforced it. In
his discussion, he argued that a democratic "defence agency" is at a
disadvantage in his "free market" system. As he put it:

> *"It would, in fact, be competing at a severe disadvantage, having
> been established on the principle of 'democratic voting.' Looked at as
> a market phenomenon, 'democratic voting' (one vote per person) is
> simply the method of the consumer 'co-operative.' Empirically, it has
> been demonstrated time and again that co-operatives cannot compete
> successfully against stock-owned companies, especially when both are
> equal before the law. There is no reason to believe that co-operatives
> for defence would be any more efficient. Hence, we may expect the old
> co-operative government to 'wither away' through loss of customers on
> the market, while joint-stock (i.e., corporate) defence agencies would
> become the prevailing market form."*

Notice how he assumes that both a co-operative and corporation would be
*"equal before the law."* But who determines that law? Obviously **not**
a democratically elected government, as the idea of "one person, one
vote" in determining the common law all are subject to is
*"inefficient."* Nor does he think, like the individualist anarchists,
that the law would be judged by juries along with the facts. As we note
in [section 1.4](append131.html#secf14), he rejects that in favour of it
being determined by *"Libertarian lawyers and jurists."* Thus the law is
unchangeable by ordinary people and enforced by private defence agencies
hired to protect the liberty and property of the owning class. In the
case of a capitalist economy, this means defending the power of
landlords and capitalists against rebel tenants and workers.

This means that Rothbard's *"common Law Code"* will be determined,
interpreted, enforced and amended by corporations based on the will of
the majority of shareholders, i.e. the rich. That hardly seems likely to
produce equality before the law. As he argues in a footnote:

> *"There is a strong **a priori** reason for believing that
> corporations will be superior to co-operatives in any given situation.
> For if each owner receives only one vote regardless of how much money
> he has invested in a project (and earnings are divided in the same
> way), there is no incentive to invest more than the next man; in fact,
> every incentive is the other way. This hampering of investment
> militates strongly against the co-operative form."*

So **if** the law is determined by the defence agencies and courts then
it will be determined by those who have invested most in these
companies. As it is unlikely that the rich will invest in defence firms
which do not support their property rights, power, profits and
definition of property rights, it is clear that agencies which favour
the wealthy will survive on the market. The idea that market demand will
counter this class rule seems unlikely, given Rothbard's own argument.
After all, in order to compete successfully you need more than demand,
you need source of investment. If co-operative defence agencies do form,
they will be at a market disadvantage due to lack of investment. As
argued in [section J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512), even though
co-operatives are more efficient than capitalist firms lack of
investment (caused by the lack of control by capitalists Rothbard notes)
stops them replacing wage slavery. Thus capitalist wealth and power
inhibits the spread of freedom in production. If we apply his own
argument to Rothbard's system, we suggest that the market in "defence"
will also stop the spread of more libertarian associations thanks to
capitalist power and wealth. In other words, like any market, Rothbard's
"defence" market will simply reflect the interests of the elite, not the
masses.

Moreover, we can expect any democratic defence agency (like a union) to
support, say, striking workers or squatting tenants, to be crushed. This
is because, as Rothbard stresses, **all** "defence" firms would be
expected to apply the *"common"* law, as written by *"Libertarian
lawyers and jurists."* If they did not they would quickly be labelled
"outlaw" agencies and crushed by the others. Ironically, Tucker would
join Bakunin and Kropotkin in an "anarchist" court accused to violating
"anarchist" law by practising and advocating "occupancy and use" rather
than the approved Rothbardian property rights. Even if these democratic
"defence" agencies could survive and not be driven out of the market by
a combination of lack of investment and violence due to their "outlaw"
status, there is another problem. As we discussed in [section
1](append131.html), landlords and capitalists have a monopoly of
decision making power over their property. As such, they can simply
refuse to recognise any democratic agency as a legitimate defence
association and use the same tactics perfected against unions to ensure
that it does not gain a foothold in their domain (see [section
6](append136.html) for more details).

Clearly, then, a "right-wing" anarchism is impossible as any system
based on capitalist property rights will simply be an oligarchy run by
and for the wealthy. As Rothbard notes, any defence agency based on
democratic principles will not survive in the "market" for defence
simply because it does not allow the wealthy to control it and its
decisions. Little wonder Proudhon argued that laissez-faire capitalism
meant *"the victory of the strong over the weak, of those who own
property over those who own nothing."* [quoted by Peter Marshall,
**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 259]
