Appendix - Is "anarcho"-capitalism a type of anarchism?
=======================================================

Anyone who has followed political discussion on the net has probably
come across people calling themselves libertarians but arguing from a
right-wing, pro-capitalist perspective. For most Europeans this is
weird, as in Europe the term *"libertarian"* is almost always used in
conjunction with *"socialist"* or *"communist."* In the US, though, the
Right has partially succeeded in appropriating this term for itself.
Even stranger, however, is that a few of these right-wingers have
started calling themselves "anarchists" in what must be one of the
finest examples of an oxymoron in the English language:
'Anarcho-capitalist'!!

Arguing with fools is seldom rewarded, but to allow their foolishness to
go unchallenged risks allowing them to deceive those who are new to
anarchism. That's what this section of the anarchist FAQ is for, to show
why the claims of these "anarchist" capitalists are false. Anarchism has
always been anti-capitalist and any "anarchism" that claims otherwise
cannot be part of the anarchist tradition. So this section of the FAQ
does not reflect some kind of debate within anarchism, as many of these
types like to pretend, but a debate between anarchism and its old enemy,
capitalism. In many ways this debate mirrors the one between Peter
Kropotkin and Herbert Spencer, an English pro-capitalist, minimal
statist, at the turn the 19th century and, as such, it is hardly new.

The "anarcho"-capitalist argument hinges on using the dictionary
definition of "anarchism" and/or "anarchy" - they try to define
anarchism as being "opposition to government," and nothing else.
However, dictionaries are hardly politically sophisticated and their
definitions rarely reflect the wide range of ideas associated with
political theories and their history. Thus the dictionary "definition"
is anarchism will tend to ignore its consistent views on authority,
exploitation, property and capitalism (ideas easily discovered if actual
anarchist texts are read). And, of course, many dictionaries "define"
anarchy as "chaos" or "disorder" but we never see "anarcho"-capitalists
use that particular definition!

And for this strategy to work, a lot of "inconvenient" history and ideas
from all branches of anarchism must be ignored. From individualists like
Spooner and Tucker to communists like Kropotkin and Malatesta,
anarchists have always been anti-capitalist (see [section
G](secGcon.html) for more on the anti-capitalist nature of individualist
anarchism). Therefore "anarcho"-capitalists are not anarchists in the
same sense that rain is not dry.

Of course, we cannot stop the "anarcho"-capitalists using the words
"anarcho", "anarchism" and "anarchy" to describe their ideas. The
democracies of the west could not stop the Chinese Stalinist state
calling itself the People's Republic of China. Nor could the social
democrats stop the fascists in Germany calling themselves "National
Socialists". Nor could the Italian anarcho-syndicalists stop the
fascists using the expression "National Syndicalism". This does not mean
that any of these movements actual name reflected their content -- China
is a dictatorship, not a democracy, the Nazi's were not socialists
(capitalists made fortunes in Nazi Germany because it crushed the labour
movement), and the Italian fascist state had nothing in common with
anarcho-syndicalists ideas of decentralised, "from the bottom up" unions
and the abolition of the state and capitalism.

Therefore, just because someone uses a label it does not mean that they
support the ideas associated with that label. And this is the case with
"anarcho"-capitalism -- its ideas are at odds with the key ideas
associated with all forms of traditional anarchism (even individualist
anarchism which is often claimed as being a forefather of the ideology).

All we can do is indicate **why** "anarcho"-capitalism is not part of
the anarchist tradition and so has falsely appropriated the name. This
section of the FAQ aims to do just that -- present the case why
"anarcho"-capitalists are not anarchists. We do this, in part, by
indicating where they differ from genuine anarchists (on such essential
issues as private property, equality, exploitation and opposition to
hierarchy) In addition, we take the opportunity to present a general
critique of right-libertarian claims from an anarchist perspective. In
this way we show up why anarchists reject that theory as being opposed
to liberty and anarchist ideals.

We are covering this topic in an anarchist FAQ for three reasons.
Firstly, the number of "libertarian" and "anarcho"-capitalists on the
net means that those seeking to find out about anarchism may conclude
that they are "anarchists" as well. Secondly, unfortunately, some
academics and writers have taken their claims of being anarchists at
face value and have included their ideology into general accounts of
anarchism. These two reasons are obviously related and hence the need to
show the facts of the matter. As we have extensively documented in
earlier sections, anarchist theory has always been anti-capitalist.
There is no relationship between anarchism and capitalism, in any form.
Therefore, there is a need for this section in order to indicate exactly
why "anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchist. As will be quickly seen from
our discussion, almost all anarchists who become aware of
"anarcho"-capitalism quickly reject it as a form of anarchism (the
better academic accounts do note that anarchists generally reject the
claim, though). The last reason is to provide other anarchists with
arguments and evidence to use against "anarcho"-capitalism and its
claims of being a new form of "anarchism."

So this section of the FAQ does not, as we noted above, represent some
kind of "debate" within anarchism. It reflects the attempt by anarchists
to reclaim the history and meaning of anarchism from those who are
attempting to steal its name (just as right-wingers in America have
attempted to appropriate the name "libertarian" for their pro-capitalist
views, and by so doing ignore over 100 years of anti-capitalist usage).
However, this section also serves two other purposes. Firstly,
critiquing right-libertarian and "anarcho"-capitalist theories allows us
to explain anarchist ones at the same time and indicate why they are
better. Secondly, and more importantly, the "ideas" and "ideals" that
underlie "anarcho"-capitalism are usually identical (or, at the very
least, similar) to those of neo-liberalism. This was noted by Bob Black
in the early 1980s, when a *"wing of the Reaganist Right has obviously
appropriated, with suspect selectivity, such libertarian themes as
deregulation and voluntarism. Ideologues indignant that Reagan has
travestied their principles. Tough shit! I notice that it's their
principles, not mine, that he found suitable to travesty."* [**The
Libertarian As Conservative**] This was echoed by Noam Chomsky two
decades later when while *"nobody takes [right-wing libertarianism]
seriously"* as *"everybody knows that a society that worked by . . .
[its] principles would self-destruct in three seconds"* the *"only
reason"* why some people *"pretend to take it seriously is because you
can use it as a weapon."* [**Understanding Power**, p. 200] As
neo-liberalism is being used as the ideological basis of the current
attack on the working class, critiquing "anarcho"-capitalism and
right-libertarianism also allows use to build theoretical weapons to use
to resist this attack and aid the class struggle.

A few more points before beginning. When debating with "libertarian" or
"anarchist" capitalists it's necessary to remember that while they claim
"real capitalism" does not exist (because all existing forms of
capitalism are statist), they will claim that all the good things we
have -- advanced medical technology, consumer choice of products, etc.
-- are nevertheless due to "capitalism." Yet if you point out any
problems in modern life, these will be blamed on "statism." Since there
has never been and never will be a capitalist system without some sort
of state, it's hard to argue against this "logic." Many actually use the
example of the Internet as proof of the power of "capitalism," ignoring
the fact that the state paid for its development before turning it over
to companies to make a profit from it. Similar points can be made about
numerous other products of "capitalism" and the world we live in. To
artificially separate one aspect of a complex evolution fails to
understand the nature and history of the capitalist system.

In addition to this ability to be selective about the history and
results of capitalism, their theory has a great "escape clause." If
wealthy employers abuse their power or the rights of the working class
(as they have always done), then they have (according to "libertarian"
ideology) ceased to be capitalists! This is based upon the misperception
that an economic system that relies on force **cannot** be capitalistic.
This is **very** handy as it can absolve the ideology from blame for any
(excessive) oppression which results from its practice. Thus individuals
are always to blame, **not** the system that generated the opportunities
for abuse they freely used.

Anarchism has always been aware of the existence of "free market"
capitalism, particularly its extreme (minimal state) wing, and has
always rejected it. As we discuss in [section 7](append137.html),
anarchists from Proudhon onwards have rejected the idea of any similar
aims and goals (and, significantly, vice versa). As academic Alan Carter
notes, anarchist concern for equality as a necessary precondition for
genuine freedom means *"that is one very good reason for not confusing
anarchists with liberals or economic 'libertarians' -- in other words,
for not lumping together everyone who is in some way or another critical
of the state. It is why calling the likes of Nozick 'anarchists' is
highly misleading."* [*"Some notes on 'Anarchism'"*, pp. 141-5,
**Anarchist Studies**, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 143] So anarchists have
evaluated "free market" capitalism and rejected it as non-anarchist for
over 150 years. Attempts by "anarcho"-capitalism to say that their
system is "anarchist" flies in the face of this long history of
anarchist analysis. That some academics fall for their attempts to
appropriate the anarchist label for their ideology is down to a false
premise: it *"is judged to be anarchism largely because some
anarcho-capitalists **say** they are 'anarchists' and because they
criticise the State."* [Peter Sabatini, **Social Anarchism**, no. 23, p.
100]

More generally, we must stress that most (if not all) anarchists do not
want to live in a society **just like this one** but without state
coercion and (the initiation of) force. Anarchists do not confuse
"freedom" with the "right" to govern and exploit others nor with being
able to change masters. It is not enough to say we can start our own
(co-operative) business in such a society. We want the abolition of the
capitalist system of authoritarian relationships, not just a change of
bosses or the possibility of little islands of liberty within a sea of
capitalism (islands which are always in danger of being flooded and our
activity destroyed). Thus, in this section of the FAQ, we analysis many
"anarcho"-capitalist claims on their own terms (for example, the
importance of equality in the market or why capitalism cannot be
reformed away by exchanges on the capitalist market) but that does not
mean we desire a society nearly identical to the current one. Far from
it, we want to transform this society into one more suited for
developing and enriching individuality and freedom. But before we can
achieve that we must critically evaluate the current society and point
out its basic limitations.

Finally, we dedicate this section of the FAQ to those who have seen the
real face of "free market" capitalism at work: the working men and women
(anarchist or not) murdered in the jails and concentration camps or on
the streets by the hired assassins of capitalism.
