Bibliography for FAQ
====================

* * * * *

This bibliography lists all the books quoted in the FAQ. However,
details for some of these books is missing. This information will also
be added to over time. Some books are listed in more than one edition.
This is due to the process of revising the FAQ for publication and using
the most recent versions of books quoted. Once the revision is complete,
the old details will be removed.

The bibliography is split into four sections: Anthologies of Anarchist
authors; books by anarchists and other libertarians; books about
anarchism, anarchists and anarchist history by non-libertarians; and
books by non-anarchists/libertarians.

* * * * *

Anarchist Anthologies
---------------------

Avrich, Paul (ed.), **The Anarchists in the Russian Revolution**, Thames
and Hudson Ltd, London, 1973.

Brook, Frank H. (ed.), **The Individualist Anarchists: An Anthology of
Liberty (1881-1908)**, Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, 1994.

Dawn Collective (eds.), **Under the Yoke of the State: Selected
Anarchist Responses to Prisons and Crime vol. 1, 1886-1929**, Dawn
Collective/Kate Sharpley Library/PMB, Oakland/London/Berkeley, 2003.

Dark Star (ed.), **Quiet Rumours: An Anarcha-Feminist Reader**, AK
Press/Dark Star, Edinburgh/San Francisco, 2002.

Dolgoff, Sam (ed.), **The Anarchist Collectives: self-management in the
Spanish revolution, 1936-1939**, Black Rose Books, Montreal, 1974.

Ehrlich, Howard J, Carol Ehrlich, David De Leon, Glenda Morris (eds.),
**Reinventing Anarchy: What are Anarchists thinking these days?**,
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1979.

Ehrlich, Howard J. (ed.), **Reinventing Anarchy, Again**, AK Press,
Edinburgh/San Francisco, 1996.

Glassgold, Peter (ed.), **Anarchy! An Anthology of Emma Goldman's Mother
Earth**, Counterpoint, Washington D.C., 2001.

Graham, M. (ed.), **Man! An Anthology of Anarchist Ideas, Essays, Poetry
and Commentaries**, Cienfuegos Press, London, 1974.

Graham, Robert (ed.), **Anarchism: A Documentary History of Libertarian
Ideas -- Volume 1: From Anarchy to Anarchism (300CE to 1939)**, Black
Rose Books, Montreal/New York/London, 2005.

Guerin, Daniel (ed.), **No Gods, No Masters: An Anthology of Anarchism**
(in two volumes), AK Press, Edinburgh/San Francisco, 1998.

Krimerman, Leonard I. and Perry, Lewis, **Patterns of Anarchy: A
Collection of Writings on the Anarchist Tradition**, Anchor Books, New
York, 1966.

Woodcock, George (ed.), **The Anarchist Reader**, Fontana, Glasgow,
1987.

Anarchist and Libertarian Works
-------------------------------

ACF, **Marxism and Its Failures**, ACE Editions, London, 1990.

Ackelsberg, Martha A., **Free Women of Spain: anarchism and the struggle
for the emancipation of women**, AK Press, Oakland/Edinburgh, 2005.

Anarchist Federation, **The Role of the Revolutionary Organisation**,
Anarchist Communist Editions, London, 2008.

Anderson, Andy, **Hungary '56**, Phoenix Press, London, date unknown.

Anonymous, *"Community Organising in Southern Italy"*, **Black Flag**,
no. 210, pp. 16-19.

Anonymous, **Fighting the Revolution** (2 volumes), Freedom Press,
London, 1985.

Anonymous, **Red Years Black Years: Anarchist Resistance to Fascism in
Italy**, ASP, London, 1989.

Anonymous, *"Trotskyism, Lies and Anarchism"*, **Black Flag**, no. 211,
pp. 24-5.

Anger, Max, *"The Spartacist School of Falsification"*, **Anarchy: A
Journal of Desire Armed**, no, 43, Spring/Summer 1997, pp. 50-2.

Arshinov, Peter, **The History of the Makhnovist Movement**, Freedom
Press, London, 1987.

Avrich, Paul, **An American Anarchist: The Life of Voltairine de
Cleyre**, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1978.

Bakunin, Micheal, **The Basic Bakunin**, Robert M. Cutler (trans. and
ed.), Promethus Books, Buffalo, N.Y., 1994.

Barclay, Harold, **The State**, Freedom Press, London, 2003.

Barrett, George, *"The Anarchist Revolution"* contained in **The Last
War**, Pirate Press, Sheffield, 1990.

Bennello, George, *"The Challenge of Mondragon"* in **Reinventing
Anarchy, Again**, Howard Ehrlich (ed.), AK Press, Edinburgh/San
Francisco, 1996.

Bennello, George C., **From the Ground Up**, Black Rose Books, Montreal,
1992.

Berkman, Alexander, **What is Anarchism?**, AK Press,
Edinburgh/London/Oakland, 2003.

Berkman, Alexander (ed.), **The Blast**, AK Press, Edinburgh/Oakland,
2005.

Berneri, Camillo, *"Peter Kropotkin: His Federalist Ideas"*, **The
Raven: Anarchist Quarterly**, no. 31 (Vol. 8, No. 3), Autumn 1993,
Freedom Press, pp. 268-82

Berneri, Marie-Louise, **Neither East Nor West: Selected Writings
1939-48**, Freedom Press, London, 1988.

Berry, David, **A History of the French Anarchist Movement, 1917-1945**,
Greenwood Press, Westport, 2002.

Black, Bob, **The Abolition of Work and other essays**, Loompanics
Unlimited, Port Townsend, 1986.

Bonanno, Alfredo M., **Anarchism and the National Liberation Struggle**,
Bratach Dubh Editions, Catania, 1981.

Bookchin, Murray, **Post Scarcity Anarchism**, 3rd Edition, AK Press,
Edinburgh/Oakland, 2004.

Bookchin, Murray and Dave Foreman, **Defending the Earth: A Dialogue
between Murray Bookchin and Dave Foreman**, Black Rose Books,
Montreal/New York.

Bradford, George, **How Deep is Deep Ecology?**, Times Change Press,
California, 1989.

Bricianer, Serge **Pannekoek and the Workers' Councils**, Telos Press,
Saint Louis, 1978.

Brinton, Maurice, **For Workers' Power: The Selected Writings of Maurice
Brinton**, David Goodway (ed.), AK Press, Edinburgh/Oakland, 2004.

Brown, L. Susan, **The Politics of Individualism: Liberalism, Liberal
Feminism and Anarchism**, Black Rose, Montreal/New York, 1993.

Brown, Tom, **Syndicalism**, Phoenix Press, London, 1990.

Buber, Martin, **Paths in Utopia**, Beacon Press, Boston, 1958.

Cardan, Paul, **Modern Capitalism and Revolution**, 2nd edition,
Solidarity, London, 1974.

Carson, Kevin A., **The Iron Fist Behind the Invisible Hand**, available
at: http://www.mutualist.org/id4.html

Carter, Alan, **Marx: A Radical Critique**, Wheatsheaf Books, Brighton,
1988.

Casa, Juan Gomez, **Anarchist Organisation: The History of the FAI**,
Black Rose Books, Montreal, 1986.

Castoriadis, Cornelius, **Workers' Councils and the Economics of a
Self-Managed Society**, Wooden Shoe Pamphlet, Philadelphia, 1984.

Chomsky, Noam, **Chronicles of Dissent: Interviews with David
Barsamian**, Common Courage and AK Press, Monroe, 1992.

Christie, Stuart, **We, the Anarchists! A Study of the Iberian Anarchist
Federation (FAI) 1927-1927**, The Meltzer Press and Jura Media,
Hastings/Petersham, 2000.

Christie, Stuart and Meltzer, Albert, **The Floodgates of Anarchy**,
Kahn & Averill, Southampton, 1984.

Ciliga, Ante, **The Russian Enigma**, Ink Links Ltd, London, 1979.

Clark, John, **The Anarchist Moment: Reflections on Culture, Nature and
Power**, Black Rose Books, Montreal, 1984.

Clark, John P., **Max Stirner's Egoism**, Freedom Press, London, 1976.

Clark, John P and Martin, Camille (eds.), **Anarchy, Geography,
Modernity: The Radical Social Thought of Elisée Reclus**, Lexington
Books, Lanham, 2004.

Cleaver, Harry, **Reading Capital Politically**, AK Press/Anti-theses,
London, 2000.

Cohn-Bendit, Daniel & Gabriel, **Obsolete Communism: The Left-Wing
Alternative**, AK Press, Edinburgh, London & San Franciso, 2000.

Cole, G.D.H., **Guild Socialism Restated**, Transaction Books, New
Brunswick, 1980.

Comfort, Alex, **Authority and Delinquency in the Modern State: A
Criminological Approach to the Problem of Power**, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1950.

Crump, John, **Hatta Shuzo and Pure Anarchism in Interwar Japan**, St.
Martin's Press, Inc., New York, 1993.

Dana, Charles A., **Proudhon and his *"Bank of the People"***, Charles
H. Kerr Publishing Co., Chicago, 1984.

de Cleyre, Voltairine, **The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**, A.J. Brigati
(ed.), AK Press, Oakland/Edinburgh, 2004.

de Ligt, Bart, **The Conquest of Violence**, Pluto Press, London, 1989.

de Llorens, Ignaio, **The CNT and the Russian Revolution**, The Kate
Sharpley Library, unknown, undated.

de Santillan, D. A., **After the Revolution: Economic Reconstruction in
Spain Today**, Greenberg, New York, 1937 (facsimile edition by Jura
Media, Petersham, 1996).

Debord, Guy, **Society of the Spectacle**, Rebel Press/Aim Publications,
Exeter, 1987.

Dielo Trouda, **The Organisational Platform of the Libertarian
Communists**, Workers Solidarity Movement, Dublin, 1989.

Direct Action Movement, **Winning the Class War: An Anarcho-Syndicalist
Strategy**, Direct Action Movement-IWA, Manchester/Glasgow, 1991.

Dobson, V.G., **Bringing the Economy Home from the Market**, Black Rose
Books, Montreal, 1993.

Dolgoff, Sam, **The Cuban Revolution: A Critical Perspective**, Black
Rose Books, Montreal, 1976.

Draughn, Jeff, **Between Anarchism and Libertarianism: Defining a New
Movement**, available at http://flag.blackened.net/liberty/between.html

Ervin, Lorenzo Kom'boa, **Anarchism and the Black Revolution**,
Monkeywrench Press and the Workers Self-Education Foundation,
Philadelphia, 1994.

Fabbri, Luigi, **Bourgeois Influences on Anarchism**, Acrata Press, San
Francisco, 1987.

Fernandez, Frank, **Cuban Anarchism: The History of a Movement**, See
Sharp Press, Tucson, 2001.

Fleming, Marie, **The Geography of Freedom: The Odyssey of Elisée
Reclus**, Black Rose Books, Montreal/New York, 1988.

Foner, Philip S. (ed.), **The Autobiographies of the Haymarket
Martyrs**, Monad Press, New York, 1977.

Fontenis, Georges, **Manifesto of Libertarian Communism**, Anarchist
Communist Editions, London, 1989.

For Ourselves, **The Right to Be Greedy: Thesis on the Practical
Necessity of Demanding Everything**, Loompanics Unlimited, Port
Townsend, Washington, 1983.

Fotopoulos, Takis, *"The Economic Foundations of an Ecological
Society"*, **Society and Nature**, No. 3 (vol. 1 no. 3), pp. 1-40.

Ford, Earl C. and Foster, William Z., **Syndicalism**, Charles H. Keer
Publishing Co., Chicago, 1990.

Franks, Benjamin, **Rebel Alliances: The means and ends of contemporary
British anarchisms**, AK Press and Dark Star, Edinburgh/Oakland, 2006.

Fernandez, Neil C., **Capitalism and Class Struggle in the USSR: A
Marxist Theory**, Ashgate, Aldershot, 1997.

Friends of Durruti, **Towards a Fresh Revolution**, available at:
http://flag.blackened.net/revolt/fod/towardsintro.html

Fromm, Erich, **To Have Or To Be?**, Abacus, London, 1993.

Galleani, Luigi, **The End of Anarchism?**, Cienfuegos Press, Orkney,
1982.

Godwin, William, **The Anarchist Writings of William Godwin**, Peter
Marshall (ed.), Freedom Press, London, 1986.

Goldman, Emma, **Red Emma Speaks: An Emma Goldman Reader**, 3rd Edition,
Alix Kates Shulman (ed.), Humanity Books, New York, 1998.

Goodway, David, **Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow: Left-Libertarian
Thought and British Writers from William Morris to Colin Ward**,
Liverpool University Press, Liverpool, 2006.

Goodway, David (ed.), **For Anarchism: History, Theory and Practice**,
Routledge, London, 1989.

Gorter, Herman, **Open Letter to Comrade Lenin**, Wildcat, 1989.

Graeber, David, **Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology**, Prickly
Paradigm Press, Chicago, 2004.

Green Anarchy, **Against Mass Society**, available at:
http://www.primitivism.com/mass-society.htm

Greene, William B., **Mutual Banking**, West Brookfield, 1850.

Guerin, Daniel, **Anarchism: From Theory to Practice**, Monthly Review
Press, New York/London, 1970.

Harper, Clifford, **Anarchy: A Graphic Guide**, Camden Press, London,
1987.

International Workers Association, **Principles, Aims and Statutes of
the International Workers Association**, Monty Millar Press, Broadway,
1983.

Industrial Workers of the World, **How to fire your boss**, available
at: http://fletcher.iww.org/direct\_action/title.html

Kelman, James, **Some Recent Attacks: Essays Cultural and Political**,
AK Press, Stirling, 1992.

Kelsey, Graham A., **Anarchosyndicalism, libertarian communism and the
state: the CNT in Zaragoza and Aragon 1930-1937**, International
Institute of Social History, Dordrecht, London, 1991.

Kenafick, K.J., **Michael Bakunin and Karl Marx**, Melbourne, 1948.

Klafta, Lance, *"Ayn Rand and the Perversion of Libertarianism"*,
**Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed**, no. 34, pp. 59-62.

Knabb, Ken, **Public Secrets**, Bureau of Public Secrets, Berkeley,
1997.

Knabb, Ken (ed.), **Situationist International Anthology**, Bureau of
Public Secrets, Berkeley, 1981.

Kropotkin, Peter, **Anarchism: A Collection of Revolutionary Writings**,
Roger N. Baldwin (ed.), Dover Press, New York, 2002.

Labadie, Joseph A., **Anarchism: What It Is and What It Is Not**,
available at: http://alumni.umbc.edu/\~akoont1/tmh/anar\_jal.html

Landauer, Gustav, **For Socialism**, Telos Press, St. Louis, 1978.

Law, Larry, **Spectacular Times: Bigger Cages, Longer Chains**,
A-Distribution/Dark Star Press, London, 1991.

Le Guin, Ursula K., **The Dispossessed**, Grafton Books, London, 1986.

Leier, Mark, **Bakunin: The Creative Passion**, Thomas Dunne Books, New
York, 2006.

Leval Gaston, **Collectives in the Spanish Revolution**, Freedom Press,
London, 1975.

Levy, Carl, **Gramsci and the Anarchists**, Berg, Oxford, 1999.

Magón, Ricardo Flores, **Dreams of Freedom: A Ricardo Flores Magón
Reader**, AK Press, Edinburgh/Oakland, 2005.

Mailer, Phil, **Portugal: The Impossible Revolution**, Solidarity,
London, 1977.

Makhno, Nestor, **The Struggle Against the State and other Essays**, AK
Press, Edinburgh/San Francisco, 1996.

Makhno, Nestor, Ida Mett, Piotr Archinov, Valevsky, Linsky, **The
Organisational Platform of the Libertarian Communists**, Workers
Solidarity Movement, Dublin, 1989.

Malatesta, Errico, **Anarchy**, Freedom Press, London, 2001.

Malet, Michael, **Nestor Makhno in the Russian Civil War**, MacMillan
Press, London, 1982.

Martin, James J., **Men Against the State: The Expositors of
Individualist Anarchism in America, 1827-1908**, Ralph Myles Publisher
Inc., Colorado Springs, 1970.

Marshall, Peter, **Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism**,
Fontana, London, 1993.

Marzocchi, Umberto, **Remembering Spain: Italian Anarchist Volunteers
the Spanish Civil War**, Kate Sharpley Library, London, 1991.

Mattick, Paul, **Economic Crisis and Crisis Theory**, M.E. Sharpe, White
Plains, New York, 1981.

Maximoff, G. P., **Program of Anarcho-Syndicalism**, Monty Miller Press,
Sydney, 1985.

Maximoff, G. P (ed.), **Constructive Anarchism**, Monty Miller Press,
Sidney, 1988.

McKercher, William R., **Freedom and Authority**, Black Rose Books,
Montreal/New York, 1989

Meltzer, Albert, **I Couldn't Paint Golden Angels**, AK Press,
Edinburgh, 1996.

Meltzer, Albert (ed.), **The Poverty of Statism**, Cienfuegos Press,
Orkney, 1981.

Mett, Ida, **The Kronstadt Uprising**, Solidarity, London, date unknown.

Michel, Louise, **The Red Virgin: Memoirs of Louise Michel**, The
University of Alabama Press, Alabama, 1981

Moorcock, Michael, **Starship Stormtroopers**, available at:
http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/Moorcock.html

Moore, John, **Primitivist Primer**, available at:
http://lemming.mahost.org/johnmoore/primer.htm

Morris, Brian, **Bakunin: The Philosophy of Freedom**, Black Rose Books,
Montreal, 1993.

Morris, William, **Political Writings: Contributions to Justice and
Commonweal 1883-1890**, Thoemmes Press, Bristol, 1994.

Nettlau, Max, **A Short History of Anarchism**, Freedom Press, London,
1996.

Nursey-Bray, Paul, **Anarchist Thinkers and Thought: an annotated
bibliography**, Greenwood Press, New York, 1992.

Ostergaard, Geoffrey, **The Tradition of Workers' Control**, Freedom
Press, London, 1997.

Pannekeok, Anton, **Workers' Councils**, AK Press, Oakland/Edinburgh,
2003.

Parsons, Albert R., **Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Scientific Basis**,
University Press of the Pacific, Honolulu, 2003.

Parsons, Lucy, **Freedom, Equality & Solidarity: Writings & Speeches,
1878-1937**, Gale Ahrens (ed.), Charles H. Kerr, Chicago, 2004.

Pataud, Emile and Pouget, Emile, **How we shall bring about the
Revolution: Syndicalism and the Co-operative Commonwealth**, Pluto
Press, London, 1990.

Pateman, Carole, **The Problem of Political Obligation: A Critique of
Liberal Theory**, Polity Press, Cambridge, 1985.

Paz, Abel, **Durruti: The People Armed**, Black Rose Books, Montreal,
1976.

Peacott, Joe, **Individualism and Inequality**, available at:
http://world.std.com/\~bbrigade/TL anarchy and inequality.htm

Peirats, Jose, **Anarchists in the Spanish Revolution**, Freedom Press,
London, 1990.

Piercy, Marge, **Woman on the Edge of Time**, The Woman's Press, London,
1995.

Pouget, Emile , **Direct Action**, Kate Sharpley Library, London, 2003.

Proudhon, P-J, **What is Property: an inquiry into the principle of
right and of government**, William Reeves Bookseller Ltd., London, 1969.

Puente, Isaac, **Libertarian Communism**, Monty Miller Press, Sydney,
1985.

Purchase, Graham, **Evolution and Revolution: An Introduction to the
Life and Thought of Peter Kropotkin**, Jura Books, Petersham, Australia,
1996.

Quail, John, **The Slow Burning Fuse: The Lost History of the British
Anarchists**, Granada Publishing Ltd., London, 1978.

Read, Herbert, **Anarchy and Order: essays in politics**, Faber and
Faber Ltd, London, 1954.

Richards, Vernon, **Lessons of the Spanish Revolution**, 3rd Edition,
Freedom Press, London, 1983.

Richards, Vernon (ed.), **Neither Nationalisation nor Privatisation:
Selections from the Anarchist Journal Freedom 1945-1950**, Freedom
Press, London, 1989.

Rocker, Rudolf, **Anarcho-Syndicalism: Theory and Practice**, AK Press,
Edinburgh/Oakland, 2004.

Root & Branch (ed.), **Root & Branch: The Rise of the Workers
Movements**, Fawcett Publications, Greenwich, Conn., 1975.

Rooum, Donald, **What is Anarchism? An Introduction**, Freedom Press,
London, 1992.

Roussopoulos, Dimitrios I. (ed.), **The Radical Papers**, Black Rose
Books, Montreal/New York, 1987.

Russell, Bertrand, **The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism**, George
Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, 1949.

Sabatini, Peter, *"Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy"*, **Anarchy: A Journal
of Desire Armed**, no. 41, Fall/Winter 1994-5

Sacco, Nicola and Vanzetti, Bartolomeo, **The Letters of Sacco and
Vanzetti**, Penguin Books, New York, 1997.

Schmidt, Michael and Walt, Lucien van der, **Black Flame: The
Revolutionary Class Politics of Anarchism and Syndicalism**, AK Press,
Edinburgh/Oakland, 2009.

Scott, James C., **Seeing like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve
the Human Condition Have Failed**, Yale University Press, New Haven and
London, 1998.

Sheppard, Brian Oliver, **Anarchism vs. Primitivism**, See Sharpe Press,
Tuscon, 2003.

Shipway, Mark A. S., **Antiparliamentary Communism: The Movement for
Workers' Councils in Britain, 1917-45**, Palgrave Macmillan,
Basingstoke, 1988.

Sitrin, Marina (ed.), **Horizontalism: Voices of Popular Power in
Argentina**, AK Press, Oakland/Edinburgh, 2006.

Skirda, Alexandre, **Nestor Makhno Anarchy's Cossack: The struggle for
free soviets in the Ukraine 1917-1921**, AK Press, Edinburgh/Oakland,
2004

Smart, D.A. (ed.), **Pannekoek and Gorter's Marxism**, Pluto Press,
London, 1978.

Spooner, Lysander, **Natural Law**, available at
http://flag.blackened.net/liberty/spoonnat.html

Starhawk, *"Staying on the Streets,"* contained in **On Fire: The Battle
of Genoa and the anti-capitalist movement**, One Off Press, unknown,
2001.

Stirner, Max, **The Ego and Its Own**, Rebel Press, London, 1993.

Tolstoy, Leo, **The Kingdom of God is Within You: Christianity Not as a
Mystic Religion but as a New Theory of Life**, University of Nebraska
Press, London, 1984.

Trotwatch, **Carry on Recruiting! Why the Socialist Workers Party dumped
the 'downturn' in a 'dash for growth' and other party pieces**, AK
Press/Trotwatch, Glasgow, 1993.

Tucker, Benjamin R., **Instead of a Book, by a man too busy to write
one: a fragmentary exposition of philosophical anarchism culled from the
writings of Benj. R. Tucker**, Haskell House Publishers, New York, 1969.

Unofficial Reform Committee, **The Miner's Next Step: Being a suggested
scheme for the reorganisation of the Federation**, Germinal and Phoenix
Press, London, 1991.

Vaneigem, Raoul, **The Revolution of Everyday Life**, Rebel Press/Left
Bank Books, London, 1994.

Voline, **The Unknown Revolution**, Black & Red/Solidarity,
Detroit/Chicago, 1974.

Walter, Nicolas, **About Anarchism**, Freedom Press, London, 2002.

Ward, Colin, **Anarchy in Action** (2nd Edition), Freedom Press, London,
1982.

Ward, Colin (ed.), **A Decade of Anarchy: Selections from the Monthly
Journal Anarchy**, Freedom , London, 1987.

Ward, Colin and Goodway, David, **Talking Anarchy**, Five Leaves,
Nottingham, 2003.

Watson, David, **Beyond Bookchin: Preface for a Future Social Ecology**,
Autonomedia/Black and Red/Fifth Estate, USA, 1996.

Weick, David, *"Anarchist Justice"*, pp. 215-36, **Anarchism: Nomos
XIX**, J. Roland Pennock and John W. Chapman (eds.), New York University
Press, New York, 1978.

Weil, Simone, **Oppression and Liberty**, Routledge, London, 2001.

Wetzel, Tom, **The Origins of the Union Shop**, available at:
http://www.uncanny.net/\~wsa/union3.html

Wildcat Group (ed.), **Class War on the Home Front: Revolutionary
Opposition to the Second World War**, Wildcat Group, Manchester, 1986.

Wilde, Oscar, *"The Soul of Man Under Socialism"*, pp. 1174-1197,
**Complete works of Oscar Wilde**, HarperCollins Publishers, Glasgow,
1994.

Wilson, Charlotte, **Three Essays on Anarchism**, Drowned Rat
Publications, Cambridge, 1985.

Wilson, Robert Anton, **Natural Law: or don't put a rubber on your
willy**, Loompanics Ltd, Port Townsend, 1987.

Woodcock, George, **Anarchism: A History of libertarian ideas and
movements** (2nd Edition), Penguin Books, England, 1986.

Woodcock, G. and Avakumovic, I., **The Anarchist Prince**, Boardman,
London, 1950.

Zerzan, John, **Elements of Refusal**, Left Bank Books, Seattle, 1988.

Zinn, Howard, **A People's History of the United States**, 2nd Edition,
Longman, Essex, 1996.

Zinn, Howard and Arnove, Anthony (eds.), **Voices of a People's History
of the United States**, Seven Stories Press, New York, 2004.

Works about Anarchism
---------------------

Alexander, Robert, **The Anarchists in the Spanish Civil War** (2
vols.), Janus Publishing Company, London, 1999.

Anderson, Carlotta R., **All-American Anarchist: Joseph A. Labadie and
the Labor Movement**, Wayne State University Press, Detroit, 1998.

Apter, D. and Joll, J (Eds.), **Anarchism Today**, Macmillan, London,
1971.

Archer, Julian P. W., **The First International in France, 1864-1872:
Its Origins, Theories, and Impact**, University Press of America, Inc.,
Lanham/Oxford, 1997.

Cahm, C., **Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism
1872-1886**, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.

Carr, Edward Hallett, **Michael Bakunin**, Macmillan, London, 1937.

Coleman, Stephen and O'Sullivan, Paddy (eds.), **William Morris and News
from Nowhere: A Vision for Our Time**, Green Books, Bideford, 1990.

Coughlin, Michael E., Hamilton, Charles H. and Sullivan, Mark A. (eds.),
**Benjamin R. Tucker and the Champions of Liberty: A Centenary
Anthology**, Michael E. Coughlin Publisher, St. Paul, Minnesota, 1986.

Crowder, George, **Classical Anarchism: The Political Thought of Godwin,
Proudhon, Bakunin and Kropotkin**, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991.

Delamotte, Eugenia C., **Gates of Freedom: Voltairine de Cleyre and the
Revolution of the Mind -- With Selections from Her Writing**, The
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 2004.

Dirlik, Arif, **Anarchism in the Chinese Revolution**, University of
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1991.

Ehrenberg, John, **Proudhon and his Age**, Humanity Books, New York,
1996.

Esenwein, George Richard, **Anarchist Ideology and the Working Class
Movement in Spain, 1868-1898**, University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1989.

Guillamon, Agustin, **The Friends of Durruti Group: 1937-1939**, AK
Press, Edinburgh/San Francisco, 1996.

Guthke, Karl S., **B. Traven: The life behind the legends**, Lawrence
Hill Books, New York, 1991.

Hart, John M., **Anarchism and the Mexican Working Class, 1860-1931**,
University of Texas Press, Austin, 1987.

Holton, Bob, **British Syndicalism: 1900-1914: Myths and Realities**,
Pluto Press, London, 1976.

Hyams, Edward, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon: His Revolutionary Life, Mind
and Works**, John Murray, London, 1979.

Jackson, Corinne, **The Black Flag of Anarchy: Antistatism in the United
States**, Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1968.

Jennings, Jeremy, **Syndicalism in France: a study of ideas**,
Macmillan, London, 1990

Kline, Wm. Gary, **The Individualist Anarchists: A Critique of
Liberalism**, University Press of America, Lanham, Maryland, 1987.

Linden, Marcel van der and Thorpe, Wayne (eds.), **Revolutionary
Syndicalism: An International Perspective**, Scolar Press, Aldershort,
1990.

Merithew, Caroline Waldron, *"Anarchist Motherhood: Toward the making of
a revolutionary Proletariat in Illinois Coal towns"*, pp. 217-246, Donna
R. Gabaccoia and Franca Iacovetta (eds.), **Women, Gender, and
Transnational Lives: Italian Workers of the World**, University of
Toronto Press, Toronto, 2002.

Miller, Martin A., **Kropotkin**, The University of Chicago Press,
London, 1976.

Milner, Susan, **The Dilemmas of Internationalism: French Syndicalism
and the International Labour Movement 1900-1914**, Berg, New York, 1990.

Mintz, Jerome R., **The Anarchists of Casas Viejas**, Indiana University
Press, Bloomington, 1994.

Moya, Jose, *"Italians in Buenos Aires's Anarchist Movement: Gender
Ideology and Women's Participation, 1890-1910,"* pp. 189-216, Donna R.
Gabaccoia and Franca Iacovetta (eds.), **Women, Gender, and
Transnational Lives: Italian Workers of the World**, University of
Toronto Press, Toronto, 2002.

Oved, Yaacov, *"'Communsmo Libertario' and Communalism in Spanish
Collectivisations (1936-1939)"*, **The Raven: Anarchist Quarterly**, no.
17 (Vol. 5, No. 1), Jan-Mar 1992, Freedom Press, pp. 39-61.

Palij, Michael, **The Anarchism of Nestor Makhno, 1918-1921: An Aspect
of the Ukrainian Revolution**, University of Washington Press, Seattle,
1976.

Pernicone, Nunzio, **Italian Anarchism: 1864-1892**, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1993.

Pyziur, Eugene, **The Doctrine of Anarchism of Michael A. Bakunin**,
Marquette University Press, Milwaukee, 1955.

Ravindranathan, T. R., **Bakunin and the Italians**, McGill-Queen's
Univsersity Press, Kingston and Montreal, 1988.

Reichert, William O., **Partisans of Freedom: A study in American
Anarchism**, Bowling Green University Popular Press, Bowling Green,
Ohio, 1976.

Ritter, Alan, **The Political Thought of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1969.

Salerno, Salvatore, **Red November, Black November: Culture and
Community in the Industrial Workers of the World**, State University
Press of New York, Albany, 1989.

Saltman, Richard B., **The Social and Political Thought of Michael
Bakunin**, Greenwood Press, Westport Connecticut, 1983.

Schuster, Eunice, **Native American Anarchism : A Study of Left-Wing
American Individualism**, De Capo Press, New Yprk, 1970.

Sysyn, Frank, *"Nestor Makhno and the Ukrainian Revolution"*, contained
in Hunczak, Taras (ed.), **The Ukrainian, 1917-1921: A Study in
Revolution**, Harvard University Press, Massachusetts, 1977.

Taylor, Michael, **Community, Anarchy and Liberty**, Cambrdige
University Press, Cambridge, 1982.

Thomas, Edith, **Louise Michel**, Black Rose Books, Montreal, 1980.

Thomas, Matthew, **Anarchist ideas and counter-cultures in Britain,
1880-1914: revolutions in everyday life**, Aldershot, Ashgate, 2005.

Thorpe, Wayne, **"The Workers Themselves": Revolutionary Syndicalism and
International Labour, 1913-1923**, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, 1989.

Vincent, K. Steven, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and the Rise of French
Republican Socialism**, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1984.

Zarrow, Peter, **Anarchism and Chinese Political Culture**, Columbia
University Press, New York, 1990.

Non-Anarchist Works
-------------------

Adams, Arthur E., **Bolsheviks in the Ukraine : the second campaign,
1918-1919**, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1963

Anderson, Terry L. and Leal, Donald R., **Free Market
Environmentalism**, Pacific Research Institute for Public Policy, San
Francisco, 1991.

Anweiler, Oskar, **The Soviets: The Russian Workers, Peasants, and
Soldiers Councils 1905-1921**, Random House, New York, 1974.

Archer, Abraham (ed.), **The Mensheviks in the Russian Revolution**,
Thames and Hudson Ltd, London, 1976.

Arestis, Philip, **The Post-Keynesian Approach to Economics: An
Alternative Analysis of Economic Theory and Policy**, Edward Elgar
Publishing Ltd., Aldershot, 1992.

Armstrong, Philip, Glyn, Andrew and Harrison, John, **Capitalism Since
World War II: The making and breakup of the great boom**, Fontana,
London, 1984.

Arrow, Kenneth, *"Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for
Inventiveness,"* in National Bureau of Economic Research, **The Rate and
Direction of Inventive Activity**, Princeton University Press, 1962.

Aves, Jonathan, **Workers Against Lenin: Labour Protest and the
Bolshevik Dictatorship**, Tauris Academic Studies, London, 1996.

Bain, J.S., **Barriers in New Competition: Their Character and
Consequences in Manufacturing Industries**, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, 1967.

Bakan, Joel, **The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and
Power**, Constable, London, 2004.

Bakunin, Michael, **The Confession of Mikhail Bakunin**, Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, N.Y., 1977.

Bukharin, Nikolai, **Economy Theory of the Leisure Class**, Monthly
Press Review, New York/London, 1972.

Bagdikian, Ben H., **The New Media Monopoly**, Beacon Press, Boston,
2004.

Baldwin, William L., **Market Power, Competition and Anti-Trust
Policy**, Irwin, Homewood, Illinois, 1987.

Balogh, Thomas, **The Irrelevance of Conventional Economics**,
Weidenfield and Nicolson, London, 1982.

Baran, Paul A. and Sweezy, Paul M., **Monopoly Capital**, Monthly Press
Review, New York, 1966.

Barry, Brian, *"The Continuing Relevance of Socialism"*, in
**Thatcherism**, Robert Skidelsky (ed.), Chatto & Windus, London, 1988.

Beder, Sharon, **Global Spin: The Corporate Assault on
Environmentalism**, Green Books, Dartington, 1997.

Beevor, Antony, **The Spanish Civil War**, Cassell, London, 1999.

Berghahn, V. R., **Modern Germany: society, economy and politics in the
twentieth century**, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1987.

Berlin, Isaiah, **Four Essays on Liberty**, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1969.

Bernstein, Michael A., **The Great Depression: Delayed recovery and
Economic Change in America, 1929-1939**, Cambridge University Press, New
York, 1987.

Beynon, Huw, **Working for Ford**, Penguin Education, London, 1973.

Blanchflower, David and Oswald, Andrew, **The Wage Curve**, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass., 1994.

Blinder, Alan S. (ed.), **Paying for productivity: a look at the
evidence**, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C, 1990.

Blum, William, **Killing Hope: US Military and CIA Interventions Since
World War II**, 2nd edition, Zed Books, London, 2003.

Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen, **Capital and Interest**, Libertarian Press, South
Holland, Ill., 1959.

Bolloten, Burnett, **The Spanish Civil War: Revolution and Counter
Revolution**, Harvester-Wheatsheaf, New York, 1991.

Boucher, Douglas H. (ed.), **The Biology of Mutualism: Biology and
Evolution**, Croom Helm , London, 1985.

Bourne, Randolph, **Untimely Papers**, B.W. Huebsch, New York, 1919.

Bowles, Samuel and Edwards, Richard (Eds.), **Radical Political
Economy**, (two volumes), Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., Aldershot, 1990.

Bowles, Samuel and Gintis, Hebert, **Schooling in Capitalist America:
Education Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life**, Routledge &
Kegan Paul, London, 1976.

Braverman, Harry, **Labour and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work
in the Twentieth Century**, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1974.

Brecher, Jeremy, **Strike!**, South End Press, Boston, 1972.

Brecher, Jeremy and Costello, Tim, **Common Sense for Hard Times**,
Black Rose Books, Montreal, 1979.

Brenan, Gerald, **The Spanish Labyrinth: An Account of the Social and
Political of the Spanish Civil War**, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1976.

Broido, Vera, **Lenin and the Mensheviks: The Persecution of Socialists
under Bolshevism**, Gower Publishing Company Limited, Aldershot, 1987.

Brovkin, Vladimir N., **From Behind the Front Lines of the Civil War:
political parties and social movements in Russia, 1918-1922**, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J, 1994.

Brovkin, Vladimir N. (ed.), **The Bolsheviks in Russian Society: The
Revolution and Civil Wars**, Yale University Press, New Haven and
London, 1997.

Byock, Jesse, **Viking Age Iceland**, Penguin Books, London, 2001

Cahm, Eric and Fisera, Vladimir Claude (eds), **Socialism and
Nationalism**, Spokesman, Nottingham, 1978-80.

Carr, Edward Hallett, **The Bolshevik Revolution: 1917-1923**, in three
volumes, Pelican Books, 1966.

Carr, Raymond, **Spain: 1808-1975**, 2nd Edition, Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1982.

Carrier, James G. (ed.), **Meanings of the market: the free market in
western culture**, Berg, Oxford, 1997.

Chandler, Lester V., **America's Greatest Depression, 1929-1941**,
Harper & Row, New York/London, 1970.

Chang, Ha-Joon, **Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategy in
Historic Perspective**, Anthem Press, London, 2002.

Clark, J.B., **The Distribution of Wealth: A theory of wages, interest
and profits**, Macmillan, New York, 1927

Cliff, Tony, **Lenin: The Revolution Besieged**, vol. 3, Pluto Press,
London, 1978.

Cohen, Stephan F., **Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution**, Oxford
University Press, London, 1980.

Collins, Joseph and Lear, John, **Chile's Free-Market Miracle: A Second
Look**, Institute for Food and Development Policy, Oakland, 1995.

Communist International, **Proceedings and Documents of the Second
Congress 1920**, (in two volumes), Pathfinder, New York, 1991.

Confino, Michael (ed.), **Daughter of a Revolutionary: Natalie Herzen
and the Bakunin-Nechayev Circle**, Library Press, LaSalle Illinois,
1973.

Cowen, Tyler, *"Law as a Public Good: The Economics of Anarchy"*,
**Economics and Philosophy**, no. 8 (1992), pp. 249-267.

Cowling, Keith, **Monopoly Capitalism**, MacMillian, London, 1982.

Cowling, Keith and Sugden, Roger, **Transnational Monopoly Capitalism**,
Wheatshelf Books, Sussez, 1987.

Curry, Richard O. (ed.), **Freedom at Risk: Secrecy, Censorship, and
Repression in the 1980s**, Temple University Press, 1988.

Curtis, Mark, **Web of Deceit: Britain's real role in the world**,
Vintage, London, 2003.

Daniels, Robert V., **The Conscience of the Revolution: Communist
Opposition in Soviet Russia**, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
1960.

Daniels, Robert V. (ed.), **A Documentary History of Communism**, vol.
1, Vintage Books, New York, 1960.

Davidson, Paul, **Controversies in Post-Keynesian Economics**, E. Elgar,
Brookfield, Vt., USA, 1991.

Davis, Mike, **Late Victorian Holocausts: El Niño Famines and the Making
of the Third World**, Verso, London, 2002.

Denikin, General A., **The White Armies**, Jonathan Cape, London, 1930.

DeShazo, Peter, **Urban Workers and Labor Unions in Chile 1902-1927**,
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1983.

Deutscher, Isaac, **The prophet unarmed : Trotsky 1921-1929**, Oxford
University Press, 1959.

Devine, Pat, **Democracy and Economic Planning**, Polity, Cambridge,
1988.

Dobbs, Maurice, **Studies in Capitalist Development**, Routledge & Kegan
Paul Ltd., London, 1963.

Dobson, Ross V. G., **Bringing the Economy Home from the Market**, Black
Rose Books, Montreal, 1993.

Domhoff, G. William, **Who Rules America Now? A view from the '80s**,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1983.

Donaldson, Peter, **A Question of Economics**, Penguin Books, London,
1985.

Dorril, Stephen and Ramsay, Robin, **Smear! Wilson and the Secret
State**, Fourth Estate Ltd., London, 1991.

Douglass, Frederick, **The Life and Writings of Frederick Douglass**,
vol. 2, Philip S. Foner (ed.) International Publishers, New York, 1975.

Draper, Hal, **The 'dictatorship of the proletariat' from Marx to
Lenin**, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1987.

Du Boff, Richard B., **Accumulation and Power: an economic history of
the United States**, M.E. Sharpe, London, 1989.

Dubois, Pierre, **Sabotage in Industry**, Penguin Books, London, 1979.

Eastman, Max, **Since Lenin Died**, Boni and Liveright, New York, 1925.

Eatwell, Roger and Wright, Anthony (eds.), **Contemporary political
ideologies**, Pinter, London, 1993.

Edwards, Stewart, **The Paris Commune 1871**, Victorian (& Modern
History) Book Club, Newton Abbot, 1972.

Edwards, Stewart (ed.), **The Communards of Paris, 1871**, Thames and
Hudson, London, 1973.

Eisler, Rianne, **Sacred Pleasure**,

Ellerman, David P., **Property and Contract in Economics: The Case for
Economic Democracy**, Blackwell, Oxford, 1992.

Elliot, Larry and Atkinson, Dan, **The Age of Insecurity**, Verso,
London, 1998.

Engler, Allan, **Apostles of Greed: Capitalism and the myth of the
individual in the market**, Pluto Press, London, 1995.

Faiwel, G. R., **The Intellectual Capital of Michal Kalecki: A study in
economic theory and policy**, University of Tennessee Press, 1975.

Farber, Samuel, **Before Stalinism: The Rise and Fall of Soviet
Democracy**, Polity Press, Oxford, 1990.

Fedotoff-White, D., **The Growth of the Red Army**, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1944.

Ferguson, C. E., **The Neo-classical Theory of Production and
Distribution**, Cambridge University Press, London, 1969.

Ferro, Marc, **October 1917: A social history of the Russian
Revolution**, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1980.

Figes, Orlando, **A People's Tragedy: The Russian Revolution
1891-1924**, Jonathan Cape, London, 1996.

Flamm, Kenneth, **Creating the Computer: Government, Industry, and High
Technology**, The Brookings Institution, Washington D.C., 1988.

Forgacs, David (ed.), **Rethinking Italian fascism: capitalism, populism
and culture**, Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1986.

Fraser, Ronald, **Blood of Spain: the experience of civil war,
1936-1939**, Allen Lane, London, 1979.

French, Marilyn, **Beyond Power: On Women, Men, and Morals**, Summit
Books, 1985.

Frenkel-Brunswick, Else, **The Authoritarian Personality**,

Friedman, David, **The Machinery of Freedom**, Harper and Row, New York,
1973.

Friedman, Milton, **Capitalism and Freedom**, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 2002.

Funnell, Warrick, Jupe, Robert and Andrew, Jane, **In Government we
Trust: Market Failure and the delusions of privatisation**, Pluto Press,
London, 2009.

Gaffney, Mason and Harrison, Mason, **The Corruption of Economics**,
Shepheard-Walwyn (Publishers) Ltd., London, 1994.

Galbraith, James K., **Created Unequal: The Crisis in American Pay**,
The Free Press, New York, 1999.

Galbraith, John Kenneth, **The Essential Galbraith**, Houghton Mifflin
Company, New York, 2001.

Gemie, Sharif, **French Revolutions, 1815-1914**, Edinburgh University
Press, Edinburgh, 1999.

Getzler, Israel, **Kronstadt 1917-1921: The Fate of a Soviet
Democracy**, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.

Gilmour, Ian, **Dancing with Dogma, Britain Under Thatcherism**, Simon
and Schuster, London, 1992.

Glennerster, Howard and Midgley, James (eds.), **The Radical Right and
the Welfare State: an international assessment**, Harvester Wheatsheaf,
1991.

Gluckstein, Donny, **The Tragedy of Bukharin**, Pluto Press, London,
1994

Glyn, Andrew, **Capitalism Unleashed: Finance Globalisation and
Welfare**, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006.

Glyn, Andrew and Miliband, David (eds.), **Paying for Inequality: The
Economic Costs of Social Injustice**, IPPR/Rivers Oram Press, London,
1994.

Goodstein, Phil H., **The Theory of the General Strike from the French
Revolution to Poland**, East European Monographs, Boulder, 1984.

Gould, Stephan Jay, **Ever Since Darwin: Reflections in Natural
History**, Penguin Books, London, 1991.

Gramsci, Antonio, **Selections from Political Writings (1921-1926)**,
Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1978.

Gray, John, **False Dawn: The Delusions of Global Capitalism**, Granta
Books, London, 1998.

Green, Duncan, **Silent Revolution: The Rise of Market Economics in
Latin America**, Cassell, London, 1995.

Greider, William, **One World, Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global
Capitalism**, Penguin Books, London, 1997.

Gross, Bertram, **Friendly Fascism**, South End Press, Boston, 1989.

Gunn, Christopher Eaton, **Workers' Self-Management in the United
States**, Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 1984.

Gunson, P., Thompson, A. and Chamberlain, G., **The Dictionary of
Contemporary Politics of South America**, Routledge, 1989.

Hahnel, Robin and Albert, Michael, **The Quiet Revolution in Welfare
Economics**, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1990.

Hallas, Duncan, **The Comintern**, Bookmarks, London, 1985.

Harding, Neil, **Leninism**, MacMillan Press, London, 1996.

Harman, Chris, **Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe**, Pluto
Press, London, 1974.

Hastrup, Kirsten, **Culture and History in Medieval Iceland**, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1985.

Hatch, John B., *"Labour Conflict in Moscow, 1921-1925"* contained in
**Russia in the Era of NEP: explorations in Soviet society and
culture**, Fitzpatrick, Sheila, Rabinowitch, Alexander and Stites,
Richard (eds.), Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 1991.

Hawkins, Howard, *"Community Control, Workers' Control and the
Co-operative Commonwealth"*, **Society and Nature**, no. 3, vol. 1, no.
3, pp. 55-85.

Haworth, Alan, **Anti-Libertarianism: Markets, Philosophy and Myth**,
Routledge, London, 1994.

Hayek, F. A. von, **The Essence of Hayek**, Chiaki Nishiyama and Kurt
Leube (Eds.), Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, 1984

Hayek, F. A. von (ed.), **Collectivist Economic Planning**, Routledge
and Kegan Paul, London, 1935.

Hayward, Jack, **After the French Revolution: Six critics of Democracy
and Nationalism**, Harvester Wheatsheaf, Hemel Hempstead, 1991.

Heider, Ulrike, **Anarchism: left, right, and green**, City Lights
Books, San Francisco, 1994.

Hein, Eckhard and Schulten, Thorsten, **Unemployment, Wages and
Collective Bargaining in the European Union**, WSI\_Discussion Paper No.
128, Witschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftliches Institut, Dusseldorf,
2004.

Henwood, Doug, **Wall Street: How it works and for whom**, Verso,
London, 1998.

Herbert, Auberon, *"Essay X: The Principles Of Voluntaryism And Free
Life"*, **The Right And Wrong Of Compulsion By The State, And Other
Essays**, available at:
http://oll.libertyfund.org/Texts/LFBooks/Herbert0120/CompulsionByState/HTMLs/0146\_Pt11\_Principles.html

Herman, Edward S., **Beyond Hypocrisy**, South End Press, Boston, 1992.

Herman, Edward S. and Chomsky, Noam, **Manufacturing Consent: the
political economy of the mass media**, Pantheon Books, New York, 1988.

Heywood, Paul, **Marxism and the Failure of Organised Socialism in Spain
1879-1936**, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.

Hicks, J. R., **Value and capital: an inquiry into some fundamental
principles of economic theory**, 2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1975.

Hills, John, **Inequality and the State**, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2004.

Hobsbawm, Eric, **Primitive Rebels: Studies in Archaic Forms of Social
Movements in the 19th and 20th Centuries**, 2nd Edition, W. W. Norton
and Co., New Yprk, 1965.

Hodgskin, Thomas, **Labour Defended against the Claims of Capital**,
available at:
http://socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/\~econ/ugcm/3ll3/hodgskin/labdef.txt

Hollis, Martin and Edward Nell, **Rational Economic Man: A Philosophical
Critique of Neo-classic Economics**, Cambridge University Press, London,
1975.

Hodgson, Geoffrey Martin, **Economics and Utopia: why the learning
economy is not the end of history**, Routledge, London/New York, 1999.

Hoppe, Hans-Hermann, **Democracy: The God That Failed: The Economics and
Politics of Monarchy, Democracy, and Natural Order**, Transaction, 2001.

Holt, Richard P. F. and Pressman, Steven (eds.), **A New Guide to Post
Keynesian Economics**, Routledge, London, 2001.

Howell, David R. (ed.), **Fighting Unemployment: The Limits of Free
Market Orthodoxy**, Oxford University Press, New York, 2005.

Hutton, Will, **The State We're In**, Vintage, London, 1996.

Hutton, Will and Giddens, Anthony (eds.), **On The Edge: living with
global capitalism**, Jonathan Cape, London, 2000.

ISG, **Discussion Document of Ex-SWP Comrades**, available at:
http://www.angelfire.com/journal/iso/isg.html

Jackson, Gabriel, **The Spanish Republic and the Civil War, 1931-1939**,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1965.

Johnson, Martin Phillip, **The Paradise of Association: Political
Culture and Popular Organisation in the Paris Commune of 1871**,
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1996

Kaldor, Nicholas, **Further Essays on Applied Economics**, Duckworth,
London, 1978.

Kaplan, Frederick I., **Bolshevik Ideology and the Ethics of Soviet
Labour, 1917-1920: The Formative Years**, Peter Owen, London, 1969.

Kaplan, Temma, **Anarchists of Andalusia: 1868-1903**, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965.

Katouzian, Homa, **Ideology and Method in Economics**, MacMillian Press
Ltd., London, 1980.

Kautsky, Karl, **The road to power: political reflections on growing
into the revolution**, Humanities Press, Atlantic Highlands, 1996.

Keen, Steve, **Debunking Economics: The Naked Emperor of the social
sciences**, Pluto Press Australia, Annandale, 2001.

Keynes, John Maynard, **The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money**, MacMillan Press, London, 1974.

Kerhohan, Andrew, *"Capitalism and Self-Ownership"*, from
**Capitalism**, pp. 60-76, Paul, Ellen Frankel, Fred D. Miller Jr.,
Jeffrey Paul and John Ahrens (eds.), Basil Blackwood, Oxford, 1989.

Kindleberger, Charles P., **Manias, Panics, and Crashes: a history of
financial crises**, 2nd Edition, Macmillan, London, 1989.

King, J.E., **A history of post Keynesian economics since 1936**, Edward
Elgar, Cheltenham, 2002

Kirzner, Israel M., *"Entrepreneurship, Entitlement, and Economic
Justice"*, pp. 385-413, in **Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State
and Utopia**, Jeffrey Paul (ed.), Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1982.

Klein, Naomi, **No Logo**, Flamingo, London, 2001.

Koenker, Diane P., *"Labour Relations in Socialist Russia: Class Values
and Production Values in the Printers' Union, 1917-1921,"* pp. 159-193,
Siegelbaum, Lewis H., and Suny, Ronald Grigor (eds.), **Making Workers
Soviet: power, class, and identity**, Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
1994.

Koenker, Diane P., Rosenberg, William G. and Suny, Ronald Grigor (eds.),
**Party, State, and Society in the Russian Civil War**, Indiana
University Press, Indiana, 1989.

Kohn, Alfie, **No Contest: The Case Against Competition**, Houghton
Mufflin Co., New York, 1992.

Kollontai, Alexandra, **The Workers Opposition**, Solidarity, London,
date unknown.

Kowalski, Ronald I., **The Bolshevik Party in Conflict: the left
communist opposition of 1918**, Macmillan, Basingstoke, 1990.

Krause, Peter, **The Battle for Homestead, 1880-1892: politics, culture,
and steel**, University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh/London, 1992

Krugman, Paul, **Peddling Prosperity: Economic Sense and Nonsense in the
Age of Diminished Expectations**, NW Norton & Co., New York/London,
1994.

Krugman, Paul and Wells, Robin, **Economics**, W. H. Freeman, New York,
2006.

Kuhn, Thomas S., **The Structure of Scientific Revolutions**, 3rd ed.,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1996.

Kuznets, Simon, **Economic Growth and Structure: Selected Essays**,
Heineman Educational Books, London, 1966.

Lange, Oskar and Taylor, Fred M., **On the Economic Theory of
Socialism**, Benjamin Lippincott (ed.), University of Minnesota Press,
New York, 1938.

Laqueur, Walter (ed.), **Fascism: a Reader's Guide**, Harmondsworth,
Penguin, 1979.

Lazonick, William, **Business Organisation and the Myth of the Market
Economy**, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991.

Lear, John, **Workers, Neighbors, and Citizens: The Revolution in Mexico
City**, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, 2001.

Lee, Frederic S., **Post Keynesian Price Theory**, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1998

Leggett, George, **The Cheka: Lenin's Political Police**, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1981.

Lenin, V. I., **Essential Works of Lenin**, Henry M. Christman (ed.),
Bantam Books, New York, 1966.

Lenin, V. I., and Trotsky, Leon, **Kronstadt**, Monad Press, New York,
1986.

Levin, Michael, **Marx, Engels and Liberal Democracy**, MacMillan Press,
London, 1989.

Lichtenstein, Nelson and Howell, John Harris (eds.), **Industrial
Democracy in America: The Ambiguous Promise**, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1992

List, Friedrich, **The Natural System of Political Economy**, Frank
Cass, London, 1983.

Lovell, David W., **From Marx to Lenin: An evaluation of Marx's
responsibility for Soviet authoritarianism**, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1984.

Luxemburg, Rosa, **Rosa Luxemburg Speaks**, Mary-Alice Waters (ed.),
Pathfinder Press, New York, 1970.

MacPherson, C.B., **The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism:
Hobbes to Locke**, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1964.

Malle, Silvana, **The Economic Organisation of War Communism,
1918-1921**, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1985.

Mandel, David, **The Petrograd Workers and the Soviet Seizure of Power:
from the July days 1917 to July 1918**, MacMillan, London, 1984.

Marglin, Steven, *"What do Bosses Do?"*, **Review of Radical Political
Economy**, Vol. 6, No.2, New York, 1974.

Marshall, Alfred, **Principles of Economics: An Introductory Volume**,
9th Edition (in 2 volumes), MacMillian, London, 1961.

Martin, Benjamin, **The Agony of Modernisation: Labour and
Industrialisation in Spain**, ICR Press, Cornell University, 1990.

Martov, J., **The State and Socialist Revolution**, Carl Slienger,
London, 1977.

Marx, Karl, **Capital: A Critique of Political Economy**, vol. 1,
Penguin Books, London, 1976.

Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick, **Selected Works**, Progress
Publishers, Moscow, 1975.

Marx, Karl, Engels, Federick and Lenin, V.I., **Anarchism and
Anarcho-Syndicalism**, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1974.

Matthews, R.C.O. (ed.), **Economy and Democracy**, MacMillan Press Ltd.,
London, 1985.

McAuley, Mary, **Bread and Justice: State and Society in Petrograd
1917-1922**, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991.

McElroy, Wendy, **Anarchism: Two Kinds**, available at:
http://www.wendymcelroy.com/mises/twoanarchism.html

McLay, Farguhar (ed.), **Workers City: The Real Glasgow Stands Up**,
Clydeside Press, Glasgow, 1988.

McNally, David, **Against the Market: Political Economy, Market
Socialism and the Marxist Critique**, Verso, London, 1993.

Mehring, Franz, **Karl Marx: The Story of his life**, John Lane, London,
1936.

Miliband, Ralph, **Divided societies: class struggle in contemporary
capitalism**, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989.

Mill, John Stuart, **Principles of Political Economy**, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1994.

Miller, David, **Social Justice**, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1976.

Miller, William Ian, **Bloodtaking and Peacemaking: Feud, Law and
Society in Saga Iceland**, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1990.

Mills, C. Wright, **The Power Elite**, Oxford University Press, London,
1956.

Milne, S., **The Enemy Within**, Verso, London, 1994.

Minsky, Hyman, **Inflation, Recession and Economic Policy**, Wheatsheaf
Books, Sussex, 1982.

Mises, Ludwig von, **Liberalism: A Socio-Economic Exposition**, Sheed
Andres and McMeek Inc., Kansas City, 1978.

Montagu, Ashley, **The Nature of Human Aggression**, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1978.

Montgomery, David, **Beyond Equality: Labour and the Radical
Republicans, 1862-1872**, Vintage Books, New York, 1967.

Moore, Michael, **Downsize This! Random Threats from an Unarmed
America**, Boxtree, London, 1997.

Morrow, Felix, **Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Spain**,
Pathfinder Press, New York, 1974.

Mumford, Lewis, **The Future of Technics and Civilisation**, Freedom
Press, London, 1986.

Negri, Antonio, **Marx Beyond Marx**, Autonomedia, Brooklyn, 1991.

Neill, A.S, **Summerhill: a Radical Approach to Child Rearing**,
Penguin, 1985.

Newman, Stephen L., **Liberalism at wit's end: the libertarian revolt
against the modern state**, Cornell University Press, 1984.

Noble, David, **America by Design: Science, technology, and the rise of
corporate capitalism**, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1979.

Nove, Alec, **An economic history of the USSR: 1917-1991**, 3rd ed.,
Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1992.

Nozick, Robert, **Anarchy, State and Utopia**, B. Blackwell, Oxford,
1974.

Oestreicher, Richard Jules, **Solidarity and fragmentation: working
people and class consciousness in Detroit, 1875-1900**, University of
Illinois Press, Urbana, 1986.

Ollman, Bertell (ed.), **Market Socialism: The Debate Among
Socialists**, Routledge, London, 1998.

O'Neill, John, **Markets, Deliberation and Environment**, Routledge,
Oxon, 2007.

Oppenheimer, Franz, **The State**, Free Life Editions, New York, 1975.

Ormerod, Paul, **The Death of Economics**, Faber and Faber Ltd., London,
1994.

Orwell, George, **Homage to Catalonia**, Penguin, London, 1989.

Pagano, U. and Rowthorn, R. E. (eds.), **Democracy and Efficiency in
Economic Enterprises**, Routledge, London, 1996.

Palley, Thomas I., **Plenty of Nothing: The Downsizing of the American
Dream and the case for Structural Keynesian**, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1998.

Paul, Ellen Frankel. Miller, Jr., Fred D. Paul, Jeffrey and Greenberg,
Dan (eds.), **Socialism**, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1989.

Perrin, David A., **The Socialist Party of Great Britain: Politics,
Economics and Britain's Oldest Socialist Party**, Bridge Books, Wrexham,
2000.

Petras, James and Leiva, Fernando Ignacio, **Democracy and Poverty in
Chile: The Limits to Electoral Politics**, Westview Press, Boulder,
1994.

Pipes, R., **Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime, 1919-1924**, Fontana
Press, London, 1995.

Pirani, Simon, **The Russian revolution in retreat, 1920-24: Soviet
workers and the new Communist elite**, Routledge, New York, 2008

Phillips, Kevin, **The Politics of Rich and Poor: Wealth and the
American Electorate in the Reagan Aftermath**, Random House, New York,
1990.

Polanyi, Karl, **The Great Transformation: the political and economic
origins of our time**, Beacon Press, Boston, 1957.

Popper, Karl, **Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific
Knowledge**, Basic, New York, 1965.

Preston, Paul, **The coming of the Spanish Civil War: reform, reaction,
and revolution in the Second Republic**, 2nd ed., Routledge, London/New
York, 1994.

Preston, Paul (ed.), **Revolution and War in Spain 1931-1939**, Methuen,
London, 1984.

Prychitko, David L., **Markets, Planning and Democracy: essays after the
collapse of communism**, Edward Elgar, Northampton, 2002.

Rabinowitch, Alexander, **Prelude to Revolution: The Petrograd
Bolsheviks and the July 1917 Uprising**, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, 1991.

Rabinowitch, Alexander and Janet with Kristof, Ladis K.D. (eds.),
**Revolution and politics in Russia: essays in memory of B.I.
Nicolaevsky**, Indiana University Press for the International Affairs
Center, Bloomington/London, 1973.

Radcliff, Pamela Beth, **From mobilization to civil war: the politics of
polarization in the Spanish city of Gijon, 1900-1937**, Cambridge
University Press, New York, 1996.

Radin, Paul, **The World of Primitive Man**, Grove Press, New York,
1960.

Raleigh, Donald J., **Experiencing Russia's Civil War: Politics,
Society, and Revolutionary Culture in Saratov, 1917-1921**, Princeton
University Press, Woodstock, 2002.

Rand, Ayn, **Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal**, New American Library, New
York, 1966.

Ransome, Arthur, **The Crisis in Russia 1920**, Redwords, London, 1992.

Rayack, Elton, **Not So Free To Choose: The Political Economy of Milton
Friedman and Ronald Reagan**, Praeger, New York, 1987.

Read, Christopher, **From Tsar to Soviets: The Russian people and their
revolution, 1917-21**, UCL Press, London, 1996.

Reed, John, **Ten Days that shook the World**, Penguin Books, 1982.

Reekie, W. Duncan, **Markets, Entrepreneurs and Liberty: An Austrian
View of Capitalism**, Wheatsheaf Books Ltd., Sussex, 1984.

Reich, Wilhelm, **The Mass Psychology of Fascism**, Condor Book,
Souvenir Press (E&A) Ltd., USA, 1991.

Reitzer, George, **The McDonaldization of Society: An Investigation into
the changing character of contemporary social life**, Pine Forge Press,
Thousand Oaks, 1993.

Remington, Thomas F., **Building Socialism in Bolshevik Russia: Ideology
and Industrial Organisation 1917-1921**, University of Pittsburgh Press,
London, 1984.

Richardson, Al (ed.), **In defence of the Russian revolution: a
selection of Bolshevik writings, 1917-1923**, Porcupine Press, London,
1995.

Ricardo, David, **The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation**,
J.M. Dent & Sons/Charles E. Tuttle Co., London/Vermont, 1992.

Ridgeway, James, **Blood in the Face: The Ku Klux Klan, Aryan Nations,
Nazi Skinheads, and the Rise of a New White Culture**, Thunder's Mouth
Press, 1990.

Roberts, David D., **The Syndicalist Tradition and Italian Fascism**,
University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1979.

Robertson, Dennis, *"Wage-grumbles"*, **Economic Fragments**, pp. 42-57,
in W. Fellner and B. Haley (eds.), **Readings in the theory of income
distribution**, The Blakiston, Philadephia, 1951.

Robinson, Joan, **The Accumulation of Capital** (2nd Edition),
MacMillan, St. Martin's Press, 1965.

Rodrik, Dani, **Comments on 'Trade, Growth, and Poverty by D. Dollar and
A. Kraay**, available at:
http://ksghome.harvard.edu/\~drodrik/Rodrik%20on%20Dollar-Kraay.PDF

Rollins, L.A., **The Myth of Natural Rights**, Loompanics Unlimited,
Port Townsend, 1983.

Rose, Steven, Lewontin, R.C. and Kamin, Leon J., **Not in Our Genes:
Biology, Ideology and Human Nature**, Penguin Books, London, 1990.

Rosenberg, William G., *"Russian Labour and Bolshevik Power*, pp.
98-131, **The Workers Revolution in Russia: the view from below**, D.
Kaiser (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987.

Rosnick, David and Weisbrot, Mark, **Are Shorter Work Hours Good for the
Environment? A Comparison of U.S. and European Energy Consumption**,
available at:
http://www.cepr.net/documents/publications/energy\_2006\_12.pdf

Rothbard, Murray N., **The Ethics of Liberty**, Humanities Press,
Atlantic Highlands, N.J., 1982.

Rousseau, J-J, **The Social Contract and Discourses**, Everyman, London,
1996.

Rowbotham, Sheila, **Hidden from History: 300 Years of Women's
Oppression and the fight against it**, Pluto Press, London, 1977.

RSDLP, **Minutes of the Second Congress of the RSDLP**, New Park
Publications, London, 1978.

St. Clair, David, **The Motorization of American Cities**, Praeger, New
York, 1986.

Sakwa, Richard, **Soviet Communists in Power: a study of Moscow during
the Civil War, 1918-21**, Macmillan, Basingstoke, 1987.

Sawyer, Malcolm C., **The Economics of Michal Kalecki**, MacMillan,
Basingstoke, 1985.

Schapiro, Leonard, **The Origin of the Communist Autocracy: Political
Opposition in the Soviet State: The First Phase, 1917-1922**, Frederick
A. Praeger, New York, 1965.

Schlosser, Eric, **Fast Food Nation: What the all-american meal is doing
to the world**, Allen Lane, London, 2001.

Schneider, Cathy Lisa, **Shantytown protest in Pinochet's Chile**,
Temple University Press, Philadelphia, 1995.

Schor, Juliet B., **The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline of
Leisure**, BasicBooks, New York, 1992.

Schorske, C., **German Social Democracy, 1905-1917**, Cambridge, Mass.,
1955.

Schulkind, Eugene (ed.), **The Paris Commune of 1871: The View from the
Left**, Jonathan Cape, London, 1972.

Schumacher, E.F., **Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if
people mattered**, Vintage, London, 1993.

Schweickart, David **Against Capitalism**, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1993.

Sen, Amartya, **Resources, Values and Development**, Basil Blackwell,
Oxford, 1984.

Senior, Nassau, **An Outline of the Science of Political Economy**, Alan
& Unwin, London, 1951

Serge, Victor, **Memoirs of a Revolutionary 1901-41**, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1963.

Service, Robert, **The Bolshevik Party in Revolution: A Study of
Organisational change**, Macmillan, London, 1979.

Silk L., and Vogel, D., **Ethics and Profits: The Crisis of Confidence
in American Business**, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1976.

Sirianni, Carmen, **Workers' Control and Socialist Democracy**,
Verso/NLB, London, 1982.

Shanin, Teodor, **The Awkward Class: Political Sociology of Peasantry in
a Developing Society: Russia 1910-1925**, Oxford University Press,
London, 1972.

Skidelsky, Robert (ed.), **Thatcherism**, Chatto & Windus, London, 1988.

Skidmore, Thomas E. and Smith, Peter H., **Modern Latin America**,
Second Edition, Oxford University Press, 1989.

Smith, Adam, **The Wealth of Nations**, Everyman's Library, London,
1991.

Smith, S.A., **Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories 1917-1918**,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.

Solvason, Birgir T. Runolfsson, **Ordered Anarchy, State and
Rent-seeking: The Iceland Commonwealth, 930-1262**, available at
http://www.hag.hi.is/\~bthru/ritgerd.htm

Sorel, Georges, **Reflections on Violence**, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1999.

Sorenson, Jay B., **The Life and Death of Soviet Trade Unionism:
1917-1928**, Atherton Press, New York, 1969.

Spriano, Paolo, **The Occupation of the Factories: Italy 1920**, Pluto
Press, London, 1975.

Staub, Ervin, **The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and Other
Group Violence**, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000

Stauber, John, and Sheldon Rampton, **Toxic Sludge is good for you!
Lies, Damn Lies and the Public Relations Industry**, Common Courage
Press, Monroe, Maine, 1995.

Steinberg, I., **Spiridonova: revolutionary terrorist**, Methuen,
London, 1935.

Steinbeck, John, **The Grapes of Wrath**, Mandarin, London, 1990.

Stewart, Michael, **Keynes in the 1990s: A Return to Economic Sanity**,
Penguin Books, London, 1993.

Stiglitz, Joseph, **Globalisation and its Discontents**, Penguin Books,
London, 2002.

Stretton, Hugh, **Economics: A New Introduction**, Pluto Press, London,
2000.

Swain, Geoffrey, **The Origins of the Russian Civil War**, Longman,
London/New York, 1996.

Sweezy, Paul, **Theory of Capitalist Development**, Monthly Review
Press, New York, 1942.

Targetti, Ferdinando, **Nicholas Kaldor: The Economics and Politics of
Capitalism as a Dynamic System**, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992.

Taylor, M. W., **Men versus the state: Herbert Spencer and late
Victorian individualism**, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992.

Taylor, Michael W. (ed.), **Herbert Spencer and the Limits of the State:
The Late Nineteenth-Century Debate Between Individualism and
Collectivism**, St. Augustine's Press, 1997.

Thomas, Hugh, **The Spanish Civil War**, Hamish Hamilton, London, 1986.

Thomas, Paul, **Karl Marx and the Anarchists**, Routledge & Kegan Paul
plc, London, 1985.

Tomlins, Christopher L., **Law, Labor, and Ideology in the Early
American Republic**, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1993.

Thompson, E.P., **The Making of the English Working Class**, Penguin
Books, London, 1991.

Thompson, Noel, **The Real Rights of Man: Political Economies for the
Working Class, 1775-1850**, Pluto Press, London, 1998.

Ticktin, Hillel and Cox, Michael (eds.), **The Ideas of Leon Trotsky**,
Porcupine Press, London, 1995.

Trotsky, Leon, **History of the Russian Revolution**, in three volumes,
Gollancz and Sphere Books, London, 1967.

Turner, Adai, **Just Capital: The Liberal Economy**, Pan Books, London,
2002.

Utton, M. A., **The Political Economy of Big Business**, Martin
Robinson, Oxford, 1982.

Wade, Robert, **Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the role of
government in East Asian Industrialisation**, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1990.

Walford, George, **George Walford on Anarcho-Capitalism**, available at
http://flag.blackened.net/liberty/walford-on-anarcap.html

Wallerstein, Immanuel, **Geopolitics and Geoculture**, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1991.

Walras, L, **Elements of Pure Political Economy**, Allen and Unwin,
London, 1954.

Ward, Benjamin, **What's Wrong with Economics?**, Basic Books, New York,
1972

Ware, Norman, **The Industrial Worker 1840-1860: The Reaction of
American Industrial Society to the Advance of the Industrial
Revolution**, Elephant Paperbacks, Chicago, 1924.

Watson, Andrew, **From Red to Green: Green Politics and environmentalism
cannot save the environment. A socialist politics can**, Privately
Published, 1990.

Weisbrot, Mark, **Globalisation for Whom?**, available at:
http://www.cepr.net/Globalization.html

Weisbrot, Mark, Baker, Dean, Kraev, Egor and Chen, Judy, **The Scorecard
on Globalization 1980-2000: Twenty Years of Diminished Progress**,
available at:
http://www.cepr.net/publications/globalization\_2001\_07\_11.htm

Weisbrot, Mark, Baker, Dean, Naiman, Robert and Neta, Gila, **Growth May
Be Good for the Poor -- But are IMF and World Bank Policies Good for
Growth?** available at:
http://www.cepr.net/publications/econ\_growth\_2001\_05.htm

Weisbrot, Mark and Rosnick, David, **Another Lost Decade?: Latin
America's Growth Failure Continues into the 21st Century**, available
at: http://www.cepr.net/publications/latin\_america\_2003\_11.htm

Wilkinson, Richard and Pickett, Kate, **The Spirit Level: Why More Equal
Societies Almost Always Do Better**, Allen Lane, London, 2009.

Williams, Gwyn A., **Proletarian Order: Antonio Gramsci, factory
councils and the origins of Italian Communism, 1911-1921**, Pluto Press,
London, 1975.

Wilson, H., **The Labour Government 1964-1970**, London, 1971.

Wilkinson, Richard and Pickett, Kate, **The Spirit Level: Why More Equal
Societies Almost Always Do Better**, Allen Lane, London, 2009.

Winn, Peter (ed.), **Victims of the Chilean Miracle: Workers and
Neoliberalism in the Pinochet Era, 1973-2002**, Duke University Press,
Durham and London, 2004.

Wolff, Edward N., **Top Heavy: A Study of Increasing Inequality in
America**, Twentieth Century Fund, 1995

Wolff, Jonathan, **Robert Nozick: Property, Justice and the Minimal
State**, Polity Press, Oxford, 1991.

Wray, L. Randall, **Money and Credit in Capitalist Economies: the
endogenous money approach**, Aldershot, Elgar, 1990.

Zinoviev, Grigorii, **History of the Bolshevik Party: A Popular
Outline**, New Park Publications, London, 1973.
