Introduction
============

Here is a list of all the new additions to the FAQ. An list of older
changes can found [here](oldnew.html).

The version number of the FAQ changes as follows. A major change results
in then the version number is increased by one (from version 10.2 to
version 11, for example). If a minor change is being made then the
current version is increased by 0.1 (for example, from version 10.2 to
10.3).

As far as new anarchist and libertarian links are concerned, we will add
them when we get enough to make an update worthwhile. These updates have
no effect on the FAQ version number as we don't want to inflate it
higher than the content deserves.

We hope that this makes it clear to visitors!

What's New in the FAQ?
======================

Version

Date

What's New

14.0

08-MAR-2010

[Section J.4](secJ4.html) \
Revision of section on *"What trends in society aid anarchist
activity?"* Various sub-sections have been merged and renamed, along
with significant changes to content.

[Section J.5](secJ1.html) \
Substantial revision of section on *"What alternative social
organisations do anarchists create?"*. Lots of new material on anarchist
community organising and industrial struggles as well as on
co-operatives. There is some re-arranging of the material on mutual
banking between sections, but no significant changes.

[Section J.6](secJ2.html) \
Revision of section on *"What methods of child rearing do anarchists
advocate?"*. Various sub-sections have been merged and renamed, along
with significant changes to content.

[Section J.7](secJ7.html) \
Revision of section on *"What do anarchists mean by social
revolution?"*. One sub-section has been renamed, but no significant
changes in content have been made.

[Section J.2.8](secJ2.html) \
Slight change to the sub-section on *"J.2.8 Will abstentionism lead to
the right winning elections?"* to include a quote from the late, great,
Howard Zinn.

This revision was made as part of getting the second volume of the FAQ
ready for publication. That is now complete.

13.4

21-JAN-2010

[Section J](secJint.html) \
Revision of introduction to section J on *"What do Anarchists do?"*

[Section J.1](secJ1.html) \
Revision of section on *"J.1 Are anarchists involved in social
struggles?"*.

[Section J.2](secJ2.html) \
Revision of section on *"What is direct action?"*.

[Section J.3](secJ3.html) \
Revision of section on *"J.3 What kinds of organisation do anarchists
build?"*.

This revision was made as part of getting the second volume of the FAQ
ready for publication.

13.3

30-SEP-2009

[Section I.6](secI6.html) \
Revision of section on *"What about the "Tragedy of the Commons"?"*

[section I.7](secI7.html) \
Revision of section on *"Won't Libertarian Socialism destroy
individuality?"*.

[section I.8](secI8.html) \
Revision of section on *"Does revolutionary Spain show that libertarian
socialism can work in practice?"*.

This revision was made as part of getting the second volume of the FAQ
ready for publication.

13.2

18-AUG-2009

[Section I.4](secI4.html) \
Signification revision of section on *"How would an anarchist society
function?"*

[section I.5](secI5.html) \
Signification revision of section on *"What would the social structure
of anarchy look like?"*. Some sub-sections have been merged (the old
I.5.10 and I.5.11) and some have been substantially changed (the old
I.5.13 and I.5.14 have been merged into the new I.5.11). Section I.5.3
has been renamed and its previous material included in I.5.2. The new
[section I.5.3](secI5.html#seci533) discusses the means by which
delegates remain under control from below.

This revision was made as part of getting the second volume of the FAQ
ready for publication.

13.1

18-JUN-2009

[Section I](secIcon.html) \
Signification revision of the [introduction](secIint.html) and first
three sub-sections ( [I.1](secI1.html), [I.2](secI2.html) and
[I.3](secI3.html)) of section I on **What would an anarchist society
look like?**

[Section I.3.3](secI3.html#seci33) \
Complete revision of section I.3.3, which is now on **What is
socialisation?**.

[Section I.1.5](secI1.html#seci15) \
New section on **Does capitalism efficiently allocate resources?**,
discussing why attempts to portray socialism as *"impossible"* downplay
the allocative inefficiencies of the current system.

[Appendix 3.1](append31.html) \
Slight change to the appendix *Reply to errors and distortions in David
McNally's pamphlet "Socialism from Below"*. This is to include [an
introduction](append31.html) which notes that McNally has now distanced
himself from this pamphlet as well as the addition of more quotes on
party dictatorship by Trotsky to the section 15 ([Did Trotsky keep alive
Leninism's *"democratic essence"*?](append31.html#app15)).

[An Anarchist FAQ blog](http://anarchism.pageabode.com/blogs/afaq) \
An Anarchist FAQ now has an official blog. This is used to post news as
well as extra material which cannot be included in the main body of the
FAQ.

This revision was made as part of getting the second volume of the FAQ
ready for publication.

13.0

11-NOV-2008

[An Anachist FAQ: Volume 1](book.html) \
**An Anarchist FAQ**, at long last, has now been published by AK Press.
Volume 1 (introductions, sections A to F, plus the appendix on the
symbols of Anarchy) is now available (ISBN: 978-1902593906)

[Section H](secHcon.html) \
Significant revision of the section on the anarchist critique of
Marxism. Removing of section H.2.15 as this is covered elsewhere in
section H as well as section H.2.16 (on the Spanish Revolution) as this
is covered in [section I.8.11](secI8.html#seci811).

[Section H.6](secH6.html) \
New section on the Russian Revolution, including an expansion of what
were sections H.3.15 and H.3.16 plus a new subsection on labour protest
under Lenin ([Section H.6.3](secH6.html#sech63)).

This revision was made as part of getting the second volume of the FAQ
ready for publication.

12.2

08-FEB-2008

[The Symbols of Anarchy](append2.html) \
Significant revision and re-organisation of the appendix on the appendix
on the Symbols of Anarchy. Adding some new information, clarifying the
roots of the black and red-and-black flags in working class and
generally improving it.

This revision was made as part of getting the first volume of the FAQ
ready for publication and so is really part of release 12.0

12.1

27-OCT-2007

[Section G](secGcon.html) \
Significant revision, re-organisation and expansion of the section on
individualist anarchism. Expands in more depth why it is as
anti-capitalist as other kinds of anarchism. Special thanks to
individualist anarchist Shawn Wilbur for his comments and feedback on
this revision.

The following revisions were made as part of getting the first volume of
the FAQ ready for publication and so are really part of release 12.0

[Section A.3.9](secA3.html#seca39) \
Revision of the section on primitivism to clarify a few issues.

[Section F.2.2](secF2.html#secf22) \
The addition of a few quotes by leading "anarcho"-capitalist Walter
Block on slave contracts. Which, in itself, shows how far that ideology
is from genuine anarchism.

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press. Volume one (sections A to F, plus the introductions and
appendix on the symbols of anarchy) is nearly ready for publication. We
will announce the exact date later this year.

12.0

19-JUL-2007

[Section C.7](secC7.html) \
Revision of section C.7 on what causes the capitalist business cycle.

[Section C.8](secC8.html) \
Revision of section C.8 on why state control of credit does not cause
slumps and the limitations of Keynesianism.

[Section C.9](secC9.html) \
Revision of section C.9 on what causes unemployment (and it is not high
wages or unions) and why the NAIRU is class warfare by the rich.

[Section F](secFcon.html) \
Revision of section F. Why "anarcho"-capitalism is not a form of
anarchism.

[Section F.3.2](secF3.html#secf32) \
New section on why there cannot be harmony of interests in an unequal
society.

[Introduction](intro.html) \
Slight changes to the original introduction.

[Tenth Anniversary of An Anarchist FAQ!](10years.html) \
Slight changes to the 10th Anniversay introduction.

[Bibliography](biblio.html) \
Slight reorganisation of the bibliography to include a new section on
works about anarchism and anarchists but written by non-libertarians.

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press. Volume one (sections A to F, plus the introductions and
appendix on the symbols of anarchy) is now ready for publication. We
will announce the exact date soon.
