Introduction
============

Here is a list of all the new additions to the FAQ from (approximately)
the beginning of February 1997. This should make it far easier for the
return visitor to find out what has changed since the last visit.

Also it is worthwhile to explain how the version number of the FAQ
changes. If we are including a new section (filling an incomplete
section, for example) or including a new sub-section in an existing
section (for example, adding A.2.20 to section A.2) then the version
number is increased by one (from version 2.2 to version 3, for example).
If we are updating an old section with new information or an improved
argument, then the current version is increased by 0.1 (for example,
from version 2.2 to 2.3).

As far as new anarchist and libertarian links are concerned, we will add
them when we get enough to make an update worthwhile. These updates have
no effect on the FAQ version number as we don't want to inflate it
higher than the content deserves.

We hope that this makes it clear to visitors!

What's New in the FAQ?
======================

Version

Date

What's New

10.0

18-MAR-04

[Section H](secHcon.html) \
Reorganisation of section H. Some sections have been moved around (for
example, section H.5 on the Makhnovist movement is now [section
H.11](secH11.html) and section H.8 on vanguardism is now [section
H.5](secH5.html)). In addition, sections from [section H.6](secH6.html)
(what was section H.4) have been added. Some changes have been made to
other sections. For example the section on Kronstadt (now [section
H.7](secH7.html)), the section on various Bolshevik Oppositions
([section H.10](secH10.html)) and the critique of Engels' essay on
Authority is now a new section ([section H.4](secH4.html)) instead of
being part of [section H.1](secH1.html).

The following subsections of section H.6 are now available:

[Section H.6](secH6.html) \
Introduction to section H.6 \
[Section H.6.3](secH6.html#sech63) \
Surely the Russian Revolution proves that vanguard parties work? \
[Section H.6.4](secH6.html#sech64) \
Was Lenin's "State and Revolution" applied after October? \
[Section H.6.5](secH6.html#sech65) \
Did the Bolsheviks really aim for Soviet power? \
[Section H.6.6](secH6.html#sech61) \
What happened to the soviets after October?

9.10

09-JAN-04

[Section H.9](secH9.html) \
New section on how Marxist and Leninist ideology helped cause the
degeneration of the Russian Revolution. Why only rejecting the
centralised, state capitalist Bolshevik vision can lead to real
socialism.

[Section H.10](secH10.html) \
New section on the better know oppositions within Bolshevism: The "Left
Communists" of 1918, the "Workers' Opposition" of 1920/1 and the "Left
Opposition" of 1923-7. Explains why they were not real oppositions and
what that says about the essence of Leninism. Talks about the little
know "Workers' Group" (a real opposition as it argued for workers
political and economic freedom) and what its repression by Lenin and
Trotsky says about the essence of Bolshevism.

9.9

26-AUG-03

[Section H.7](secH7.html) \
 New section on why the Russian Revolution failed. Covers most of the
common Leninist explanations of why Bolshevism became authoritarian and
shows why they are flawed. Includes replies to such classics as the
"declassing" of the working class and lots more.

9.8

27-JAN-03

[Section H.5](secH5.html) \
[Section H.5.4](secH5.html#sech54) \
[Section H.5.5](secH5.html#sech55) \
[Section H.5.6](secH5.html#sech56) \
[Section H.5.8](secH5.html#sech58) \
[Section H.5.10](secH5.html#sech510) \
Additions to various sub-sections to section H.5 (***"What was the
Kronstadt Rebellion?"***). These additions are from recently published
Soviet Archive documents.

[Section B.4](secB4.html) \
A slight addition on company towns to the section on ***How does
capitalism affect liberty?***

[Section H.2.2](secH2.html#sech22) \
Addition of an Emma Goldman quote to the section on ***"Do anarchists
reject "class conflict" as "the motor of change" and "collective
struggle" as the "means"?"***. This quote reiterates that Goldman, like
all social anarchists, placed collective class struggle at the core of
her politics.

[Section A.5.5](secA5.html#seca55) \
Slight change to the section on ***"Anarchists in the Italian Factory
Occupations"*** to include a quote by Gramsci on the Communist's
disgraceful position on the anti-fascist Arditi del Popolo organisation.

[Section G](secGint.html) \
[Section G.2](secG2.html) \
[Section G.2.1](secG2.html#secg21) \
[Section G.2.2](secG2.html#secg22) \
A few additions to clarify a few points on the ideas of individualist
anarchism, its support of "free markets" and why it is anti-capitalist.

9.7

27-JUNE-02

[Section H.3](secH3.html) \
New section on the "myths of Marxism." Covers the contradictions in the
Marxist and Leninist theories of the state, whether the state is simply
an instrument of class rule and whether anarchists and Marxists want the
same thing. In addition, covers whether Marxists seek to place power in
the hands of workers' organisation and their position on "workers'
control." Plus lots more.

[Section H.8](secH8.html) \
New section on why anarchists oppose Leninist vanguard parties.
Discusses their anti-socialist and elitist tendencies and explains why
they are "bureaucratic centralist" rather than "democratic centralist."
Plus lots more.

9.6

29-MAY-02

[Section H.5](secH5.html) \
A few additions to the section on the Kronstadt Rebellion, to include
Fedotoff-White's book **The Growth of the Red Army**

[Appendix - The Symbols of Anarchy](append2.html) \
A few minor changes to the appendix on anarchist symbols.

9.5

5-FEB-02

[Section H.6](secH6.html) \
New section on the Makhnovist movement. The Makhnovist movement was an
anarchist influenced peasant partisan army which fought in the Ukraine
for working class freedom and autonomy against the tyrannts of the right
and left. The Makhnovists show that there was a viable alternative to
the authoritarianism of the Bolsheviks and that Bolshevik ideology
played a key role in the degeneration of the revolution. This section
summarises the military history of the movement, its constructive social
ideas and its attempts to apply them. In addition it refutes common
allegations against the Makhnovists (such as they were anti-Semitic,
worked with the Whites, were Nationalists, anti-town and so on).

9.4

7-DEC-01

[Section H.2](secH2.html) \
New section on how Marxists have distorted anarchist ideas.

[Section I.3](secI3.html) \
[Section I.4](secI4.html) \
[Section I.5](secI5.html) \
[Section I.8](secI8.html) \
[Marxists and Spanish Anarchism](append32.html) \
[Reply to errors and distortions in the SWP's "Marxism and
Anarchism"](append34.html) \
[Reply to errors and distortions in John Fisher's "Why we must further
Marxism and not Anarchism"](append35.html) \
Minor updates of these sections and appendices to make the quotes
Peirats' **CNT in the Spanish Revolution** and Christies' **We, the
Anarchists!** consistent with the newly published book versions.

9.3

27-OCT-01

[Section H.1](secH1.html) \
New section on how anarchists have opposed state socialism (including
Marxism) from the start. Indicates Stirner's and Proudhon's opposition
to state socialism and gives a short summary of Bakunin's critique of
Marxism. Discusses the key differences between anarchism and Marxism.
Also indicates why Engels' infamous essay "On Authority" does not refute
anarchism.

9.2

01-SEP-01

[Section A.5.4](secA5.html#seca54) \
Extensive revision and expansion of the section on ***"Anarchists in the
Russian Revolution."*** More details on the Makhnovist movement as well
as the degeneration of the revolution under the Bolshevik government.

[Section A.5.5](secA5.html#seca55) \
Expansion of the section on ***"Anarchists in the Italian Factory
Occupations."** Indicates the key role anarchists played in this
movement.*

[Section A.5.7](secA5.html#seca57) \
Slight revision to include a reference to the Situationists and their
influence in the May, 1968 events in Paris.

[Section D.5](secD5.html) \
Extensive revision of ***"What causes imperialism?"***. Provides an
anarchist analysis of what causes imperialism, how it has changed over
time and how "globalisation" is just another, more modern, form of it.

[Did Trotsky keep alive Leninism's *"democratic
essence"*?](append31.html#app15) \
A new section to [Reply to errors and distortions in David McNally's
pamphlet *"Socialism from Below"*.](append31.html) This section
discusses Trotsky's support for party dictatorship during the 1920s and
1930s, so showing the inaccuracy of McNally's account of his ideas
**and** putting in question his assertions about Leninism's *democratic
essence."*

[Marxists and Spainish Anarchism](append32.html) \
Slight addition to [section 6](append32.html#app6) on the Asturias
uprising and the addition of Trotsky's suggestion that the CNT leaders
take *"dictatorship for themselves"* to [section
20](append32.html#app20).

9.1

27-JUN-01

[Anarchism and Marxism](append3.html) \
New reply to another (highly inaccurate) Trotskyist attack on anarchism.
We show how the "New Youth" article ["Why we must further Marxism and
not Anarchism"](append3.html#app35) is little more than a series of
inventions and does not present an honest account of anarchist ideas. We
also indicate the authoritarian nature of Trotskyist politics.

9.0

01-MAY-01

[Section I](secIcon.html) \
Massive revision and extension to section I (***"What would an anarchist
society look like?"***). New sub-sections, new and improved arguments,
ideas, facts and quotes. Find out about the kind of society anarchists
want and fight for.

8.7

17-MAR-01

[Section H.5](secH5.html) \
New section on the Kronstadt Uprising against the Communists in 1921. It
presents an indepth discussion and analysis of the rising and places it
in the context of the revolution. It refutes Leninist claims that it was
a White conspiracy, counter-revolutionary or expressed the exasperation
of the peasants. It shows the continuity of the the revolutionary
sailors and their politics in 1917 with the revolt of 1921 and discusses
what the suppression of the revolt tells us about the politics of
Leninism.

[Section H -- Introduction](secHint.html) \
Slight change to include a quote by Lenin noting that the
Council/Anti-Parliamentarian Communists were close to anarchism.

8.6

14-DEC-00

[The Symbols of Anarchy](append2.html) \
Slight revision on the histories of the Black and Red-and-Black Flags.
Includes Louise Michels comments on both the Black and Red flags and why
the Black Flag ("the flag of strikes") may have become an anarchist
symbol. Also shows that anarchists used the red-and-black flag in Mexico
in the 1870s.

[Anarchism and Marxism](append3.html) \
Slight revisions to two parts of this appendix. Now quotes from the
Paris Commune's "Declaration to the French People" in our discussion of
*[Why is Marxist "class analysis" of anarchism
contradictory?](append31.html#app12)* This makes clearer the anarchistic
nature of the Commune. In addition, the comment by Marx that revolution
*"from below"* was *"nonsense"* has been added to the section on [why
SWP/ISO use of the expression *"Socialism from below"* is
dishonest](append31.html#app14). Also a discussion of the Bolshevik
hostility towards workers' councils in the 1905 Russian Revolution as
another example of the [ineffectiveness of the "vanguard" parties like
the SWP.](append34.html#app1)

8.5

27-OCT-00

[Anarchism and Marxism](append3.html) \
Slight revisions of each of the existing appendices to fix minor typing
errors. Plus a reply to the recent British SWP article on ["Marxism and
Anarchism"](append3.html#app34) in which we discuss the errors in the
article and indicate that the disgraceful behaviour of the SWP in the
recent "Battle of Prague" shows that the SWP are hypocrites as well as
why such behaviour flows naturally from their authoritarian politics.

8.4

19-JUL-00

[Section B.4.5](secB4.html#secb45) \
Expansion on why capitalism cannot "leave you alone". Includes
information on self-management schemes and why they management stop them
and what this implies for capitalism. Plus it discusses the ambiguity of
the slogan "leave me alone" in a hierarchical society.

[Section J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512) \
Expansion on why capitalism selects against workers' self-management
even though it is usually more productive and efficient than wage
labour. The hierarchical nature of the company ensures that such
experiments do not grow and expand.

[Section F.1](secF1.html) \
Slight expansion of ***"Are 'anarcho'-capitalists really anarchists?"**
Adds the point we make elsewhere that they cannot be considered as
anarchists because capitalist property, like the state, is
hierarchical.*

[Anarchism and Marxism](append3.html) \
Two new additions to this appendix. The first one is on **[Marxists and
Spanish Anarchism](append3.html#app32)** in which we discuss various
claims made by Marxists (particularly Trotskyists) about the history and
politics of the Spanish anarchist movement. The second is a [reply to a
Marxist diatribe](append3.html#app33) against the various "direct
action" and anti-globalisation events and organisations, particularly
**Reclaim the Streets** in London. In addition, [section
12](append31.html#app12) of the appendix on the pamphlet **"Socialism
from Below"** has been expanded to include more details about anarchist
involvement during the Russian Revolution and their links with the
masses as well as details of the politics of Parisian workers of the
1860s.

8.3

13-APR-00

[Section B.2](secB2.html) \
Expansion and revision on the section ***"Why are anarchists against the
state?"***. Indicates that the state bureaucracy has its own interests
and so the state is not only the tool of the economically dominant
class. Also indicates the role of the state as protector of the system
**as a whole** and how it does this.

[Section J.1](secJ1.html) \
Revision of the section on ***"Are Anarchists involved in social
struggles?"**.*

[Section D.1](secD1.html)\
 [Section D.2](secD2.html)\
 [Section D.11](secD11.html) \
Slight expanision of each of these sections.

[Anarchism and Marxism](append3.html) \
Revision to fix various minor typos.

8.2

18-MAR-00

[Anarchism and Marxism](append3.html) \
New appendix for replies to on-line anti-anarchist webpages and works.
Currently contains an indepth reply to the SWP/ISO pamphlet
***"Socialism from Below."*** We expose their *"The Myth of Anarchist
Libertarianism"* to be a mish-mash of lies, half-truths and nonsense and
indicate why Marxism is **not** *Socialism from Below* and why anarchism
is.

[Section C.1](secC1.html) \
Revision and expansion of our critique of marginalism and general
equilibrium theory.

[Section J.2.10](secJ2.html#secj210) \
Slight expansion on why the claim that anarchism is apolitical because
it rejects electioneering is false.

[Section J.3.7](secJ3.html#secj37) \
Slight expansion on Bakunin's ideas on the tactics of anarchist groups
and why Marxist accounts of them are false.

[Section J.7.2](secJ7.html#secj72) \
Slight change to the end of the section on ***Is social revolution
possible?** Stresses that people change themselves when they change the
world and that libertarian characteristics are generated by struggle and
so co-operative/libertarian tendencies are a product of struggle, not
idealised notions with little basis in reality.*

[Section E.7](secE7.html) \
Slight expansion on why Green Consumerism cannot stop ecological
destruction. Expands on the use of PR firms, *"greenwashing"* and how
apparently "green" firms may not be.

[Section F.1.3](secF1.html#secF13)\
 [Section F.2.2](secF2.html#secF22) \
Slight revision of these sections.

8.1

19-JAN-00

[Section A.2.9](secA2.html#seca29) \
Expansion on the section on ***"What sort of society do anarchists
want?"*** Clarifies the important difference between delegates and
representatives. The former is the basis for eliminating government, the
latter is a form of government.

[Section A.5](secA5.html) \
Slight expansion to introduction of this sub-section to hight that
anarchists aim for a ***revolution from below** and that our examples of
***Anarchy in Action** are expressions of this.**

[Section A.5.1](secA5.html#seca51) \
Expansion of the section on ***"The Paris Commune"** to include more
information on its anarchistic elements and to provide more anarchist
analysis of it.*

[Section A.5.2](secA5.html#seca52) \
Expansion of the section on the ***"Haymarket Martyrs"* to include more
of the history of the event, details of the ***"Chicago Idea"** which
inspired them as well as why anarchists still consider it important.***

[Section J.5](secJ5.html) \
Slight modification to ***"What alternative social organisations do
anarchists create?"***

[Appendix 1](append12.html) \
Slight changes to the appendix on ***"Anarchism and
'Anarcho'-capitalism"***

8.0

14-DEC-99

[Section G](secGcon.html) \
Revision and expansion of section G which is on the Individualist
Anarchists. In addition to new arguments in existing sections on why
they were libertarian ***socialists*** and **not** fore-fathers of
"anarcho"-capitalism, there are three new sub-sections: \
[G.1.1 Why is the social context important in evaluating Individualist
Anarchism?](secG1.html#secg11) \
[G.2.1 What about their support of the free market?](secG2.html#secg21);
\
[G.2.2 What about their support of "private
property"?](secG2.html#secg22);

[Section C.2.6](secC2.html#secc26)\
 [Section C.2.7](secC2.html#secc27) \
Addition of a couple of Proudhon quotes on why interest is exploitative
and unjustifiable.

[Section H -- Introduction](secHint.html) \
New section. Introduction to the section on why Anarchists are opposed
to Marxism and other forms of state socialism. Also refutes some of the
silly anti-anarchist assertions by Marxists.

[Section J.7](secJ7.html) \
New section on ***What do anarchists mean by social revolution?**. Find
out what anarchists mean when they talk about social revolution, what it
would involve and why most anarchists think it is required (and also why
some anarchists reject it).*

7.8

11-NOV-99

[Section A.1.4](secA1.html#seca14)\
 Slight change to the section on ***Are anarchists socialists?***

[Section A.1.5](secA1.html#seca15)\
 Expansion of the section on ***Where does anarchism come from?**. While
still stressing that anarchism is a product of working class struggle
against the modern state and capitalism (and for freedom and equality),
it also notes that anarchistic tendencies have existed in society before
anarchism existed as a specific political theory.*

[Section A.2.7](secA2.html#seca27) \
Expansion to the section on ***Why do anarchists argue for
self-liberation?** in order to stress that it is the process of
rebellion, of self-liberation, that holds the key to a free society.*

[Section A.2.9](secA2.html#seca29) \
Addition of Kropotkin quote to the section on ***What sort of society do
anarchists want?***

[Section A.2.14](secA2.html#seca214)\
 Revision to the section on ***Why is voluntarism not enough?** to
include a few quotes and to clarify a few things.*

[Section A.2.19](secA2.html#seca219)\
 Very slight addition to the section on ***What ethical views do
anarchists hold?** to include how inequality erodes ethical behaviour.*

[Section B.7.1](secB7.html#secb71)\
 Inclusion of more information on classes to the section on ***But do
classes actually exist?**. International comparisions show that the US
has more poverty and the smallest middle class compared to social
democratic states in Europe. Not surprisingly, as its more free market
based.*

[Section B.7.3](secB7.html#secb73)\
 Slight expansion of the section on ***What do anarchists mean by "class
consciousness"?***

[Section C.2](secC2.html)\
 Slight expansion of the section on ***Where do profits come from?***

[Section D.10](secD10.html)\
 Expansion of the section on ***How does capitalism affect
technology?**. In a hierarchical society, technology cannot be truly
neutral -- as anarchists have been aware of since Proudhon -- and will
be used to enchance the power and profit of the bosses.*

[Section F.5](secF5.html)\
 Expansion of the section on why privatising everything will not
increase freedom. Discover why a right-libertarian society implies the
end of freedom of travel and the end of other civil liberties such as
freedom of speach.

[Section J.2](secJ2.html)\
 Expansion of the section on ***What is Direct Action?***. Find out why
anarchists support direct action, why we are against voting and what our
alternative is to electioneering.

[An Anarchist FAQ Bibilography](biblio.html) \
The bibliography for the books we reference in the FAQ has been
considerably added to.

7.7

14-JUL-99

[Section J.4](secJ4.html)\
 New section on ***What trends in society aid anarchist activity?***
This section includes discussion of the importance of social struggle
and the myth that its counter-production. In addition, it discusses
anarchist use of the Internet, popular discontent with the state and big
business as well as economic crisis.

[Appendix - Anarchism and "anarcho"-capitalism](append1.html) \
Revision and expansion on our reply and critique to Bryan Caplan's
"Anarchist Theory FAQ." Explains why "anarcho"-capitalism is not
anarchist and not part of the anarchist tradition.

[An Anarchist FAQ Bibilography](biblio.html) \
Incomplete bibliography for the books we reference in the FAQ. It will
be added to as time permits.

[Section A.1.1](secA1.html#seca11)\
 Slight revision to the section on ***What does "anarchy" mean?** to
stress that anarchy means far more than just "no government."*

[Section A.3.1](secA3.html#seca31)\
 [Section A.3.2](secA3.html#seca32)\
 Expansion to the discussion on the differences between social and
individualist anarchists, as well as between different kinds of social
anarchist.

[Section A.5.5](secA5.html#seca55)\
 Expansion of the section on ***Anarchists in the Italian Factory
Occupations**. Includes more details of the Anarchist struggle against
fascism and refutes claims that Italian Fascism was somehow related to
anarcho-syndicalism.*

[Section A.2.18](secA2.html#seca218)\
 Expansion and revision of the infamous ***"propaganda by the deed"**
period of anarchist history.*

[Section F.8](secF8.html)\
 Slight changes to the section on the role of the state in creating
capitalism in the first place.

[Section A](secAcon.html)\
 Minor changes in section A.

[Section B](secBcon.html)\
 Minor changes in section B.

7.6

23-APR-99

[Section J.3](secJ3.html)\
 New section on ***What kinds of organisation do anarchists build?***.
This section discusses the different kinds of organisations anarchists
create and what role they play in anarchist theory, as part of society
and in the class struggle. Anarcho-syndicalism is also discussed, as is
why many anarchists are not anarcho-syndicalists. Also covered is
Bakunin's ideas on the role of revolutionary organisations.

[Appendix - The Symbols of Anarchy](append2.html) \
New appendix on the history of the common anarchist symbols: the black
flag, the red-and-black flag and the circled-A

7.5

15-MAR-99

[Section C.8](secC8.html) \
Expansion of section on the role of credit and state control of money in
the business cycle. Discusses Monetarism and free banking and why they
fail to stop the business cycle.

[Section C.11](secC11.html) \
Slight revision and expansion on the section which discusses why Chile
shows that free-market capitalism does not benefit everyone and that it
was no "economic miracle".

[Section A.2.2](secA2.html#seca22)\
 Slight modification to the section on ***"Why do anarchists emphasise
liberty?"***.

[Section A.2.5](secA2.html#seca25)\
 Extension on ***"why anarchists are in favour of equality?"* to clarify
a few points.**

[Section A.2.8](secA2.html#seca28)\
 More arguments explaining why it is impossible to be an anarchist
without opposing hierarchy, including the hierarchy associated with
private property.

[Introduction](intro.html)\
 Slight up-date of the introduction.

7.4

17/12/98

[Section C.7](secC7.html)\
 Expansion, revision and reorganisation of section on ***"What causes
the capitalist business cycle?"**. Includes new facts and figures and
expands on original arguments. Why boom and bust is inherent in
capitalism and the role of class struggle, investment and the price
mechanism in it.*

[Section C.9](secC9.html)\
 Expansion, revision and reorganisation of section on ***Would
laissez-faire policies reduce unemployment, as "free market" capitalists
claim?**. Reorganisation includes new subsections on empirical evidence
that suggests high wages are associated with low unemployment and why
"flexible" labour markets do not seem to be the solution to
unemployment.*

[Section C.3](secC3.html)\
 Revision on ***What determines the distribution between profits and
wages within companies?**, stressing the importance of organisation and
collective struggle in increasing wages by increasing bargaining power
and indicating that rising productivity can be associated with lower
wages, in contradiction to the claims of capitalist economics.*

7.3

08/12/98

[Section A.3.3](secA3.html#seca33)\
 Revision and expansion of ***"What types of Green anarchism are
there?"**, indicating the links between ecological and anarchist
thought, the different types of green anarchism there are and where they
agree and disagree.*

[Section A.3.4](secA3.html#seca34)\
 Revision and expansion of ***"Is anarchism pacifistic?"*** in which we
discuss why many anarchists are pacifists and why anarchism has close
links with pacifist ideas. It also indicates why most anarchists are not
pacifists.

[Section A.1.4](secA1.html#seca14)\
 Revision of the section on ***"Are Anarchists Socialists?** to clarify
a couple of points and provide a few more quotes from Individualist
anarchists.*

[Section B.4.3](secB4.html#secb43)\
 Revision of the section on ***"No one forces you to work for them"**
which indicates that this refrain of supporters of capitalism misses the
point.*

[Section G.6](secG6.html)\
 Slight expansion on ***"What are the ideas of Max Stirner?*** in
relation to his ***Union of Egoists** and why it implies
self-management, not hierarchy.*

[Section C.5.1](secC5.html#secc51)\
 Inclusion of a few quotes by Peter Kropotkin on how Big Business gets
more profits. Big isn't beautiful, but it helps you make more profits!

7.2

22/05/98

[Section C.1](secC1.html)\
 [Section C.2](secC2.html)\
 Revision and expansion of the anarchist critique of capitalist
economics and why exploitation (unpaid labour) is the root source of
profits, interest and rent.

[Section C.10](secC10.html)\
 Expansion of the section on why "free market" capitalism will not
benefit all, *especially* the poor.

[Section C Introduction](secCint.html)\
 [Section C.9](secC9.html)\
 Slight changes to these two sub-sections of section C.

7.1

27/03/98

[Section A.3.5](secA3.html#seca35)\
 Revision and expansion of ***"What is Anarcha-Feminism?"***. Includes a
few more quotes and a discussion on why anarchists and anarcha-feminism
are critical of mainstream feminism.

[Section A.2.11](secA2.html#seca211)\
 Expansion of the section explaining why most anarchists support direct
democracy and consider it as the complement to free association and
individual freedom.

[Section A.2.13](secA2.html#seca213)\
 Slight expansion on the section explaining why anarchists reject
"individualism" and "collectivism" as two sides of the same (capitalist)
coin.

[Section A.1](secA1.html)\
 [Section A.2.2](secA2.html#seca22)\
 [Section A.2.12](secA2.html#seca212)\
 [Section A.5.2](secA5.html#seca52)\
 Slight revisions to all the above sections.

[Section J.5](secJ5.html)\
 Slight revisions for grammar.

7.0

10/03/98

[Section A.3.7](secA3.html#seca37)\
 New sub-section on ***Are there religious anarchists?*** Includes
information on various forms of religious anarchism with particular
reference to Tolstoy.

[Section A.3.8](secA3.html#seca38)\
 New sub-section on ***What is "anarchism without adjectives"?*. Gives
the history of this form of anarchism, what it is and why it came
about.**

[Section A.4](secA4.html)\
 Slight revision of this section on ***Who are the major anarchist
thinkers*** to include information on religious anarchism.

[Section C.11](secC11.html)\
 Slight arrangement of sections C.11 and C.12 on the "free market"
capitalist experiment in Pinochet's Chile. C.12 is now included as a
subsection of C.11.

[Section C.12](secC12.html)\
 New section C.12 on Hong Kong and why it does not show the benefits of
laissez-faire capitalism as is often claimed.

[Section F](secFcon.html)\
 Extensive revision of section F on why "anarcho"-capitalism is not a
form of anarchism. Expanded, revised and spell checked.

[Replies to the FAQ](replies.html)\
 New appendix which will list webpages that reply to the FAQ. Currently
it includes a reply to reply on section F.1 done by an
"anarcho"-capitalist.

6.8

07/01/98

[Section J.5](secJ5.html)\
 New sub-section on ***"What alternative social organisations do
anarchists create?***. Includes information about community organising,
industrial unionism and networking, mutual/co-operative credit systems,
producer co-operatives (and why capitalism is inefficient), libertarian
education and schools, a discussion on Libertarian Municipalism and
anarchist views on state and private welfare and self-managed
alternatives to both. Essential reading if you are interested in
***anarchy in action***

[Section A.1](secA1.html)\
 Slightly revised sub-section on ***"What is Anarchism?"***.

[Section B.1.4](secB1.html#secb14)\
 Slight revision on the section on racism, sexism and homophobia and why
they exist to include a summary of a study into the effects of racism in
the USA. The study indicates that racism makes all working people worse
off, including the "white" workers who are often said to benefit from
it.

6.7

18/12/97

[Section G.6](secG6.html)\
 Slight revision to the section on Max Stirner and his ideas.

Sections [J introduction,](secJintro.html)[J.1](secJ1.html),
[J.2](secJ2.html) and [J.6](secJ6.html) \
Minor revision on these sections of J for spelling and grammar

6.6

15/12/97

[Section B.7](secB7.html)\
 Slight revision to include more details on the concentration of wealth
within the ruling class.

Sections [C.4,](secC4.html)[C.5](secC5.html) and [C.6](secC6.html) \
Major revision on the sections on Big Business and oligopoly. Why it
develops, its impact on society and why and how it enriches the few at
the expense of the many.

[Section D](secDcon.html) \
Revised, expanded and spell checked section D on ***How does capitalism
and statism effect society*. Even more arguments and facts against
capitalism and statism.**

6.5

28/10/97

Slight corrections to sections [A](secAcon.html), [B](secBcon.html) and
[C](secCcon.html)

6.4

03/09/97

[Section J.6](secJ6.html)\
 Anarchist ideas on and methods for bringing up children.

[Section B](secBcon.html)\
 Revised, expanded and spell checked section B on ***Why do anarchists
oppose the current system*. Even more arguments and facts against
capitalism and statism.**

Section C [Introduction](secCintro.html), [C.2](secC2.html),
[C.6](secC6.html), [C.7.2](secC7.html#secc72) and [C.9](secC9.html) \
Slightly revised and expended sections on capitalist economics.

Sections
[F](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secFcon.html) and
[G](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secGcon.html) have
been moved to another geocities address for space reasons. \

6.3

17/07/97

[Section C](secCcon.html)\
 Revised, expanded and spell checked section C on ***The Myths of
Capitalist Economics***. Even more quotes from your favourite anarchists
and libertarians!. Even more arguments and facts against capitalism!

[Section E](secEcon.html)\
 Revised and spell checked section e on ***What do anarchists think
causes ecological problems?***.

[Section
G](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secGcon.html)\
 Renamed, improved, expanded, revised and spell checked section G on
***Is individualist anarchism capitalistic?*** - the short answer being
"no"! Indicates how and why individualist anarchism was opposed to
capitalism **plus** why social anarchists are critical of the theory.

6.2

23/05/97

[Section J.1](secJ1.html)\
 Newly completed sub-section. Find out why social struggle is important
to anarchists and how anarchists take part in it. For anarchists, social
struggle is the key from getting from capitalism to anarchy.

[Section A](secAcon.html)\
 Revised section A on ***What is Anarchism?***. Improved and updated
arguments and evidence, plus spell checked, and so on!

Section J - [introduction](secJintro.html) and [J.2](secJ2.html)\
 Spell checked and slightly revised.

6.1

01/05/97

[Section J.2](secJ2.html)\
 Newly completed sub-section. Find out all about ***direct action***,
why anarchists support it, why we reject electioneering as a means of
change and why we do not vote.

Minor update of section [B.3](secB3.html) to include a couple of nice
Proudhon quotes on how ***"property is despotism."***

Minor updates of sections [C.2](secC2.html) and
[F.2.1](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF2.html#secf26)
to make the quotes from Proudhon's **What is Property** consistent in
terms of edition. All quotes now from B.R. Tucker's translation, Bellamy
Library edition, London.

Minor updates to sections [I.3](secI3.html), [I.3.1](secI3.html#seci31),
[I.3.4](secI3.html#seci34),
[I.3.5,](secI3.html#seci35)[I.4.4](secI4.html#seci44) and
[I.4.13](secI4.html#seci413) in order to make the possible nature and
workings of an anarchist "economy" clearer.

Minor update to section [I.8.7](secI8.html#seci87) on the Aragon rural
collectives and how they were the product of the radicalisation of the
population during the 1930s.

6.0

26/03/97

[Section B.3.4](secB3.html#secb34)\
 New sub-section. Analysis of the claims that private property,
particularly in land, can be justified in terms of self-ownership. Also
indicates the authoritarian nature of private property and the way
Robert Nozick ignores the liberty of the dispossessed in his attempts to
justify appropriation of land. If land ownership cannot be justified,
then capitalism is based upon stolen goods.

[Section B.7.1](secB7.html#secb71)\
 This section on classes is slightly expanded to give details of income
mobility within capitalism. Argues that even high income mobility cannot
justify a class system and presents evidence that income mobility is
moderate at best.

[Section
F.2.2](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF2.html#secf28)\
 New sub-section. Short discussion on why we should reject the
right-Libertarian "entitlement theory of justice." The means do not
justify the ends, and if the ends involve authoritarian social
relationships, inequalities in liberty, wealth and power, even
"civilised" slavery, then the theory stinks.

[Appendix](append1.html)\
 New appendix on Anarchism and "anarcho"-capitalism. As well as
including the old section F.10, this appendix contains new work - a
reply to the claim that [the Individualist Anarchists were not part of
the socialist movement](append11.html#app1), a discussion on [What
socialism actually stands for](append11.html#app2), analysis on whether
[Proudhon](append11.html#app3) and [Tucker](append11.html#app4) were
socialists or capitalists, a reply to claims that ["anarcho"capitalism
is a form of anarchism](append11.html#app5) and a discussion on why
[anarchism cannot be defined using dictionaries.](append11.html#app6)

5.1

10/03/97

Minor updates to sections [C.11](secC11.html) and
[C.12](secC11.html#secc111) on the Chilean "economic miracle." Why did
it require mass murder, dictatorship and state terror to create "free
market" capitalism in Chile and what was its actual results?

5.0

28/02/97

[Section D.5](secD5.html)\
 A slight update expanding upon the anarchist analysis of imperialism
and how it has developed over time.

[Section C.7](secC7.html)\
 An updated analysis of the capitalist business cycle. Argues that the
class struggle both outside and inside the workplace has an impact in
creating the business cycle. Old version ignored social struggle outside
the workplace and put too much emphasis on technological innovation by
big business. This has been corrected.

Sections [C.8.1](secC8.html#secc81),[C.8.2](secC8.html#secc82) and
[C.8.3](secC8.html#secc83) \
 Anarchist analysis of the rise of social Keynesianism and its fall into
a combination of free markets and Pentagon-style Keynesianism. Even
reformed capitalist is not immune to the struggle for freedom against
hierarchy and the objective limits of capitalism.

[Section
F.1](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF1.html) \
Expanded arguments on why "anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchist.
Contains an excellent quote by Noam Chomsky on what he considers would
happen if it was tried in practice. Also contains the new sub-sections
[F.1.2](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF1.html#secf12)
and
[F.1.3](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF1.html#secf13)
on how libertarian right-libertarian theory is (not very!) and how most
right-Libertarians reject the scientific method in favour of dogma,
respectively.

[Section
G.5](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secG5.html) \
An updated analysis of the ideas of Individualist Anarchist Benjamin
Tucker. More quotes from Tucker on the socialistic nature of his ideas
and his support for labour struggle.

[Section I.7.4](secI7.html#seci74)\
 Expanded analysis on why capitalism does not protect individuality and
why competition puts out the flame of individuality and rebellion.

[Section J - Introduction](secJintro.html) \
Introduction to the section on ***"What do Anarchists do?"**. Gives a
short overview of the anarchist approach to social struggles and why its
so important for creating an anarchist future. Plus updated [contents
page](secJcon.html) - what to look forward to in the near future!*

4.1

14/02/97

Minor updates to sections [A.1.5](secA1.html#seca15),
[A.2.9](secA2.html#seca29), [I.5.8](secI5.html#seci58) and
[I.6.1](secI6.html#seci61).

4.0

10/02/97

[Introduction](intro.html)\
 At long last an introduction to the FAQ and its history. Also names the
guilty parties.

**What's New?**\
 This "What's New" page will be a welcome addition to regular visitors
to the FAQ.

[Section
F.2.1](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF2.html#secf26)
\
Do Libertarian-capitalists support slavery? Yes is the answer and find
out why this indicates that right-libertarians are not libertarians at
all.

[Section
F.9](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF9.html) \
Update with new evidence of the nature of Medieval Iceland and why it
indicates that private property produces statism. More reasons why
Medieval Iceland demonstrates how "anarcho-"capitalism will not work in
practice.

3.3

06/02/97

[Section
F.6](http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3998/secF6.html) \
New analysis on how the "anarcho"-capitalist system of private states
will become a public state. Builds on and extends original argument.
