Introduction
============

Here is a list of all the new additions to the FAQ. An list of older
changes can found [here](oldernew.html).

The version number of the FAQ changes as follows. A major change results
in then the version number is increased by one (from version 10.2 to
version 11, for example). If a minor change is being made then the
current version is increased by 0.1 (for example, from version 10.2 to
10.3).

As far as new anarchist and libertarian links are concerned, we will add
them when we get enough to make an update worthwhile. These updates have
no effect on the FAQ version number as we don't want to inflate it
higher than the content deserves.

We hope that this makes it clear to visitors!

What's New in the FAQ?
======================

Version

Date

What's New

11.10

01-MAY-2007

[Section E](secEcon.html) \
Major revision of section E (***"What do anarchists think causes
ecological problems?"**). Massively expanded and improved, with many new
sub-sections and arguments.*

[Section C.12](secC12.html) \
Major revision of section C.12. Think Hong Kong is an example of "free
market" capitalism? Think again...

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press.

11.9

01-MAR-2007

[Section D](secDcon.html) \
Major revision of section D (***"How does statism and capitalism affect
society?"**) to fix typos and expand and improve some of the sections.*

[Section D.1.4](secD1.html#secd14) \
New sub-section on why laissez-faire capitalism is not without state
intervention.

[Section D.1.5](secD1.html#secd15) \
New sub-section on whether anarchists support state intervention or not.

[Section D.11](secD11.html) \
New section discussing if politics and economics can be separated from
each other, using the example of Pinochet's Chile. The original section
D.11 has now become a sub-section of [section D.9](secD9.html).

[Section C.10](secC10.html) \
Major revision of section C.10, including new subsections on
neo-liberalism, growth, labour's share in nation income and lots more.

[Section C.11](secC11.html) \
Major revision of section C.11, including new subsections. Find out the
true failure of the first experiment in neo-liberalism, Pinochet's
Chile.

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press.

11.8

11-NOV-2006

[Section C.3](secC3.html) \
Revision of section C.3

[Section C.4](secC4.html) \
Revision of section C.4

[Section C.5](secC5.html) \
Revision of section C.5

[Section C.6](secC5.html) \
Revision of section C.6

[Section A](secAcon.html) \
Slight changes to section A, fixing typos and making a few slight
additions here and there (e.g., some new additions on Tolstoy's
religious anarchism).

[Section B](secBcon.html) \
Slight changes to section B, fixing typos and making a few slight
additions here and there (mostly to section B.1).

[Section C](secCcon.html) \
Slight changes to the introduction, C.1 and C.2, fixing typos and making
a few slight additions here and there.

[Appendix 2](append2.html) \
Slight addition to the appendix on the symbols of Anarchy.

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press.

11.7

19-JUL-2006

[Tenth Anniversary of An Anarchist FAQ!](10years.html)
======================================================

[Section C](secCint.html) \
Revised introduction to Section C

[Section C.1](secC1.html) \
Totally revised and expanded revision of section C.1, now entitled
***"What is wrong with Economics?"***. Explains why mainstream economics
is not a science and not value free as well as how it presents a
radically false picture of capitalism.

[Section C.2](secC2.html) \
Totally revised and expanded revision of section C.2, now entitled ***"
Why is capitalism exploitative?"***. Explains why anarchists, like other
socialists, think capitalism is exploitative. It also critiques many of
the standard mainstream economics defences of profit, interest and rent
(such as marginal productivity theory, waiting, risk and innovation).

[Section C.9.1](secC9.html#secc91) \
Addition to the section on ***"Would cutting wages reduce
unemployment?"*** to note that there is no theoretical or empirical
reason to support the standard economic assertion of an upward sloping
supply curve for labour and so its arguments on what causes unemployment
(i.e. wages being too high).

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press.

11.6

13-MAY-2006

[Section F](secFcon.html) \
New, smaller, section on "anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchism. This is
an edited version of the original section F (which has been put into an
appendix).

[Appendix -- Is "anarcho"-capitalism a type of
anarchism?](append13.html) \
The old section F (with some very slight changes here and there).

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press. Not only does this change mean that the AK Press
proof-readers have less to look at, it puts "anarcho"-capitalism more
into context. If it were not for some academics taking their claims at
face value, this section would not even be needed.

11.5

22-APR-2006

[Section F.7](secF7.html) \
New section on the history of "anarcho"-capitalism and how it always
(rightly) rejected the term "anarchist." Discusses how a "right-wing
anarchism" is impossible (it would just be rule by the rich).

[Section F.11](secF11.html) \
The old section F.7 (on "Natural Law")

[Section F.9](secF9.html) \
Yet more evidence on why Viking Iceland was not an "anarcho"-capitalist
system. As far as it was anarchic, it was not capitalist. As it became
capitalistic, it became statist.

[Section F.1](secF1.html) \
A rewrite of the first section to summarise the rest of the section F to
show how "anarcho"-capitalism's own definition of the state refutes its
claim to be anarchist.

[Section F.1.4](secF1.html#secf14) \
Some of what was originally in section F.1, plus some new bits and
pieces on how individualist anarchism is **not** really related to
"anarcho"-capitalism.

[Section F.2.6](secF2.html#secf26) \
A few changes on right "libertarian" support for voluntary slavery and
how its exposes its contradictions.

[Section F --Introduction](secFint.html) \
Slight change to the introduction to Section F

[Section F.1.3](secF1.html#secf13) \
A few additions on the non-scientific nature of most kinds of right-wing
libertarianism and how it produces authoritarian politics.

This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press. The next stage will be moving section F into an appendix
and replacing it with a much more edited version. This because
"anarcho"-capitalism is not important and it takes up too much space in
an FAQ about anarchism.

11.4

15-FEB-2006

[Appendix -- The symbols of Anarchy](append2.html) \
Revision of the appendix on the symbols of anarchy to fix typos and
improve it. This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for
being published by AK Press.

11.3

31-JAN-2006

[Section A](secAcon.html) \
Minor changes to section A to change the references for Murray
Bookchin's "The Ecology of Freedom" to the most recent edition,
including new works by Voltairine de Cleyre and Lucy Parsons, and make a
few minor additions here and there (mostly to sections A.2, A.2.1,
A.2.18, A.3, A.3.1, A.3.5, A.3.8, A.4, A.5.2, and A.5.5).

11.2

19-JUL-2005

[Section B](secBcon.html) \
Major revision of section B to fix typos and improve some of the
sections. This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being
published by AK Press.

[Section B.1.6](secB1.html#secb16) \
New sub-section on how hierarchy can be overcome.

[Section B.2.6](secB2.html#secb26) \
New sub-section on how the state can be an independent power within
society

[Section B.3.5](secB3.html#secb35) \
New sub-section on why state owned property is basically the same as
private property.

[Section B.7.2](%20secB7.html#secb72) \
New sub-section on social mobility in capitalism and why it does not
make class or inequality irrelevant. The rest of section B.7 has been
reorganised to take the new section into account.

[Section A](secAcon.html) \
Slight changes to section A to change the references for Murray
Bookchin's "Post-Scarcity Anarchism" and Martha A. Ackelsberg's "Free
Women of Spain" to the most recent edition and make a few minor
additions here and there (mostly to section A.4).

11.1

10-JAN-2005

[Section A](secAcon.html) \
Slight changes to section A to fix a few typos, change the references
for Rudolf Rocker's "Anarcho-Syndicalism" to the most recent edition and
make a few minor additions here and there (mostly to section A.1).

11.0

03-OCT-2004

[Section A](secAcon.html) \
Revision of section A to fix typos and improve some of the sections.
This is part of the process of getting the FAQ ready for being published
by AK Press.

[Section A.2.20](secA2.html#seca220) \
New section on why most anarchists are atheists. Discusses the
anti-anarchist nature of religion as well as its social role in aiding
the powerful and making the oppressed accept their lot in life.

[Section A.3.9](secA3.html#seca39) \
New section on "anarcho-primitivism," explaining what it stands for and
why most anarchists reject it.

[Section A.4.1](secA4.html#seca41)\
 [Section A.4.2](secA4.html#seca42)\
 [Section A.4.3](secA4.html#seca43)\
 [Section A.4.4](secA4.html#seca44) \
New sub-sections on thinkers who are close to anarchism but are not, in
fact, anarchists. They include liberals, socialists and marxists as well
as others not so easily categorised.

[Section H.3.15](secH3.html#sech315) \
New section on why the Leninist argument that "objective factors" rather
than Bolshevik ideology caused the failure of the Russian revolution.

[Section H.3.16](secH3.html#sech316) \
New section which summarises the impact of Bolshevik ideology on the
outcome of the Russian revolution.

[Appendix: The Symbols of Anarchy](append2.html) \
Slight additions to the history of the Black Flag.

[Appendix: The Russian Revolution](append4.html) \
New appendix for the various sub-sections of section H which discuss the
Russian Revolution (namely sections H.6 to 11).
