What Anarchists Say about An Anarchist FAQ
==========================================

*"At long last An Anarchist Frequently Asked Questions (AFAQ) has moved
from the Internet onto the printed page . . . it is likely to be the
primary source anarchists turn too for information about anarchist
theory and history . . . . It is accessible, not laden with jargon but
also built on ten years and more of solid research . . . The structure
of the book is such that it is easy to dip into . . . this [is a]
comprehensive resource. The prefix to the book is 'An' Anarchist FAQ.
The collective is too modest. This is the place to go to find out about
anarchist ides, theory and practice. It is accessible and based on sound
research. Thoroughly recommended."* ([Richard Griffin,
**Freedom**](http://anarchism.pageabode.com/afaq/freedom-review-of-an-anarchist-faq)).

*"the primary source of information about anarchism on the world wide
web . . . a foundation stone for laying down the idea of anarchism as
the viable alternative that we should work towards achieving."*
(*"Workers Solidarity"*, **Workers Solidarity Movement**)

*"this invaluable resource is highly recommended for anyone wishing to
delve further or gain a better understanding of anarchism as a practice,
living, socially relevant ideology."* (*"Direct Action"*, **Solidarity
Federation**)

*"The anarchist FAQ has been one of the standout achievements of the
last decade in terms of its rigorous treatment of every aspect of the
theory. Its translation from screen to print is long overdue."*
(**Freedom**)

*"the most comprehensive resource available . . . for a discussion on
anarchism is An Anarchist FAQ"* (Flint Jones, **NEFAC**)

*"The Anarchist FAQ collective are to be congratulated on producing this
excellent book. Always intended to be used by anarchists as an
organising tool, the FAQ will also be useful to newcomers to anarchism
and to those who already think of themselves as anarchists, but who
would like to deepen their understanding of anarchist politics. The FAQ
format makes it really easy to dip into in order to find answers to all
those questions that anarchists are often asked by sceptics and critics
(of right and left) as well as by other activists who are sympathetic
but just don't know much about anarchism, or have been influenced by the
many misrepresentations of anarchism put about by Leninists and the
capitalist media. So The Anarchist FAQ succeeds in being a very
accessible introduction to anarchism, whilst being at the same time
detailed, wide-ranging, properly researched and authoritative. Highly
recommended!"* (David Berry author of **A History of the French
Anarchist Movement, 1917-1945**)

*"Thanks for a fabulous job on this. What an amazing project! . . . All
best wishes to all of you, and again, congratulations on a excellent
work."* (Mark Leier, author of **Bakunin: The Creative Passion**)

*"monumental and essential FAQ dedicated to anarchism"* (Norman
Baillargeon, **L'order moins le pouvoir: Histoire et actualité de
l'anarchisme**)

*"The Anarchist FAQ should be one of the first stops for anyone studying
anarchism. It's an extensive compilation of material, painstakingly
indexed, of anarchist history, theory and practice. Just tracing the
tantalising block quotes to their original sources, via the amazing
bibliography--which alone is worth the price of the book--will take you
a long way toward an education on any of the subject headings. On a
personal note, I benefited greatly from stumbling across the FAQ near
the beginning of my own journey into anarchism."* (Kevin Carson author
of **Studies in Mutualist Political Economy**)

*""Found it very detailed and informative and I'm sure it will prove to
be an excellent reference book for those interested in the subject and
for those who wish to defend anarchism."* (John Couzin, anarchist from
Glasgow)
