A.1 What is anarchism?
======================

Anarchism is a political theory which aims to create anarchy, *"the
absence of a master, of a sovereign."* [P-J Proudhon, **What is
Property**, p. 264] In other words, anarchism is a political theory
which aims to create a society within which individuals freely
co-operate together as equals. As such anarchism opposes all forms of
hierarchical control - be that control by the state or a capitalist - as
harmful to the individual and their individuality as well as
unnecessary.

In the words of anarchist L. Susan Brown:

> *"While the popular understanding of anarchism is of a violent,
> anti-State movement, anarchism is a much more subtle and nuanced
> tradition then a simple opposition to government power. Anarchists
> oppose the idea that power and domination are necessary for society,
> and instead advocate more co-operative, anti-hierarchical forms of
> social, political and economic organisation."* [**The Politics of
> Individualism**, p. 106]

However, "anarchism" and "anarchy" are undoubtedly the most
misrepresented ideas in political theory. Generally, the words are used
to mean "chaos" or "without order," and so, by implication, anarchists
desire social chaos and a return to the "laws of the jungle."

This process of misrepresentation is not without historical parallel.
For example, in countries which have considered government by one person
(monarchy) necessary, the words "republic" or "democracy" have been used
precisely like "anarchy," to imply disorder and confusion. Those with a
vested interest in preserving the status quo will obviously wish to
imply that opposition to the current system cannot work in practice, and
that a new form of society will only lead to chaos. Or, as Errico
Malatesta expresses it:

> *"since it was thought that government was necessary and that without
> government there could only be disorder and confusion, it was natural
> and logical that anarchy, which means absence of government, should
> sound like absence of order."* [**Anarchy**, p. 16]

Anarchists want to change this "common-sense" idea of "anarchy," so
people will see that government and other hierarchical social
relationships are both harmful **and** unnecessary:

> *"Change opinion, convince the public that government is not only
> unnecessary, but extremely harmful, and then the word anarchy, just
> because it means absence of government, will come to mean for
> everybody: natural order, unity of human needs and the interests of
> all, complete freedom within complete solidarity."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
> 16]

This FAQ is part of the process of changing the commonly-held ideas
regarding anarchism and the meaning of anarchy. But that is not all. As
well as combating the distortions produced by the "common-sense" idea of
"anarchy", we also have to combat the distortions that anarchism and
anarchists have been subjected to over the years by our political and
social enemies. For, as Bartolomeo Vanzetti put it, anarchists are *"the
radical of the radical -- the black cats, the terrors of many, of all
the bigots, exploiters, charlatans, fakers and oppressors. Consequently
we are also the more slandered, misrepresented, misunderstood and
persecuted of all."* [Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, **The
Letters of Sacco and Vanzetti**, p. 274]

Vanzetti knew what he was talking about. He and his comrade Nicola Sacco
were framed by the US state for a crime they did not commit and were,
effectively, electrocuted for being foreign anarchists in 1927. So this
FAQ will have to spend some time correcting the slanders and distortions
that anarchists have been subjected to by the capitalist media,
politicians, ideologues and bosses (not to mention the distortions by
our erstwhile fellow radicals like liberals and Marxists). Hopefully
once we are finished you will understand why those in power have spent
so much time attacking anarchism -- it is the one idea which can
effectively ensure liberty for all and end all systems based on a few
having power over the many.

A.1.1 What does "anarchy" mean?
-------------------------------

The word ***"anarchy"*** is from the Greek, prefix **an** (or **a**),
meaning *"not," "the want of," "the absence of,"* or *"the lack of"*,
plus **archos**, meaning *"a ruler," "director", "chief," "person in
charge,"* or *"authority."* Or, as Peter Kropotkin put it, Anarchy comes
from the Greek words meaning *"contrary to authority."* [**Anarchism**,
p. 284]

While the Greek words ***anarchos*** and ***anarchia*** are often taken
to mean *"having no government"* or *"being without a government,"* as
can be seen, the strict, original meaning of anarchism was not simply
*"no government."* ***"An-archy"*** means *"without a ruler,"* or more
generally, *"without authority,"* and it is in this sense that
anarchists have continually used the word. For example, we find
Kropotkin arguing that anarchism *"attacks not only capital, but also
the main sources of the power of capitalism: law, authority, and the
State."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 150] For anarchists, anarchy means *"not
necessarily absence of order, as is generally supposed, but an absence
of rule."* [Benjamin Tucker, **Instead of a Book**, p. 13] Hence David
Weick's excellent summary:

> *"Anarchism can be understood as the **generic** social and political
> idea that expresses negation of **all** power, sovereignty,
> domination, and hierarchical division, and a will to their
> dissolution. . . Anarchism is therefore more than anti-statism . . .
> [even if] government (the state) . . . is, appropriately, the central
> focus of anarchist critique."* [**Reinventing Anarchy**, p. 139]

For this reason, rather than being purely anti-government or anti-state,
anarchism is primarily a movement against ***hierarchy.*** Why? Because
hierarchy is the organisational structure that embodies authority. Since
the state is the "highest" form of hierarchy, anarchists are, by
definition, anti-state; but this is **not** a sufficient definition of
anarchism. This means that real anarchists are opposed to all forms of
hierarchical organisation, not only the state. In the words of Brian
Morris:

> *"The term anarchy comes from the Greek, and essentially means 'no
> ruler.' Anarchists are people who reject all forms of government or
> coercive authority, all forms of hierarchy and domination. They are
> therefore opposed to what the Mexican anarchist Flores Magon called
> the 'sombre trinity' -- state, capital and the church. Anarchists are
> thus opposed to both capitalism and to the state, as well as to all
> forms of religious authority. But anarchists also seek to establish or
> bring about by varying means, a condition of anarchy, that is, a
> decentralised society without coercive institutions, a society
> organised through a federation of voluntary associations."*
> [*"Anthropology and Anarchism,"* pp. 35-41, **Anarchy: A Journal of
> Desire Armed**, no. 45, p. 38]

Reference to "hierarchy" in this context is a fairly recent development
-- the "classical" anarchists such as Proudhon, Bakunin and Kropotkin
did use the word, but rarely (they usually preferred "authority," which
was used as short-hand for "authoritarian"). However, it's clear from
their writings that theirs was a philosophy against hierarchy, against
any inequality of power or privileges between individuals. Bakunin spoke
of this when he attacked *"official"* authority but defended *"natural
influence,"* and also when he said:

> *"Do you want to make it impossible for anyone to oppress his
> fellow-man? Then make sure that no one shall possess power."* [**The
> Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 271]

As Jeff Draughn notes, *"while it has always been a latent part of the
'revolutionary project,' only recently has this broader concept of
anti-hierarchy arisen for more specific scrutiny. Nonetheless, the root
of this is plainly visible in the Greek roots of the word 'anarchy.'"*
[**Between Anarchism and Libertarianism: Defining a New Movement**]

We stress that this opposition to hierarchy is, for anarchists, not
limited to just the state or government. It includes all authoritarian
economic and social relationships as well as political ones,
particularly those associated with capitalist property and wage labour.
This can be seen from Proudhon's argument that *"**Capital** . . . in
the political field is analogous to **government** . . . The economic
idea of capitalism, the politics of government or of authority, and the
theological idea of the Church are three identical ideas, linked in
various ways. To attack one of them is equivalent to attacking all of
them . . . What capital does to labour, and the State to liberty, the
Church does to the spirit. This trinity of absolutism is as baneful in
practice as it is in philosophy. The most effective means for oppressing
the people would be simultaneously to enslave its body, its will and its
reason."* [quoted by Max Nettlau, **A Short History of Anarchism**, pp.
43-44] Thus we find Emma Goldman opposing capitalism as it meant *"that
man [or woman] must sell his [or her] labour"* and, therefore, *"that
his [or her] inclination and judgement are subordinated to the will of a
master."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 50] Forty years earlier Bakunin made
the same point when he argued that under the current system *"the worker
sells his person and his liberty for a given time"* to the capitalist in
exchange for a wage. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 187]

Thus "anarchy" means more than just "no government," it means opposition
to all forms of authoritarian organisation and hierarchy. In Kropotkin's
words, *"the origin of the anarchist inception of society . . . [lies
in] the criticism . . . of the hierarchical organisations and the
authoritarian conceptions of society; and . . . the analysis of the
tendencies that are seen in the progressive movements of mankind."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 158] For Malatesta, anarchism *"was born in a moral
revolt against social injustice"* and that the *"specific causes of
social ills"* could be found in *"capitalistic property and the State."*
When the oppressed *"sought to overthrow both State and property -- then
it was that anarchism was born."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and
Ideas**, p. 19]

Thus any attempt to assert that anarchy is purely anti-state is a
misrepresentation of the word and the way it has been used by the
anarchist movement. As Brian Morris argues, *"when one examines the
writings of classical anarchists. . . as well as the character of
anarchist movements. . . it is clearly evident that it has never had
this limited vision [of just being against the state]. It has always
challenged all forms of authority and exploitation, and has been equally
critical of capitalism and religion as it has been of the state."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 40]

And, just to state the obvious, anarchy does not mean chaos nor do
anarchists seek to create chaos or disorder. Instead, we wish to create
a society based upon individual freedom and voluntary co-operation. In
other words, order from the bottom up, not disorder imposed from the top
down by authorities. Such a society would be a true anarchy, a society
without rulers.

While we discuss what an anarchy could look like in [section
I](secIcon.html), Noam Chomsky sums up the key aspect when he stated
that in a truly free society *"any interaction among human beings that
is more than personal -- meaning that takes institutional forms of one
kind or another -- in community, or workplace, family, larger society,
whatever it may be, should be under direct control of its participants.
So that would mean workers' councils in industry, popular democracy in
communities, interaction between them, free associations in larger
groups, up to organisation of international society."* [**Anarchism
Interview**] Society would no longer be divided into a hierarchy of
bosses and workers, governors and governed. Rather, an anarchist society
would be based on free association in participatory organisations and
run from the bottom up. Anarchists, it should be noted, try to create as
much of this society today, in their organisations, struggles and
activities, as they can.

A.1.2 What does "anarchism" mean?
---------------------------------

To quote Peter Kropotkin, Anarchism is *"the no-government system of
socialism."* [**Anarchism**, p. 46] In other words, *"the abolition of
exploitation and oppression of man by man, that is the abolition of
private property [i.e. capitalism] and government."* [Errico Malatesta,
**Towards Anarchism,"**, p. 75]

Anarchism, therefore, is a political theory that aims to create a
society which is without political, economic or social hierarchies.
Anarchists maintain that anarchy, the absence of rulers, is a viable
form of social system and so work for the maximisation of individual
liberty and social equality. They see the goals of liberty and equality
as mutually self-supporting. Or, in Bakunin's famous dictum:

> "*We are convinced that freedom without Socialism is privilege and
> injustice, and that Socialism without freedom is slavery and
> brutality."* [**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 269]

The history of human society proves this point. Liberty without equality
is only liberty for the powerful, and equality without liberty is
impossible and a justification for slavery.

While there are many different types of anarchism (from individualist
anarchism to communist-anarchism -- see [section A.3](secA3.html) for
more details), there has always been two common positions at the core of
all of them -- opposition to government and opposition to capitalism. In
the words of the individualist-anarchist Benjamin Tucker, anarchism
insists *"on the abolition of the State and the abolition of usury; on
no more government of man by man, and no more exploitation of man by
man."* [cited by Eunice Schuster, **Native American Anarchism**, p. 140]
All anarchists view profit, interest and rent as **usury** (i.e. as
exploitation) and so oppose them and the conditions that create them
just as much as they oppose government and the State.

More generally, in the words of L. Susan Brown, the *"unifying link"*
within anarchism *"is a universal condemnation of hierarchy and
domination and a willingness to fight for the freedom of the human
individual."* [**The Politics of Individualism**, p. 108] For
anarchists, a person cannot be free if they are subject to state or
capitalist authority. As Voltairine de Cleyre summarised:

> *"Anarchism . . . teaches the possibility of a society in which the
> needs of life may be fully supplied for all, and in which the
> opportunities for complete development of mind and body shall be the
> heritage of all . . . [It] teaches that the present unjust
> organisation of the production and distribution of wealth must finally
> be completely destroyed, and replaced by a system which will insure to
> each the liberty to work, without first seeking a master to whom he
> [or she] must surrender a tithe of his [or her] product, which will
> guarantee his liberty of access to the sources and means of
> production. . . Out of the blindly submissive, it makes the
> discontented; out of the unconsciously dissatisfied, it makes the
> consciously dissatisfied . . . Anarchism seeks to arouse the
> consciousness of oppression, the desire for a better society, and a
> sense of the necessity for unceasing warfare against capitalism and
> the State."* [**Anarchy! An Anthology of Emma Goldman's Mother
> Earth**, pp. 23-4]

So Anarchism is a political theory which advocates the creation of
anarchy, a society based on the maxim of *"no rulers."* To achieve this,
*"[i]n common with all socialists, the anarchists hold that the private
ownership of land, capital, and machinery has had its time; that it is
condemned to disappear: and that all requisites for production must, and
will, become the common property of society, and be managed in common by
the producers of wealth. And. . . they maintain that the ideal of the
political organisation of society is a condition of things where the
functions of government are reduced to minimum. . . [and] that the
ultimate aim of society is the reduction of the functions of government
to nil -- that is, to a society without government, to an-archy"* [Peter
Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 46]

Thus anarchism is both positive and negative. It analyses and critiques
current society while at the same time offering a vision of a potential
new society -- a society that fulfils certain human needs which the
current one denies. These needs, at their most basic, are liberty,
equality and solidarity, which will be discussed in [section
A.2](secA2.html).

Anarchism unites critical analysis with hope, for, as Bakunin (in his
pre-anarchist days) pointed out, *"the urge to destroy is a creative
urge."* One cannot build a better society without understanding what is
wrong with the present one.

However, it must be stressed that anarchism is more than just a means of
analysis or a vision of a better society. It is also rooted in struggle,
the struggle of the oppressed for their freedom. In other words, it
provides a means of achieving a new system based on the needs of people,
not power, and which places the planet before profit. To quote Scottish
anarchist Stuart Christie:

> "Anarchism is a movement for human freedom. It is concrete, democratic
> and egalitarian . . . Anarchism began -- and remains -- a direct
> challenge by the underprivileged to their oppression and exploitation.
> It opposes both the insidious growth of state power and the pernicious
> ethos of possessive individualism, which, together or separately,
> ultimately serve only the interests of the few at the expense of the
> rest.
>
> "Anarchism is both a theory and practice of life. Philosophically, it
> aims for the maximum accord between the individual, society and
> nature. Practically, it aims for us to organise and live our lives in
> such a way as to make politicians, governments, states and their
> officials superfluous. In an anarchist society, mutually respectful
> sovereign individuals would be organised in non-coercive relationships
> within naturally defined communities in which the means of production
> and distribution are held in common.
>
> "Anarchists are not dreamers obsessed with abstract principles and
> theoretical constructs . . . Anarchists are well aware that a perfect
> society cannot be won tomorrow. Indeed, the struggle lasts forever!
> However, it is the vision that provides the spur to struggle against
> things as they are, and for things that might be . . .
>
> "Ultimately, only struggle determines outcome, and progress towards a
> more meaningful community must begin with the will to resist every
> form of injustice. In general terms, this means challenging all
> exploitation and defying the legitimacy of all coercive authority. If
> anarchists have one article of unshakeable faith, it is that, once the
> habit of deferring to politicians or ideologues is lost, and that of
> resistance to domination and exploitation acquired, then ordinary
> people have a capacity to organise every aspect of their lives in
> their own interests, anywhere and at any time, both freely and fairly.
>
> "Anarchists do not stand aside from popular struggle, nor do they
> attempt to dominate it. They seek to contribute practically whatever
> they can, and also to assist within it the highest possible levels of
> both individual self-development and of group solidarity. It is
> possible to recognise anarchist ideas concerning voluntary
> relationships, egalitarian participation in decision-making processes,
> mutual aid and a related critique of all forms of domination in
> philosophical, social and revolutionary movements in all times and
> places." [**My Granny made me an Anarchist**, pp. 162-3]

Anarchism, anarchists argue, is simply the theoretical expression of our
capacity to organise ourselves and run society without bosses or
politicians. It allows working class and other oppressed people to
become conscious of our power as a class, defend our immediate
interests, and fight to revolutionise society as a whole. Only by doing
this can we create a society fit for human beings to live in.

It is no abstract philosophy. Anarchist ideas are put into practice
everyday. Wherever oppressed people stand up for their rights, take
action to defend their freedom, practice solidarity and co-operation,
fight against oppression, organise themselves without leaders and
bosses, the spirit of anarchism lives. Anarchists simply seek to
strengthen these libertarian tendencies and bring them to their full
fruition. As we discuss in [section J](secJcon.html), anarchists apply
their ideas in many ways within capitalism in order to change it for the
better until such time as we get rid of it completely. [Section
I](secIcon.html) discusses what we aim to replace it with, i.e. what
anarchism aims for.

A.1.3 Why is anarchism also called libertarian socialism?
---------------------------------------------------------

Many anarchists, seeing the negative nature of the definition of
*"anarchism,"* have used other terms to emphasise the inherently
positive and constructive aspect of their ideas. The most common terms
used are *"free socialism," "free communism," "libertarian socialism,"*
and *"libertarian communism."* For anarchists, libertarian socialism,
libertarian communism, and anarchism are virtually interchangeable. As
Vanzetti put it:

> *"After all we are socialists as the social-democrats, the socialists,
> the communists, and the I.W.W. are all Socialists. The difference --
> the fundamental one -- between us and all the other is that they are
> authoritarian while we are libertarian; they believe in a State or
> Government of their own; we believe in no State or Government."*
> [Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, **The Letters of Sacco and
> Vanzetti**, p. 274]

But is this correct? Considering definitions from the **American
Heritage Dictionary**, we find:

> **LIBERTARIAN:** *one who believes in freedom of action and thought;
> one who believes in free will.*
>
> **SOCIALISM:** *a social system in which the producers possess both
> political power and the means of producing and distributing goods.*

Just taking those two first definitions and fusing them yields:

> **LIBERTARIAN SOCIALISM:** *a social system which believes in freedom
> of action and thought and free will, in which the producers possess
> both political power and the means of producing and distributing
> goods.*

(Although we must add that our usual comments on the lack of political
sophistication of dictionaries still holds. We only use these
definitions to show that "libertarian" does not imply "free market"
capitalism nor "socialism" state ownership. Other dictionaries,
obviously, will have different definitions -- particularly for
socialism. Those wanting to debate dictionary definitions are free to
pursue this unending and politically useless hobby but we will not).

However, due to the creation of the Libertarian Party in the USA, many
people now consider the idea of *"libertarian socialism"* to be a
contradiction in terms. Indeed, many "Libertarians" think anarchists are
just attempting to associate the "anti-libertarian" ideas of "socialism"
(as Libertarians conceive it) with Libertarian ideology in order to make
those "socialist" ideas more "acceptable" -- in other words, trying to
steal the "libertarian" label from its rightful possessors.

Nothing could be further from the truth. Anarchists have been using the
term "libertarian" to describe themselves and their ideas since the
1850's. According to anarchist historian Max Nettlau, the revolutionary
anarchist Joseph Dejacque published **Le Libertaire, Journal du
Mouvement Social** in New York between 1858 and 1861 while the use of
the term *"libertarian communism"* dates from November, 1880 when a
French anarchist congress adopted it. [Max Nettlau, **A Short History of
Anarchism**, p. 75 and p. 145] The use of the term "Libertarian" by
anarchists became more popular from the 1890s onward after it was used
in France in an attempt to get round anti-anarchist laws and to avoid
the negative associations of the word "anarchy" in the popular mind
(Sebastien Faure and Louise Michel published the paper **Le Libertaire**
-- **The Libertarian** -- in France in 1895, for example). Since then,
particularly outside America, it has **always** been associated with
anarchist ideas and movements. Taking a more recent example, in the USA,
anarchists organised ***"The Libertarian League"*** in July 1954, which
had staunch anarcho-syndicalist principles and lasted until 1965. The
US-based "Libertarian" Party, on the other hand has only existed since
the early 1970's, well over 100 years after anarchists first used the
term to describe their political ideas (and 90 years after the
expression "libertarian communism" was first adopted). It is that party,
not the anarchists, who have "stolen" the word. Later, in [Section
B](secBcon.html), we will discuss why the idea of a "libertarian"
capitalism (as desired by the Libertarian Party) is a contradiction in
terms.

As we will also explain in [Section I](secIcon.html), only a
libertarian-socialist system of ownership can maximise individual
freedom. Needless to say, state ownership -- what is commonly **called**
"socialism" -- is, for anarchists, not socialism at all. In fact, as we
will elaborate in [Section H](secHcon.html), state "socialism" is just a
form of capitalism, with no socialist content whatever. As Rudolf Rocker
noted, for anarchists, socialism is *"not a simple question of a full
belly, but a question of culture that would have to enlist the sense of
personality and the free initiative of the individual; without freedom
it would lead only to a dismal state capitalism which would sacrifice
all individual thought and feeling to a fictitious collective
interest."* [quoted by Colin Ward, *"Introduction"*, Rudolf Rocker,
**The London Years**, p. 1]

Given the anarchist pedigree of the word "libertarian," few anarchists
are happy to see it stolen by an ideology which shares little with our
ideas. In the United States, as Murray Bookchin noted, the *"term
'libertarian' itself, to be sure, raises a problem, notably, the
specious identification of an anti-authoritarian ideology with a
straggling movement for 'pure capitalism' and 'free trade.' This
movement never created the word: it appropriated it from the anarchist
movement of the [nineteenth] century. And it should be recovered by
those anti-authoritarians . . . who try to speak for dominated people as
a whole, not for personal egotists who identify freedom with
entrepreneurship and profit."* Thus anarchists in America should
*"restore in practice a tradition that has been denatured by"* the
free-market right. [**The Modern Crisis**, pp. 154-5] And as we do that,
we will continue to call our ideas libertarian socialism.

A.1.4 Are anarchists socialists?
--------------------------------

Yes. All branches of anarchism are opposed to capitalism. This is
because capitalism is based upon oppression and exploitation (see
sections [B](secBcon.html) and [C](secCcon.html)). Anarchists reject the
*"notion that men cannot work together unless they have a driving-master
to take a percentage of their product"* and think that in an anarchist
society *"the real workmen will make their own regulations, decide when
and where and how things shall be done."* By so doing workers would free
themselves *"from the terrible bondage of capitalism."* [Voltairine de
Cleyre, *"Anarchism"*, **Exquisite Rebel**, p. 75 and p. 79]

(We must stress here that anarchists are opposed to **all** economic
forms which are based on domination and exploitation, including
feudalism, Soviet-style "socialism" -- better called "state capitalism"
--, slavery and so on. We concentrate on capitalism because that is what
is dominating the world just now).

Individualists like Benjamin Tucker along with social anarchists like
Proudhon and Bakunin proclaimed themselves ***"socialists."*** They did
so because, as Kropotkin put it in his classic essay *"Modern Science
and Anarchism,"* *"[s]o long as Socialism was understood in its wide,
generic, and true sense -- as an effort to **abolish** the exploitation
of Labour by Capital -- the Anarchists were marching hand-in-hands with
the Socialists of that time."* [**Evolution and Environment**, p. 81]
Or, in Tucker's words, *"the bottom claim of Socialism [is] that labour
should be put in possession of its own,"* a claim that both *"the two
schools of Socialistic thought . . . State Socialism and Anarchism"*
agreed upon. [**The Anarchist Reader**, p. 144] Hence the word
*"socialist"* was originally defined to include *"all those who believed
in the individual's right to possess what he or she produced."* [Lance
Klafta, *"Ayn Rand and the Perversion of Libertarianism,"* in **Anarchy:
A Journal of Desire Armed**, no. 34] This opposition to exploitation (or
usury) is shared by all true anarchists and places them under the
socialist banner.

For most socialists, *"the only guarantee not to be robbed of the fruits
of your labour is to possess the instruments of labour."* [Peter
Kropotkin, **The Conquest of Bread**, p. 145] For this reason Proudhon,
for example, supported workers' co-operatives, where *"every individual
employed in the association . . . has an undivided share in the property
of the company"* because by *"participation in losses and gains . . .
the collective force [i.e. surplus] ceases to be a source of profits for
a small number of managers: it becomes the property of all workers."*
[**The General Idea of the Revolution**, p. 222 and p. 223] Thus, in
addition to desiring the end of exploitation of labour by capital, true
socialists also desire a society within which the producers own and
control the means of production (including, it should be stressed, those
workplaces which supply services). The means by which the producers will
do this is a moot point in anarchist and other socialist circles, but
the desire remains a common one. Anarchists favour direct workers'
control and either ownership by workers' associations or by the commune
(see [section A.3](secA3.html) on the different types of anarchists).

Moreover, anarchists also reject capitalism for being authoritarian **as
well as** exploitative. Under capitalism, workers do not govern
themselves during the production process nor have control over the
product of their labour. Such a situation is hardly based on equal
freedom for all, nor can it be non-exploitative, and is so opposed by
anarchists. This perspective can best be found in the work of Proudhon's
(who inspired both Tucker and Bakunin) where he argues that anarchism
would see *"[c]apitalistic and proprietary exploitation stopped
everywhere [and] the wage system abolished"* for *"either the workman. .
. will be simply the employee of the proprietor-capitalist-promoter; or
he will participate . . . In the first case the workman is subordinated,
exploited: his permanent condition is one of obedience. . . In the
second case he resumes his dignity as a man and citizen. . . he forms
part of the producing organisation, of which he was before but the slave
. . . we need not hesitate, for we have no choice. . . it is necessary
to form an ASSOCIATION among workers . . . because without that, they
would remain related as subordinates and superiors, and there would
ensue two. . . castes of masters and wage-workers, which is repugnant to
a free and democratic society."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 233 and pp. 215-216]

Therefore **all** anarchists are anti-capitalist (*"If labour owned the
wealth it produced, there would be no capitalism"* [Alexander Berkman,
**What is Anarchism?**, p. 44]). Benjamin Tucker, for example -- the
anarchist most influenced by liberalism (as we will discuss later) --
called his ideas *"Anarchistic-Socialism"* and denounced capitalism as a
system based upon *"the usurer, the receiver of interest, rent and
profit."* Tucker held that in an anarchist, non-capitalist, free-market
society, capitalists will become redundant and exploitation of labour by
capital would cease, since *"labour. . . will. . . secure its natural
wage, its entire product."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 82 and
p. 85] Such an economy will be based on mutual banking and the free
exchange of products between co-operatives, artisans and peasants. For
Tucker, and other Individualist anarchists, capitalism is not a true
free market, being marked by various laws and monopolies which ensure
that capitalists have the advantage over working people, so ensuring the
latter's exploitation via profit, interest and rent (see [section
G](secGcon.html) for a fuller discussion). Even Max Stirner, the
arch-egoist, had nothing but scorn for capitalist society and its
various "spooks," which for him meant ideas that are treated as sacred
or religious, such as private property, competition, division of labour,
and so forth.

So anarchists consider themselves as socialists, but socialists of a
specific kind -- ***libertarian socialists***. As the individualist
anarchist Joseph A. Labadie puts it (echoing both Tucker and Bakunin):

> *"It is said that Anarchism is not socialism. This is a mistake.
> Anarchism is voluntary Socialism. There are two kinds of Socialism,
> archistic and anarchistic, authoritarian and libertarian, state and
> free. Indeed, every proposition for social betterment is either to
> increase or decrease the powers of external wills and forces over the
> individual. As they increase they are archistic; as they decrease they
> are anarchistic."* [**Anarchism: What It Is and What It Is Not**]

Labadie stated on many occasions that *"all anarchists are socialists,
but not all socialists are anarchists."* Therefore, Daniel Guerin's
comment that *"Anarchism is really a synonym for socialism. The
anarchist is primarily a socialist whose aim is to abolish the
exploitation of man by man"* is echoed throughout the history of the
anarchist movement, be it the social or individualist wings.
[**Anarchism**, p. 12] Indeed, the Haymarket Martyr Adolph Fischer used
almost exactly the same words as Labadie to express the same fact --
*"every anarchist is a socialist, but every socialist is not necessarily
an anarchist"* -- while acknowledging that the movement was *"divided
into two factions; the communistic anarchists and the Proudhon or
middle-class anarchists."* [**The Autobiographies of the Haymarket
Martyrs**, p. 81]

So while social and individualist anarchists do disagree on many issues
-- for example, whether a true, that is non-capitalist, free market
would be the best means of maximising liberty -- they agree that
capitalism is to be opposed as exploitative and oppressive and that an
anarchist society must, by definition, be based on associated, not wage,
labour. Only associated labour will *"decrease the powers of external
wills and forces over the individual"* during working hours and such
self-management of work by those who do it is the core ideal of real
socialism. This perspective can be seen when Joseph Labadie argued that
the trade union was *"the exemplification of gaining freedom by
association"* and that *"[w]ithout his union, the workman is much more
the slave of his employer than he is with it."* [**Different Phases of
the Labour Question**]

However, the meanings of words change over time. Today "socialism"
almost always refers to **state** socialism, a system that all
anarchists have opposed as a denial of freedom and genuine socialist
ideals. All anarchists would agree with Noam Chomsky's statement on this
issue:

> *"If the left is understood to include 'Bolshevism,' then I would
> flatly dissociate myself from the left. Lenin was one of the greatest
> enemies of socialism."* [**Marxism, Anarchism, and Alternative
> Futures**, p. 779]

Anarchism developed in constant opposition to the ideas of Marxism,
social democracy and Leninism. Long before Lenin rose to power, Mikhail
Bakunin warned the followers of Marx against the *"Red bureaucracy"*
that would institute *"the worst of all despotic governments"* if Marx's
state-socialist ideas were ever implemented. Indeed, the works of
Stirner, Proudhon and especially Bakunin all predict the horror of state
Socialism with great accuracy. In addition, the anarchists were among
the first and most vocal critics and opposition to the Bolshevik regime
in Russia.

Nevertheless, being socialists, anarchists do share **some** ideas with
**some** Marxists (though none with Leninists). Both Bakunin and Tucker
accepted Marx's analysis and critique of capitalism as well as his
labour theory of value (see [section C](secCcon.html)). Marx himself was
heavily influenced by Max Stirner's book **The Ego and Its Own**, which
contains a brilliant critique of what Marx called "vulgar" communism as
well as state socialism. There have also been elements of the Marxist
movement holding views very similar to social anarchism (particularly
the anarcho-syndicalist branch of social anarchism) -- for example,
Anton Pannekoek, Rosa Luxembourg, Paul Mattick and others, who are very
far from Lenin. Karl Korsch and others wrote sympathetically of the
anarchist revolution in Spain. There are many continuities from Marx to
Lenin, but there are also continuities from Marx to more libertarian
Marxists, who were harshly critical of Lenin and Bolshevism and whose
ideas approximate anarchism's desire for the free association of equals.

Therefore anarchism is basically a form of socialism, one that stands in
direct opposition to what is usually defined as "socialism" (i.e. state
ownership and control). Instead of "central planning," which many people
associate with the word "socialism," anarchists advocate free
association and co-operation between individuals, workplaces and
communities and so oppose "state" socialism as a form of state
capitalism in which *"[e]very man [and woman] will be a wage-receiver,
and the State the only wage payer."* [Benjamin Tucker, **The
Individualist Anarchists**, p. 81] Thus anarchists reject Marxism (what
most people think of as "socialism") as just *"[t]he idea of the State
as Capitalist, to which the Social-Democratic fraction of the great
Socialist Party is now trying to reduce Socialism."* [Peter Kropotkin,
**The Great French Revolution**, vol. 1, p. 31] The anarchist objection
to the identification of Marxism, "central planning" and State
Socialism/Capitalism with socialism will be discussed in [section
H](secHcon.html).

It is because of these differences with state socialists, and to reduce
confusion, most anarchists just call themselves "anarchists," as it is
taken for granted that anarchists are socialists. However, with the rise
of the so-called "libertarian" right in the USA, some pro-capitalists
have taken to calling themselves "anarchists" and that is why we have
laboured the point somewhat here. Historically, and logically, anarchism
implies anti-capitalism, i.e. socialism, which is something, we stress,
that all anarchists have agreed upon (for a fuller discuss of why
"anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchist see [section F](secFcon.html)).

A.1.5 Where does anarchism come from?
-------------------------------------

Where does anarchism come from? We can do no better than quote **The
Organisational Platform of the Libertarian Communists** produced by
participants of the Makhnovist movement in the Russian Revolution (see
[Section A.5.4](secA5.html#seca54)). They point out that:

> "The class struggle created by the enslavement of workers and their
> aspirations to liberty gave birth, in the oppression, to the idea of
> anarchism: the idea of the total negation of a social system based on
> the principles of classes and the State, and its replacement by a free
> non-statist society of workers under self-management.
>
> "So anarchism does not derive from the abstract reflections of an
> intellectual or a philosopher, but from the direct struggle of workers
> against capitalism, from the needs and necessities of the workers,
> from their aspirations to liberty and equality, aspirations which
> become particularly alive in the best heroic period of the life and
> struggle of the working masses.
>
> "The outstanding anarchist thinkers, Bakunin, Kropotkin and others,
> did not invent the idea of anarchism, but, having discovered it in the
> masses, simply helped by the strength of their thought and knowledge
> to specify and spread it." [pp. 15-16]

Like the anarchist movement in general, the Makhnovists were a mass
movement of working class people resisting the forces of authority, both
Red (Communist) and White (Tsarist/Capitalist) in the Ukraine from 1917
to 1921. As Peter Marshall notes *"anarchism . . . has traditionally
found its chief supporters amongst workers and peasants."* [**Demanding
the Impossible**, p. 652]

Anarchism was created in, and by, the struggle of the oppressed for
freedom. For Kropotkin, for example, *"Anarchism . . . originated in
everyday struggles"* and *"the Anarchist movement was renewed each time
it received an impression from some great practical lesson: it derived
its origin from the teachings of life itself."* [**Evolution and
Environment**, p. 58 and p. 57] For Proudhon, *"the proof"* of his
mutualist ideas lay in the *"current practice, revolutionary practice"*
of *"those labour associations . . . which have spontaneously . . . been
formed in Paris and Lyon . . . [show that the] organisation of credit
and organisation of labour amount to one and the same."* [**No Gods, No
Masters**, vol. 1, pp. 59-60] Indeed, as one historian argues, there was
*"close similarity between the associational ideal of Proudhon . . . and
the program of the Lyon Mutualists"* and that there was *"a remarkable
convergence [between the ideas], and it is likely that Proudhon was able
to articulate his positive program more coherently because of the
example of the silk workers of Lyon. The socialist ideal that he
championed was already being realised, to a certain extent, by such
workers."* [K. Steven Vincent, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and the Rise of
French Republican Socialism**, p. 164]

Thus anarchism comes from the fight for liberty and our desires to lead
a fully human life, one in which we have time to live, to love and to
play. It was not created by a few people divorced from life, in ivory
towers looking down upon society and making judgements upon it based on
their notions of what is right and wrong. Rather, it was a product of
working class struggle and resistance to authority, oppression and
exploitation. As Albert Meltzer put it:

> *"There were never theoreticians of Anarchism as such, though it
> produced a number of theoreticians who discussed aspects of its
> philosophy. Anarchism has remained a creed that has been worked out in
> action rather than as the putting into practice of an intellectual
> idea. Very often, a bourgeois writer comes along and writes down what
> has already been worked out in practice by workers and peasants; he
> [or she] is attributed by bourgeois historians as being a leader, and
> by successive bourgeois writers (citing the bourgeois historians) as
> being one more case that proves the working class relies on bourgeois
> leadership."* [**Anarchism: Arguments for and against**, p. 18]

In Kropotkin's eyes, *"Anarchism had its origins in the same creative,
constructive activity of the masses which has worked out in times past
all the social institutions of mankind -- and in the revolts . . .
against the representatives of force, external to these social
institutions, who had laid their hands on these institutions and used
them for their own advantage."* More recently, *"Anarchy was brought
forth by the same critical and revolutionary protest which gave birth to
Socialism in general."* Anarchism, unlike other forms of socialism,
*"lifted its sacrilegious arm, not only against Capitalism, but also
against these pillars of Capitalism: Law, Authority, and the State."*
All anarchist writers did was to *"work out a general expression of
[anarchism's] principles, and the theoretical and scientific basis of
its teachings"* derived from the experiences of working class people in
struggle as well as analysing the evolutionary tendencies of society in
general. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 19 and p. 57]

However, anarchistic tendencies and organisations in society have
existed long before Proudhon put pen to paper in 1840 and declared
himself an anarchist. While anarchism, as a specific political theory,
was born with the rise of capitalism (Anarchism *"emerged at the end of
the eighteenth century . . .[and] took up the dual challenge of
overthrowing both Capital and the State."* [Peter Marshall, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 4]) anarchist writers have analysed history for libertarian
tendencies. Kropotkin argued, for example, that *"from all times there
have been Anarchists and Statists."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 16] In **Mutual
Aid** (and elsewhere) Kropotkin analysed the libertarian aspects of
previous societies and noted those that successfully implemented (to
some degree) anarchist organisation or aspects of anarchism. He
recognised this tendency of actual examples of anarchistic ideas to
predate the creation of the "official" anarchist movement and argued
that:

> *"From the remotest, stone-age antiquity, men [and women] have
> realised the evils that resulted from letting some of them acquire
> personal authority. . . Consequently they developed in the primitive
> clan, the village community, the medieval guild . . . and finally in
> the free medieval city, such institutions as enabled them to resist
> the encroachments upon their life and fortunes both of those strangers
> who conquered them, and those clansmen of their own who endeavoured to
> establish their personal authority."* [**Anarchism**, pp. 158-9]

Kropotkin placed the struggle of working class people (from which modern
anarchism sprung) on par with these older forms of popular organisation.
He argued that *"the labour combinations. . . were an outcome of the
same popular resistance to the growing power of the few -- the
capitalists in this case"* as were the clan, the village community and
so on, as were *"the strikingly independent, freely federated activity
of the 'Sections' of Paris and all great cities and many small
'Communes' during the French Revolution"* in 1793. [**Op. Cit.**, p.
159]

Thus, while anarchism as a political theory is an expression of working
class struggle and self-activity against capitalism and the modern
state, the ideas of anarchism have continually expressed themselves in
action throughout human existence. Many indigenous peoples in North
America and elsewhere, for example, practised anarchism for thousands of
years before anarchism as a specific political theory existed.
Similarly, anarchistic tendencies and organisations have existed in
every major revolution -- the New England Town Meetings during the
American Revolution, the Parisian 'Sections' during the French
Revolution, the workers' councils and factory committees during the
Russian Revolution to name just a few examples (see Murray Bookchin's
**The Third Revolution** for details). This is to be expected if
anarchism is, as we argue, a product of resistance to authority then any
society with authorities will provoke resistance to them and generate
anarchistic tendencies (and, of course, any societies without
authorities cannot help but being anarchistic).

In other words, anarchism is an expression of the struggle against
oppression and exploitation, a generalisation of working people's
experiences and analyses of what is wrong with the current system and an
expression of our hopes and dreams for a better future. This struggle
existed before it was called anarchism, but the historic anarchist
movement (i.e. groups of people calling their ideas anarchism and aiming
for an anarchist society) is essentially a product of working class
struggle against capitalism and the state, against oppression and
exploitation, and **for** a free society of free and equal individuals.
