A.4 Who are the major anarchist thinkers?
=========================================

Although Gerard Winstanley (**The New Law of Righteousness**, 1649) and
William Godwin (**Enquiry Concerning Political Justice**, 1793) had
begun to unfold the philosophy of anarchism in the 17th and 18th
centuries, it was not until the second half of the 19th century that
anarchism emerged as a coherent theory with a systematic, developed
programme. This work was mainly started by four people -- a German,
***Max Stirner*** (1806-1856), a Frenchman, ***Pierre-Joseph Proudhon***
(1809-1865), and two Russians, ***Michael Bakunin*** (1814-1876) and
***Peter Kropotkin*** (1842-1921). They took the ideas in common
circulation within sections of the working population and expressed them
in written form.

Born in the atmosphere of German romantic philosophy, Stirner's
anarchism (set forth in **The Ego and Its Own**) was an extreme form of
individualism, or **egoism**, which placed the unique individual above
all else -- state, property, law or duty. His ideas remain a cornerstone
of anarchism. Stirner attacked both capitalism and state socialism,
laying the foundations of both social and individualist anarchism by his
egoist critique of capitalism and the state that supports it. In place
of the state and capitalism, Max Stirner urges the *"union of egoists,"*
free associations of unique individuals who co-operate as equals in
order to maximise their freedom and satisfy their desires (including
emotional ones for solidarity, or "intercourse" as Stirner called it).
Such a union would be non-hierarchical, for, as Stirner wonders, *"is an
association, wherein most members allow themselves to be lulled as
regards their most natural and most obvious interests, actually an
Egoist's association? Can they really be 'Egoists' who have banded
together when one is a slave or a serf of the other?"* [**No Gods, No
Masters**, vol. 1, p. 24]

Individualism by definition includes no concrete programme for changing
social conditions. This was attempted by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, the
first to describe himself openly as an anarchist. His theories of
**mutualism**, **federalism** and workers' **self-management** and
**association** had a profound effect on the growth of anarchism as a
mass movement and spelled out clearly how an anarchist world could
function and be co-ordinated. It would be no exaggeration to state that
Proudhon's work defined the fundamental nature of anarchism as both an
anti-state and anti-capitalist movement and set of ideas. Bakunin,
Kropotkin and Tucker all claimed inspiration from his ideas and they are
the immediate source for both social and individualist anarchism, with
each thread emphasising different aspects of mutualism (for example,
social anarchists stress the associational aspect of them while
individualist anarchists the non-capitalist market side). Proudhon's
major works include **What is Property**, **System of Economical
Contradictions**, **The Principle of Federation** and, and **The
Political Capacity of the Working Classes**. His most detailed
discussion of what mutualism would look like can be found in his **The
General Idea of the Revolution**. His ideas heavily influenced both the
French Labour movement and the Paris Commune of 1871.

Proudhon's ideas were built upon by Michael Bakunin, who humbly
suggested that his own ideas were simply Proudhon's *"widely developed
and pushed right to . . . [their] final consequences."* [**Michael
Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 198] However, he is doing a disservice
to his own role in developing anarchism. For Bakunin is the central
figure in the development of modern anarchist activism and ideas. He
emphasised the importance of **collectivism,** mass insurrection,
**revolution** and involvement in the militant **labour movement** as
the means of creating a free, classless society. Moreover, he repudiated
Proudhon's sexism and added patriarchy to the list of social evils
anarchism opposes. Bakunin also emphasised the social nature of humanity
and individuality, rejecting the abstract individualism of liberalism as
a denial of freedom. His ideas become dominant in the 20th century among
large sections of the radical labour movement. Indeed, many of his ideas
are almost identical to what would later be called syndicalism or
anarcho-syndicalism. Bakunin influenced many union movements --
especially in Spain, where a major anarchist social revolution took
place in 1936. His works include **Anarchy and Statism** (his only
book), **God and the State**, **The Paris Commune and the Idea of the
State**, and many others. **Bakunin on Anarchism**, edited by Sam
Dolgoff is an excellent collection of his major writings. Brian Morris'
**Bakunin: The Philosophy of Freedom** is an excellent introduction to
Bakunin's life and ideas.

Peter Kropotkin, a scientist by training, fashioned a sophisticated and
detailed anarchist analysis of modern conditions linked to a
thorough-going prescription for a future society --
**communist-anarchism** -- which continues to be the most widely-held
theory among anarchists. He identified **mutual aid** as the best means
by which individuals can develop and grow, pointing out that competition
**within** humanity (and other species) was often not in the best
interests of those involved. Like Bakunin, he stressed the importance of
direct, economic, class struggle and anarchist participation in any
popular movement, particularly in labour unions. Taking Proudhon's and
Bakunin's idea of the **commune,** he generalised their insights into a
vision of how the social, economic and personal life of a free society
would function. He aimed to base anarchism *"on a scientific basis by
the study of the tendencies that are apparent now in society and may
indicate its further evolution"* towards anarchy while, at the same
time, urging anarchists to *"promote their ideas directly amongst the
labour organisations and to induce those union to a direct struggle
against capital, without placing their faith in parliamentary
legislation."* [**Anarchism**, p. 298 and p. 287] Like Bakunin, he was a
revolutionary and, like Bakunin, his ideas inspired those struggle for
freedom across the globe. His major works included **Mutual Aid**, **The
Conquest of Bread**, **Field, Factories, and Workshops**, **Modern
Science and Anarchism**, **Act for Yourselves**, **The State: Its
Historic Role**, **Words of a Rebel**, and many others. A collection of
his revolutionary pamphlets is available under the title **Anarchism**
and is essential reading for anyone interested in his ideas. In
Addition, Graham Purchase's **Evolution and Revolution** and
**Kropotkin: The Politics of Community** by Brain Morris are both
excellent evaluations of his ideas and how they are still relevant
today.

The various theories proposed by these "founding anarchists" are not,
however, mutually exclusive: they are interconnected in many ways, and
to some extent refer to different levels of social life. Individualism
relates closely to the conduct of our private lives: only by recognising
the uniqueness and freedom of others and forming unions with them can we
protect and maximise our own uniqueness and liberty; mutualism relates
to our general relations with others: by mutually working together and
co-operating we ensure that we do not work for others. Production under
anarchism would be collectivist, with people working together for their
own, and the common, good, and in the wider political and social world
decisions would be reached communally.

It should also be stressed that anarchist schools of thought are **not**
named after individual anarchists. Thus anarchists are **not**
*"Bakuninists"*, *"Proudhonists"* or *"Kropotkinists"* (to name three
possibilities). Anarchists, to quote Malatesta, *"follow ideas and not
men, and rebel against this habit of embodying a principle in a man."*
This did not stop him calling Bakunin *"our great master and
inspiration."* [**Errico Malatesta: Life and Ideas**, p. 199 and p. 209]
Equally, not everything written by a famous anarchist thinker is
automatically libertarian. Bakunin, for example, only became an
anarchist in the last ten years of his life (this does not stop Marxists
using his pre-anarchist days to attack anarchism!). Proudhon turned away
from anarchism in the 1850s before returning to a more anarchistic (if
not strictly anarchist) position just before his death in 1865.
Similarly, Kropotkin's or Tucker's arguments in favour of supporting the
Allies during the First World War had nothing to do with anarchism. Thus
to say, for example, that anarchism is flawed because Proudhon was a
sexist pig simply does not convince anarchists. No one would dismiss
democracy, for example, because Rousseau opinions on women were just as
sexist as Proudhon's. As with anything, modern anarchists analyse the
writings of previous anarchists to draw inspiration, but a dogma.
Consequently, we reject the non-libertarian ideas of "famous" anarchists
while keeping their positive contributions to the development of
anarchist theory. We are sorry to belabour the point, but much of
Marxist "criticism" of anarchism basically involves pointing out the
negative aspects of dead anarchist thinkers and it is best simply to
state clearly the obvious stupidity of such an approach.

Anarchist ideas of course did not stop developing when Kropotkin died.
Neither are they the products of just four men. Anarchism is by its very
nature an evolving theory, with many different thinkers and activists.
When Bakunin and Kropotkin were alive, for example, they drew aspects of
their ideas from other libertarian activists. Bakunin, for example,
built upon the practical activity of the followers of Proudhon in the
French labour movement in the 1860s. Kropotkin, while the most
associated with developing the theory communist-anarchism, was simply
the most famous expounder of the ideas that had developed after
Bakunin's death in the libertarian wing of the First International and
before he became an anarchist. Thus anarchism is the product of tens of
thousands of thinkers and activists across the globe, each shaping and
developing anarchist theory to meet their needs as part of the general
movement for social change. Of the many other anarchists who could be
mentioned here, we can mention but a few.

Stirner is not the only famous anarchist to come from Germany. It also
produced a number of original anarchist thinkers. Gustav Landauer was
expelled from the Marxist Social-Democratic Party for his radical views
and soon after identified himself as an anarchist. For him, anarchy was
*"the expression of the liberation of man from the idols of state, the
church and capital"* and he fought *"**State** socialism, levelling from
above, bureaucracy"* in favour of *"free association and union, the
absence of authority."* His ideas were a combination of Proudhon's and
Kropotkin's and he saw the development of self-managed communities and
co-operatives as the means of changing society. He is most famous for
his insight that the *"state is a condition, a certain relationship
among human beings, a mode of behaviour between them; we destroy it by
contracting other relationships, by behaving differently towards one
another."* [quoted by Peter Marshall, **Demanding the Impossible**, p.
410 and p. 411] He took a leading part in the Munich revolution of 1919
and was murdered during its crushing by the German state. His book **For
Socialism** is an excellent summary of his main ideas.

Other notable German anarchists include Johann Most, originally a
Marxist and an elected member of the Reichstag, he saw the futility of
voting and became an anarchist after being exiled for writing against
the Kaiser and clergy. He played an important role in the American
anarchist movement, working for a time with Emma Goldman. More a
propagandist than a great thinker, his revolutionary message inspired
numerous people to become anarchists. Then there is Rudolf Rocker, a
bookbinder by trade who played an important role in the Jewish labour
movement in the East End of London (see his autobiography, **The London
Years**, for details). He also produced the definite introduction to
**Anarcho-syndicalism** as well as analysing the Russian Revolution in
articles like **Anarchism and Sovietism** and defending the Spanish
revolution in pamphlets like **The Tragedy of Spain**. His **Nationalism
and Culture** is a searching analysis of human culture through the ages,
with an analysis of both political thinkers and power politics. He
dissects nationalism and explains how the nation is not the cause but
the result of the state as well as repudiating race science for the
nonsense it is.

In the United States Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman were two of the
leading anarchist thinkers and activists. Goldman united Stirner's
egoism with Kropotkin's communism into a passionate and powerful theory
which combined the best of both. She also placed anarchism at the centre
of feminist theory and activism as well as being an advocate of
syndicalism (see her book **Anarchism and Other Essays** and the
collection of essays, articles and talks entitled **Red Emma Speaks**).
Alexander Berkman, Emma's lifelong companion, produced a classic
introduction to anarchist ideas called **What is Anarchism?** (also
known as **What is Communist Anarchism?** and the **ABC of Anarchism**).
Like Goldman, he supported anarchist involvement in the labour movement
was a prolific writer and speaker (the book **Life of An Anarchist**
gives an excellent selection of his best articles, books and pamphlets).
Both were involved in editing anarchist journals, with Goldman most
associated with **Mother Earth** (see **Anarchy! An Anthology of Emma
Goldman's Mother Earth** edited by Peter Glassgold) and Berkman **The
Blast** (reprinted in full in 2005). Both journals were closed down when
the two anarchists were arrested in 1917 for their anti-war activism.

In December 1919, both he and Goldman were expelled by the US government
to Russia after the 1917 revolution had radicalised significant parts of
the American population. There as they were considered too dangerous to
be allowed to remain in the land of the free. Exactly two years later,
their passports arrived to allow them to leave Russia. The Bolshevik
slaughter of the Kronstadt revolt in March 1921 after the civil war
ended had finally convinced them that the Bolshevik dictatorship meant
the death of the revolution there. The Bolshevik rulers were more than
happy to see the back of two genuine revolutionaries who stayed true to
their principles. Once outside Russia, Berkman wrote numerous articles
on the fate of the revolution (including **The Russian Tragedy** and
**The Kronstadt Rebellion**) as well as publishing his diary in book
from as **The Bolshevik Myth**. Goldman produced her classic work **My
Disillusionment in Russia** as well as publishing her famous
autobiography **Living My Life**. She also found time to refute
Trotsky's lies about the Kronstadt rebellion in **Trotsky Protests Too
Much**.

As well as Berkman and Goldman, the United States also produced other
notable activists and thinkers. Voltairine de Cleyre played an important
role in the US anarchist movement, enriching both US and international
anarchist theory with her articles, poems and speeches. Her work
includes such classics as **Anarchism and American Traditions**,
**Direct Action**, **Sex Slavery** and **The Dominant Idea**. These are
included, along with other articles and some of her famous poems, in
**The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**. These and other important essays
are included in **Exquisite Rebel**, another anthology of her writings,
while Eugenia C. Delamotte's **Gates of Freedom** provides an excellent
overview of her life and ideas as well as selections from her works. In
addition, the book **Anarchy! An Anthology of Emma Goldman's Mother
Earth** contains a good selection of her writings as well as other
anarchists active at the time. Also of interest is the collection of the
speeches she made to mark the state murder of the Chicago Martyrs in
1886 (see **the First Mayday: The Haymarket Speeches 1895-1910**). Every
November the 11th, except when illness made it impossible, she spoke in
their memory. For those interested in the ideas of that previous
generation of anarchists which the Chicago Martyrs represented, Albert
Parsons' **Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Scientific Basis** is essential
reading. His wife, Lucy Parsons, was also an outstanding anarchist
activist from the 1870s until her death in 1942 and selections of her
writings and speeches can be found in the book **Freedom, Equality &
Solidarity** (edited by Gale Ahrens).

Elsewhere in the Americas, Ricardo Flores Magon helped lay the ground
for the Mexican revolution of 1910 by founding the (strangely named)
**Mexican Liberal Party** in 1905 which organised two unsuccessful
uprising against the Diaz dictatorship in 1906 and 1908. Through his
paper **Tierra y Libertad** (*"Land and Liberty"*) he influenced the
developing labour movement as well as Zapata's peasant army. He
continually stressed the need to turn the revolution into a **social**
revolution which will *"give the lands to the people"* as well as
*"possession of the factories, mines, etc."* Only this would ensure that
the people *"will not be deceived."* Talking of the Agrarians (the
Zapatista army), Ricardo's brother Enrique he notes that they *"are more
or less inclined towards anarchism"* and they can work together because
both are *"direct actionists"* and *"they act perfectly revolutionary.
They go after the rich, the authorities and the priestcraft"* and have
*"burnt to ashes private property deeds as well as all official
records"* as well as having *"thrown down the fences that marked private
properties."* Thus the anarchists *"propagate our principles"* while the
Zapatista's *"put them into practice."* [quoted by David Poole, **Land
and Liberty**, p. 17 and p. 25] Ricardo died as a political prisoner in
an American jail and is, ironically, considered a hero of the revolution
by the Mexican state. A substantial collection of his writings are
available in the book **Dreams of Freedom** (which includes an
impressive biographical essay which discusses his influence as well as
placing his work in historical context).

Italy, with its strong and dynamic anarchist movement, has produced some
of the best anarchist writers. Errico Malatesta spent over 50 years
fighting for anarchism across the world and his writings are amongst the
best in anarchist theory. For those interested in his practical and
inspiring ideas then his short pamphlet **Anarchy** cannot be beaten.
Collections of his articles can be found in **The Anarchist Revolution**
and **Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, both edited by Vernon
Richards. A favourite writing technique was the use of dialogues, such
as **At the Cafe: Conversations on Anarchism**. These, using the
conversations he had with non-anarchists as their basis, explained
anarchist ideas in a clear and down to Earth manner. Another dialogue,
**Fra Contadini: A Dialogue on Anarchy**, was translated into many
languages, with 100,000 copies printed in Italy in 1920 when the
revolution Malatesta had fought for all his life looked likely. At this
time Malatesta edited **Umanita Nova** (the first Italian daily
anarchist paper, it soon gained a circulation of 50 000) as well as
writing the programme for the **Unione Anarchica Italiana**, a national
anarchist organisation of some 20 000. For his activities during the
factory occupations he was arrested at the age of 67 along with 80 other
anarchists activists. Other Italian anarchists of note include
Malatesta's friend Luigi Fabbri (sadly little of his work has been
translated into English bar **Bourgeois Influences on Anarchism** and
**Anarchy and 'Scientific' Communism**) Luigi Galleani produced a very
powerful anti-organisational anarchist-communism which proclaimed (in
**The End of Anarchism?**) that *"Communism is simply the economic
foundation by which the individual has the opportunity to regulate
himself and carry out his functions."* Camillo Berneri, before being
murdered by the Communists during the Spanish Revolution, continued the
fine tradition of critical, practical anarchism associated with Italian
anarchism. His study of Kropotkin's federalist ideas is a classic
(**Peter Kropotkin: His Federalist Ideas**). His daughter Marie-Louise
Berneri, before her tragic early death, contributed to the British
anarchist press (see her **Neither East Nor West: Selected Writings
1939-48** and **Journey Through Utopia**).

In Japan, Hatta Shuzo developed Kropotkin's communist-anarchism in new
directions between the world wars. Called "true anarchism," he created
an anarchism which was a concrete alternative to the mainly peasant
country he and thousands of his comrades were active in. While rejecting
certain aspects of syndicalism, they organised workers into unions as
well as working with the peasantry for the *"foundation stones on which
to build the new society that we long for are none other than the
awakening of the tenant farmers"* who *"account for a majority of the
population."* Their new society was based on decentralised communes
which combined industry and agriculture for, as one of Hatta's comrade's
put it, *"the village will cease to be a mere communist agricultural
village and become a co-operative society which is a fusion of
agriculture and industry."* Hatta rejected the idea that they sought to
go back to an ideal past, stating that the anarchists were *"completely
opposite to the medievalists. We seek to use machines as means of
production and, indeed, hope for the invention of yet more ingenious
machines."* [quoted by John Crump, **Hatta Shuzo and Pure Anarchism in
Interwar Japan**, p. 122-3, and p. 144]

As far as individualist anarchism goes, the undoubted "pope" was
Benjamin Tucker. Tucker, in his **Instead of Book**, used his intellect
and wit to attack all who he considered enemies of freedom (mostly
capitalists, but also a few social anarchists as well! For example,
Tucker excommunicated Kropotkin and the other communist-anarchists from
anarchism. Kropotkin did not return the favour). Tucker built on the
such notable thinkers as Josiah Warren, Lysander Spooner, Stephen Pearl
Andrews and William B. Greene, adapting Proudhon's mutualism to the
conditions of pre-capitalist America (see Rudolf Rocker's **Pioneers of
American Freedom** for details). Defending the worker, artisan and
small-scale farmer from a state intent on building capitalism by means
of state intervention, Tucker argued that capitalist exploitation would
be abolished by creating a totally free non-capitalist market in which
the four state monopolies used to create capitalism would be struck down
by means of mutual banking and *"occupancy and use"* land and resource
rights. Placing himself firmly in the socialist camp, he recognised
(like Proudhon) that all non-labour income was theft and so opposed
profit, rent and interest. he translated Proudhon's **What is Property**
and **System of Economical Contradictions** as well as Bakunin's **God
and the State**. Tucker's compatriot, Joseph Labadie was an active trade
unionist as well as contributor to Tucker's paper **Liberty**. His son,
Lawrence Labadie carried the individualist-anarchist torch after
Tucker's death, believing that *"that freedom in every walk of life is
the greatest possible means of elevating the human race to happier
conditions."*

Undoubtedly the Russian Leo Tolstoy is the most famous writer associated
with religious anarchism and has had the greatest impact in spreading
the spiritual and pacifistic ideas associated with that tendency.
Influencing such notable people as Gandhi and the ***Catholic Worker
Group*** around Dorothy Day, Tolstoy presented a radical interpretation
of Christianity which stressed individual responsibility and freedom
above the mindless authoritarianism and hierarchy which marks so much of
mainstream Christianity. Tolstoy's works, like those of that other
radical libertarian Christian William Blake, have inspired many
Christians towards a libertarian vision of Jesus' message which has been
hidden by the mainstream churches. Thus Christian Anarchism maintains,
along with Tolstoy, that *"Christianity in its true sense puts an end to
government"* (see, for example, Tolstoy's **The Kingdom of God is within
you** and Peter Marshall's **William Blake: Visionary Anarchist**).

More recently, Noam Chomsky (in such works as **Deterring Democracy**,
**Necessary Illusions**, **World Orders, Old and New**, **Rogue
States**, **Hegemony or Survival** and many others) and Murray Bookchin
(**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, **The Ecology of Freedom**, **Towards an
Ecological Society**, and **Remaking Society**, among others) have kept
the social anarchist movement at the front of political theory and
analysis. Bookchin's work has placed anarchism at the centre of green
thought and has been a constant threat to those wishing to mystify or
corrupt the movement to create an ecological society. **The Murray
Bookchin Reader** contains a representative selection of his writings.
Sadly, a few years before his death Bookchin distanced himself from the
anarchism he spent nearly four decades advocating (although he remained
a libertarian socialist to the end). Chomsky's well documented critiques
of U.S. imperialism and how the media operates are his most famous
works, but he has also written extensively about the anarchist tradition
and its ideas, most famously in his essays *"Notes on Anarchism"* (in
**For Reasons of State**) and his defence of the anarchist social
revolution against bourgeois historians in *"Objectivity and Liberal
Scholarship"* (in **American Power and the New Mandarins**). These and
others of his more explicitly anarchist essays and interviews can be
found in the collection **Chomsky on Anarchism**. Other good sources for
his anarchist ideas are **Radical Priorities**, **Language and
Politics** and the pamphlet **Government in the Future**. Both
**Understanding Power** and **The Chomsky Reader** are excellent
introductions to his thought.

Britain has also seen an important series of anarchist thinkers. Hebert
Read (probably the only anarchist to ever accept a knighthood!) wrote
several works on anarchist philosophy and theory (see his **Anarchy and
Order** compilation of essays). His anarchism flowered directly from his
aesthetic concerns and he was a committed pacifist. As well as giving
fresh insight and expression to the tradition themes of anarchism, he
contributed regularly to the anarchist press (see the collection of
articles **A One-Man Manifesto and other writings from Freedom Press**).
Another pacifist anarchist was Alex Comfort. As well as writing the
**Joy of Sex**, Comfort was an active pacifist and anarchist. He wrote
particularly on pacifism, psychiatry and sexual politics from a
libertarian perspective. His most famous anarchist book was **Authority
and Delinquency** and a collection of his anarchist pamphlets and
articles was published under the title **Writings against Power and
Death**.

However, the most famous and influential British anarchist must be Colin
Ward. He became an anarchist when stationed in Glasgow during the Second
World War and came across the local anarchist group there. Once an
anarchist, he has contributed to the anarchist press extensively. As
well as being an editor of **Freedom**, he also edited the influential
monthly magazine **Anarchy** during the 1960s (a selection of articles
picked by Ward can be found in the book **A Decade of Anarchy**).
However, his most famous single book is **Anarchy in Action** where he
has updated Kropotkin's **Mutual Aid** by uncovering and documenting the
anarchistic nature of everyday life even within capitalism. His
extensive writing on housing has emphasised the importance of collective
self-help and social management of housing against the twin evils of
privatisation and nationalisation (see, for example, his books **Talking
Houses** and **Housing: An Anarchist Approach**). He has cast an
anarchist eye on numerous other issues, including water use (Reflected
in Water: A Crisis of Social Responsibility), transport (**Freedom to
go: after the motor age**) and the welfare state (**Social Policy: an
anarchist response**). His **Anarchism: A Very Short Introduction** is a
good starting point for discovering anarchism and his particular
perspective on it while **Talking Anarchy** provides an excellent
overview of both his ideas and life. Lastly we must mention both Albert
Meltzer and Nicolas Walter, both of whom contributed extensively to the
anarchist press as well as writing two well known short introductions to
anarchism (**Anarchism: Arguments for and against** and **About
Anarchism**, respectively).

We could go on; there are many more writers we could mention. But
besides these, there are the thousands of "ordinary" anarchist militants
who have never written books but whose common sense and activism have
encouraged the spirit of revolt within society and helped build the new
world in the shell of the old. As Kropotkin put it, *"anarchism was born
**among the people**; and it will continue to be full of life and
creative power only as long as it remains a thing of the people."*
[**Anarchism**, p. 146]

So we hope that this concentration on anarchist thinkers should not be
taken to mean that there is some sort of division between activists and
intellectuals in the movement. Far from it. Few anarchists are purely
thinkers or activists. They are usually both. Kropotkin, for example,
was jailed for his activism, as was Malatesta and Goldman. Makhno, most
famous as an active participate in the Russian Revolution, also
contributed theoretical articles to the anarchist press during and after
it. The same can be said of Louise Michel, whose militant activities
during the Paris Commune and in building the anarchist movement in
France after it did not preclude her writing articles for the
libertarian press. We are simply indicating key anarchists thinkers so
that those interested can read about their ideas directly.

A.4.1 Are there any thinkers close to anarchism?
------------------------------------------------

Yes. There are numerous thinkers who are close to anarchism. They come
from both the liberal and socialist traditions. While this may be
considered surprising, it is not. Anarchism has links with both
ideologies. Obviously the individualist anarchists are closest to the
liberal tradition while social anarchists are closest to the socialist.

Indeed, as Nicholas Walter put it, *"Anarchism can be seen as a
development from either liberalism or socialism, or from both liberalism
and socialism. Like liberals, anarchists want freedom; like socialists,
anarchists want equality."* However, *"anarchism is not just a mixture
of liberalism and socialism . . . we differ fundamentally from them."*
[**About Anarchism**, p. 29 and p. 31] In this he echoes Rocker's
comments in **Anarcho-Syndicalism**. And this can be a useful tool for
seeing the links between anarchism and other theories however it must be
stressed that anarchism offers an ***anarchist*** critique of both
liberalism and socialism and we should not submerge the uniqueness of
anarchism into other philosophies.

[Section A.4.2](secA4.html#seca42) discusses liberal thinkers who are
close to anarchism, while [section A.4.3](secA4.html#seca43) highlights
those socialists who are close to anarchism. There are even Marxists who
inject libertarian ideas into their politics and these are discussed in
[section A.4.4](secA4.html#seca44). And, of course, there are thinkers
who cannot be so easily categorised and will be discussed here.

Economist David Ellerman has produced an impressive body of work arguing
for workplace democracy. Explicitly linking his ideas the early British
Ricardian socialists and Proudhon, in such works as **The Democratic
Worker-Owned Firm** and **Property and Contract in Economics** he has
presented both a rights based and labour-property based defence of
self-management against capitalism. He argues that *"[t]oday's economic
democrats are the **new abolitionists** trying to abolish the whole
institution of renting people in favour of democratic self-management in
the workplace"* for his *"critique is not new; it was developed in the
Enlightenment doctrine of inalienable rights. It was applied by
abolitionists against the voluntary self-enslavement contract and by
political democrats against the voluntary contraction defence of
non-democratic government."* [**The Democratic Worker-Owned Firm**, p.
210] Anyone, like anarchists, interested in producer co-operatives as
alternatives to wage slavery will find his work of immense interest.

Ellerman is not the only person to stress the benefits of co-operation.
Alfie Kohn's important work on the benefits of co-operation builds upon
Kropotkin's studies of mutual aid and is, consequently, of interest to
social anarchists. In **No Contest: the case against competition** and
**Punished by Rewards**, Kohn discusses (with extensive empirical
evidence) the failings and negative impact of competition on those
subject to it. He addresses both economic and social issues in his works
and shows that competition is not what it is cracked up to be.

Within feminist theory, Carole Pateman is the most obvious libertarian
influenced thinker. Independently of Ellerman, Pateman has produced a
powerful argument for self-managed association in both the workplace and
society as a whole. Building upon a libertarian analysis of Rousseau's
arguments, her analysis of contract theory is ground breaking. If a
theme has to be ascribed to Pateman's work it could be freedom and what
it means to be free. For her, freedom can only be viewed as
self-determination and, consequently, the absence of subordination.
Consequently, she has advocated a participatory form of democracy from
her first major work, **Participation and Democratic Theory** onwards.
In that book, a pioneering study of in participatory democracy, she
exposed the limitations of liberal democratic theory, analysed the works
of Rousseau, Mill and Cole and presented empirical evidence on the
benefits of participation on the individuals involved.

In the **Problem of Political Obligation**, Pateman discusses the
"liberal" arguments on freedom and finds them wanting. For the liberal,
a person must consent to be ruled by another but this opens up the
"problem" that they might not consent and, indeed, may never have
consented. Thus the liberal state would lack a justification. She
deepens her analysis to question why freedom should be equated to
consenting to be ruled and proposed a participatory democratic theory in
which people collectively make their own decisions (a self-assumed
obligation to your fellow citizens rather to a state). In discussing
Kropotkin, she showed her awareness of the social anarchist tradition to
which her own theory is obviously related.

Pateman builds on this analysis in her **The Sexual Contract**, where
she dissects the sexism of classical liberal and democratic theory. She
analyses the weakness of what calls 'contractarian' theory (classical
liberalism and right-wing "libertarianism") and shows how it leads not
to free associations of self-governing individuals but rather social
relationships based on authority, hierarchy and power in which a few
rule the many. Her analysis of the state, marriage and wage labour are
profoundly libertarian, showing that freedom must mean more than
consenting to be ruled. This is the paradox of capitalist liberal, for a
person is assumed to be free in order to consent to a contract but once
within it they face the reality subordination to another's decisions
(see [section A.4.2](secA4.html#seca42) for further discussion).

Her ideas challenge some of Western culture's core beliefs about
individual freedom and her critiques of the major Enlightenment
political philosophers are powerful and convincing. Implicit is a
critique not just of the conservative and liberal tradition, but of the
patriarchy and hierarchy contained within the Left as well. As well as
these works, a collection of her essays is available called **The
Disorder of Women**.

Within the so-called "anti-globalisation" movement Naomi Klein shows an
awareness of libertarian ideas and her own work has a libertarian thrust
to it (we call it "so-called" as its members are internationalists,
seeking a globalisation from below not one imposed from above by and for
a few). She first came to attention as the author of **No Logo**, which
charts the growth of consumer capitalism, exposing the dark reality
behind the glossy brands of capitalism and, more importantly,
highlighting the resistance to it. No distant academic, she is an active
participant in the movement she reports on in **Fences and Windows**, a
collection of essays on globalisation, its consequences and the wave of
protests against it.

Klein's articles are well written and engaging, covering the reality of
modern capitalism, the gap, as she puts it, *"between rich and power but
also between rhetoric and reality, between what is said and what is
done. Between the promise of globalisation and its real effects."* She
shows how we live in a world where the market (i.e. capital) is made
"freer" while people suffer increased state power and repression. How an
unelected Argentine President labels that country's popular assemblies
*"antidemocratic."* How rhetoric about liberty is used as a tool to
defend and increase private power (as she reminds us, *"always missing
from [the globalisation] discussion is the issue of power. So many of
the debates that we have about globalisation theory are actually about
power: who holds it, who is exercising it and who is disguising it,
pretending it no longer matters"*). [**Fences and Windows**, pp 83-4 and
p. 83]

And how people across the world are resisting. As she puts it, *"many
[in the movement] are tired of being spoken for and about. They are
demanding a more direct form of political participation."* She reports
on a movement which she is part of, one which aims for a globalisation
from below, one *"founded on principles of transparency, accountability
and self-determination, one that frees people instead of liberating
capital."* This means being against a *"corporate-driven globalisation .
. . that is centralising power and wealth into fewer and fewer hands"*
while presenting an alternative which is about *"decentralising power
and building community-based decision-making potential -- whether
through unions, neighbourhoods, farms, villages, anarchist collectives
or aboriginal self-government."* All strong anarchist principles and,
like anarchists, she wants people to manage their own affairs and
chronicles attempts around the world to do just that (many of which, as
Klein notes, are anarchists or influenced by anarchist ideas, sometimes
knowing, sometimes not). [**Op. Cit.**, p. 77, p. 79 and p. 16]

While not an anarchist, she is aware that real change comes from below,
by the self-activity of working class people fighting for a better
world. Decentralisation of power is a key idea in the book. As she puts
it, the *"goal"* of the social movements she describes is *"not to take
power for themselves but to challenge power centralisation on
principle"* and so creating *"a new culture of vibrant direct democracy
. . . one that is fuelled and strengthened by direct participation."*
She does not urge the movement to invest itself with new leaders and
neither does she (like the Left) think that electing a few leaders to
make decisions for us equals "democracy" (*"the goal is not better
faraway rules and rulers but close-up democracy on the ground"*). Klein,
therefore, gets to the heart of the matter. Real social change is based
on empowering the grassroots, *"the desire for self-determination,
economic sustainability and participatory democracy."* Given this, Klein
has presented libertarian ideas to a wide audience. [**Op. Cit.**, p.
xxvi, p. xxvi-xxvii, p. 245 and p. 233]

Other notable libertarian thinkers include Henry D. Thoreau, Albert
Camus, Aldous Huxley, Lewis Mumford, Lewis Mumford and Oscar Wilde. Thus
there are numerous thinkers who approach anarchist conclusions and who
discuss subjects of interest to libertarians. As Kropotkin noted a
hundred years ago, these kinds of writers *"are full of ideas which show
how closely anarchism is interwoven with the work that is going on in
modern thought in the same direction of enfranchisement of man from the
bonds of the state as well as from those of capitalism."*
[**Anarchism**, p. 300] The only change since then is that more names
can be added to the list.

Peter Marshall discusses the ideas of most, but not all, of the
non-anarchist libertarians we mention in this and subsequent sections in
his book history of anarchism, **Demanding the Impossible**. Clifford
Harper's **Anarchy: A Graphic Guide** is also a useful guide for finding
out more.

A.4.2 Are there any liberal thinkers close to anarchism?
--------------------------------------------------------

As noted in the [last section](secA4.html#seca41), there are thinkers in
both the liberal and socialist traditions who approach anarchist theory
and ideals. This understandable as anarchism shares certain ideas and
ideals with both.

However, as will become clear in sections [A.4.3](secA4.html#seca43) and
[A.4.4](secA4.html#seca44), anarchism shares most common ground with the
socialist tradition it is a part of. This is because classical
liberalism is a profoundly elitist tradition. The works of Locke and the
tradition he inspired aimed to justify hierarchy, state and private
property. As Carole Pateman notes, *"Locke's state of nature, with its
father-rulers and capitalist economy, would certainly not find favour
with anarchists"* any more than his vision of the social contract and
the liberal state it creates. A state, which as Pateman recounts, in
which *"only males who own substantial amounts of material property are
[the] politically relevant members of society"* and exists *"precisely
to preserve the property relationships of the developing capitalist
market economy, not to disturb them."* For the majority, the
non-propertied, they expressed *"tacit consent"* to be ruled by the few
by *"choosing to remain within the one's country of birth when reaching
adulthood."* [**The Problem of Political Obligation**, p. 141, p. 71, p.
78 and p. 73]

Thus anarchism is at odds with what can be called the pro-capitalist
liberal tradition which, flowing from Locke, builds upon his rationales
for hierarchy. As David Ellerman notes, *"there is a whole liberal
tradition of apologising for non-democratic government based on consent
-- on a voluntary social contract alienating governing rights to a
sovereign."* In economics, this is reflected in their support for wage
labour and the capitalist autocracy it creates for the *"employment
contract is the modern limited workplace version"* of such contracts.
[**The Democratic Worker-Owned Firm**, p. 210] This pro-capitalist
liberalism essentially boils down to the liberty to pick a master or, if
you are among the lucky few, to become a master yourself. The idea that
freedom means self-determination for all at all times is alien to it.
Rather it is based on the idea of "self-ownership," that you "own"
yourself and your rights. Consequently, you can sell (alienate) your
rights and liberty on the market. As we discuss in [section
B.4](secB4.html), in practice this means that most people are subject to
autocratic rule for most of their waking hours (whether in work or in
marriage).

The modern equivalent of classical liberalism is the right-wing
"libertarian" tradition associated with Milton Friedman, Robert Nozick,
von Hayek and so forth. As they aim to reduce the state to simply the
defender to private property and enforcer of the hierarchies that social
institution creates, they can by no stretch of the imagination be
considered near anarchism. What is called "liberalism" in, say, the
United States is a more democratic liberal tradition and has, like
anarchism, little in common with the shrill pro-capitalist defenders of
the minimum state. While they may (sometimes) be happy to denounce the
state's attacks on individual liberty, they are more than happy to
defend the "freedom" of the property owner to impose exactly the same
restrictions on those who use their land or capital.

Given that feudalism combined ownership and rulership, that the
governance of people living on land was an attribute of the ownership of
that land, it would be no exaggeration to say that the right-wing
"libertarian" tradition is simply its modern (voluntary) form. It is no
more libertarian than the feudal lords who combated the powers of the
King in order to protect their power over their own land and serfs. As
Chomsky notes, *"the 'libertarian' doctrines that are fashionable in the
US and UK particularly . . . seem to me to reduce to advocacy of one or
another form of illegitimate authority, quite often real tyranny."*
[**Marxism, Anarchism, and Alternative Futures**, p. 777] Moreover, as
Benjamin Tucker noted with regards their predecessors, while they are
happy to attack any state regulation which benefits the many or limits
their power, they are silent on the laws (and regulations and "rights")
which benefit the few.

However there is another liberal tradition, one which is essentially
pre-capitalist which has more in common with the aspirations of
anarchism. As Chomsky put it:

> *"These ideas [of anarchism] grow out the Enlightenment; their roots
> are in Rousseau's **Discourse on Inequality**, Humbolt's **The Limits
> of State Action**, Kant's insistence, in his defence of the French
> Revolution, that freedom is the precondition for acquiring the
> maturity for freedom, not a gift to be granted when such maturity is
> achieved . . . With the development of industrial capitalism, a new
> and unanticipated system of injustice, it is libertarian socialism
> that has preserved and extended the radical humanist message of the
> Enlightenment and the classical liberal ideals that were perverted
> into an ideology to sustain the emerging social order. In fact, on the
> very same assumptions that led classical liberalism to oppose the
> intervention of the state in social life, capitalist social relations
> are also intolerable. This is clear, for example, from the classic
> work of [Wilhelm von] Humboldt, **The Limits of State Action**, which
> anticipated and perhaps inspired [John Stuart] Mill . . . This classic
> of liberal thought, completed in 1792, is in its essence profoundly,
> though prematurely, anticapitalist. Its ideas must be attenuated
> beyond recognition to be transmuted into an ideology of industrial
> capitalism."* [*"Notes on Anarchism"*, **For Reasons of State**, p.
> 156]

Chomsky discusses this in more detail in his essay *"Language and
Freedom"* (contained in both **Reason of State** and **The Chomsky
Reader**). As well as Humbolt and Mill, such "pre-capitalist" liberals
would include such radicals as Thomas Paine, who envisioned a society
based on artisan and small farmers (i.e. a pre-capitalist economy) with
a rough level of social equality and, of course, a minimal government.
His ideas inspired working class radicals across the world and, as E.P.
Thompson reminds us, Paine's **Rights of Man** was *"a foundation-text
of the English [and Scottish] working-class movement."* While his ideas
on government are *"close to a theory of anarchism,"* his reform
proposals *"set a source towards the social legislation of the twentieth
century."* [**The Making of the English Working Class**, p. 99, p. 101
and p. 102] His combination of concern for liberty and social justice
places him close to anarchism.

Then there is Adam Smith. While the right (particularly elements of the
"libertarian" right) claim him as a classic liberal, his ideas are more
complex than that. For example, as Noam Chomsky points out, Smith
advocated the free market because *"it would lead to perfect equality,
equality of condition, not just equality of opportunity."* [**Class
Warfare**, p. 124] As Smith himself put it, *"in a society where things
were left to follow their natural course, where there is perfect
liberty"* it would mean that *"advantages would soon return to the level
of other employments"* and so *"the different employments of labour and
stock must . . . be either perfectly equal or continually tending to
equality."* Nor did he oppose state intervention or state aid for the
working classes. For example, he advocated public education to counter
the negative effects of the division of labour. Moreover, he was against
state intervention because whenever *"a legislature attempts to regulate
differences between masters and their workmen, its counsellors are
always the masters. When regulation, therefore, is in favour of the
workmen, it is always just and equitable; but it is otherwise when in
favour of the masters."* He notes how *"the law"* would *"punish"*
workers' combinations *"very severely"* while ignoring the masters'
combinations (*"if it dealt impartially, it would treat the masters in
the same manner"*). [**The Wealth of Nations**, p. 88 and p. 129] Thus
state intervention was to be opposed in general because the state was
run by the few for the few, which would make state intervention benefit
the few, not the many. It is doubtful Smith would have left his ideas on
laissez-faire unchanged if he had lived to see the development of
corporate capitalism. It is this critical edge of Smith's work are
conveniently ignored by those claiming him for the classical liberal
tradition.

Smith, argues Chomsky, was *"a pre-capitalist and anti-capitalist person
with roots in the Enlightenment."* Yes, he argues, *"the classical
liberals, the [Thomas] Jeffersons and the Smiths, were opposing the
concentrations of power that they saw around them . . . They didn't see
other forms of concentration of power which only developed later. When
they did see them, they didn't like them. Jefferson was a good example.
He was strongly opposed to the concentrations of power that he saw
developing, and warned that the banking institutions and the industrial
corporations which were barely coming into existence in his day would
destroy the achievements of the Revolution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 125]

As Murray Bookchin notes, Jefferson *"is most clearly identified in the
early history of the United States with the political demands and
interests of the independent farmer-proprietor."* [**The Third
Revolution**, vol. 1, pp. 188-9] In other words, with pre-capitalist
economic forms. We also find Jefferson contrasting the *"aristocrats"*
and the *"democrats."* The former are *"those who fear and distrust the
people, and wish to draw all powers from them into the hands of the
higher classes."* The democrats *"identify with the people, have
confidence in them, cherish and consider them as the honest & safe . . .
depository of the public interest,"* if not always *"the most wise."*
[quoted by Chomsky, **Powers and Prospects**, p. 88] As Chomsky notes,
the *"aristocrats"* were *"the advocates of the rising capitalist state,
which Jefferson regarded with dismay, recognising the obvious
contradiction between democracy and the capitalism."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
88] Claudio J. Katz's essay on *"Thomas Jefferson's Liberal
Anticapitalism"* usefully explores these issues. [**American Journal of
Political Science**, vol. 47, No. 1 (Jan, 2003), pp. 1-17]

Jefferson even went so far as to argue that *"a little rebellion now and
then is a good thing . . . It is a medicine necessary for the sound
health of government . . . The tree of liberty must be refreshed from
time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants."* [quoted by Howard
Zinn, **A People's History of the United States**, p. 94] However, his
libertarian credentials are damaged by him being both a President of the
United States and a slave owner but compared to the other "founding
fathers" of the American state, his liberalism is of a democratic form.
As Chomsky reminds us, *"all the Founding Fathers hated democracy --
Thomas Jefferson was a partial exception, but only partial."* The
American state, as a classical liberal state, was designed (to quote
James Madison) *"to protect the minority of the opulent from the
majority."* Or, to repeat John Jay's principle, the *"people who own the
country ought to govern it."* [**Understanding Power**, p. 315] If
American is a (formally) democracy rather than an oligarchy, it is in
spite of rather than because of classical liberalism.

Then there is John Stuart Mill who recognised the fundamental
contradiction in classical liberalism. How can an ideology which
proclaims itself for individual liberty support institutions which
systematically nullify that liberty in practice? For this reason Mill
attacked patriarchal marriage, arguing that marriage must be a voluntary
association between equals, with *"sympathy in equality . . . living
together in love, without power on one side or obedience on the other."*
Rejecting the idea that there had to be *"an absolute master"* in any
association, he pointed out that in *"partnership in business . . . it
is not found or thought necessary to enact that in every partnership,
one partner shall have entire control over the concern, and the others
shall be bound to obey his rule."* [*"The Subjection of Women,"* quoted
by Susan L. Brown, **The Politics of Individualism**, pp. 45-6]

Yet his own example showed the flaw in liberal support for capitalism,
for the employee ***is*** subject to a relationship in which power
accrues to one party and obedience to another. Unsurprisingly,
therefore, he argued that the *"form of association . . . which is
mankind continue to improve, must be expected in the end to predominate,
is not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief, and
workpeople without a voice in management, but the association of the
labourers themselves on terms of equality, collectively owning the
capital . . . and working under managers elected and removable by
themselves."* [**The Principles of Political Economy**, p. 147]
Autocratic management during working hours is hardly compatible with
Mill's maxim that *"[o]ver himself, over his own body and mind, the
individual is sovereign."* Mill's opposition to centralised government
and wage slavery brought his ideas closer to anarchism than most
liberals, as did his comment that the *"social principle of the future"*
was *"how to unite the greatest individual liberty of action with a
common ownership in the raw materials of the globe, and equal
participation of all in the benefits of combined labour."* [quoted by
Peter Marshall, **Demanding the Impossible**, p. 164] His defence of
individuality, **On Liberty**, is a classic, if flawed, work and his
analysis of socialist tendencies (*"Chapters on Socialism"*) is worth
reading for its evaluation of their pros and cons from a (democratic)
liberal perspective.

Like Proudhon, Mill was a forerunner of modern-day market socialism and
a firm supporter of decentralisation and social participation. This,
argues Chomsky, is unsurprising for pre-capitalist classical liberal
thought *"is opposed to state intervention in social life, as a
consequence of deeper assumptions about the human need for liberty,
diversity, and free association. On the same assumptions, capitalist
relations of production, wage labour, competitiveness, the ideology of
'possessive individualism' -- all must be regarded as fundamentally
antihuman. Libertarian socialism is properly to be regarded as the
inheritor of the liberal ideals of the Enlightenment."* [*"Notes on
Anarchism"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 157]

Thus anarchism shares commonality with pre-capitalist and democratic
liberal forms. The hopes of these liberals were shattered with the
development of capitalism. To quote Rudolf Rocker's analysis:

> *"Liberalism and Democracy were pre-eminently political concepts, and
> since the great majority of the original adherents of both maintained
> the right of ownership in the old sense, these had to renounce them
> both when economic development took a course which could not be
> practically reconciled with the original principles of Democracy, and
> still less with those of Liberalism. Democracy, with its motto of 'all
> citizens equal before the law,' and Liberalism with its 'right of man
> over his own person,' both shipwrecked on the realities of the
> capitalist economic form. So long as millions of human beings in every
> country had to sell their labour-power to a small minority of owners,
> and to sink into the most wretched misery if they could find no
> buyers, the so-called 'equality before the law' remains merely a pious
> fraud, since the laws are made by those who find themselves in
> possession of the social wealth. But in the same way there can also be
> no talk of a 'right over one's own person,' for that right ends when
> one is compelled to submit to the economic dictation of another if he
> does not want to starve."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 10]

A.4.3 Are there any socialist thinkers close to anarchism?
----------------------------------------------------------

Anarchism developed in response to the development of capitalism and it
is in the non-anarchist socialist tradition which anarchism finds most
fellow travellers.

The earliest British socialists (the so-called Ricardian Socialists)
following in the wake of Robert Owen held ideas which were similar to
those of anarchists. For example, Thomas Hodgskin expounded ideas
similar to Proudhon's mutualism while William Thompson developed a
non-state, communal form of socialism based on *"communities of mutual
co-operative"* which had similarities to anarcho-communism (Thompson had
been a mutualist before becoming a communist in light of the problems
even a non-capitalist market would have). John Francis Bray is also of
interest, as is the radical agrarianist Thomas Spence who developed a
communal form of land-based socialism which expounded many ideas usually
associated with anarchism (see *"The Agrarian Socialism of Thomas
Spence"* by Brian Morris in his book **Ecology and Anarchism**).
Moreover, the early British trade union movement *"developed, stage by
stage, a theory of syndicalism"* 40 years before Bakunin and the
libertarian wing of the First International did. [E.P. Thompson, **The
Making of the English Working Class**, p. 912] Noel Thompson's **The
Real Rights of Man** is a good summary of all these thinkers and
movements, as is E.P. Thompson's classic social history of working class
life (and politics) of this period, **The Making of the English Working
Class**.

Libertarian ideas did not die out in Britain in the 1840s. There was
also the quasi-syndicalists of the Guild Socialists of the 1910s and
1920s who advocated a decentralised communal system with workers'
control of industry. G.D.H. Cole's **Guild Socialism Restated** is the
most famous work of this school, which also included author's S.G.
Hobson and A.R. Orage (Geoffrey Osteregaard's **The Tradition of
Workers' Control** provides an good summary of the ideas of Guild
Socialism). Bertrand Russell, another supporter of Guild Socialism, was
attracted to anarchist ideas and wrote an extremely informed and
thoughtful discussion of anarchism, syndicalism and Marxism in his
classic book **Roads to Freedom**.

While Russell was pessimistic about the possibility of anarchism in the
near future, he felt it was *"the ultimate idea to which society should
approximate."* As a Guild Socialist, he took it for granted that there
could *"be no real freedom or democracy until the men who do the work in
a business also control its management."* His vision of a good society
is one any anarchist would support: *"a world in which the creative
spirit is alive, in which life is an adventure full of joy and hope,
based upon the impulse to construct than upon the desire to retain what
we possess or to seize what is possessed by others. It must be a world
in which affection has free play, in which love is purged of the
instinct for domination, in which cruelty and envy have been dispelled
by happiness and the unfettered development of all the instincts that
build up life and fill it with mental delights."* [quoted by Noam
Chomsky, **Problems of Knowledge and Freedom**, pp. 59-60, p. 61 and p.
x] An informed and interesting writer on many subjects, his thought and
social activism has influenced many other thinkers, including Noam
Chomsky (whose **Problems of Knowledge and Freedom** is a wide ranging
discussion on some of the topics Russell addressed).

Another important British libertarian socialist thinker and activist was
William Morris. Morris, a friend of Kropotkin, was active in the
**Socialist League** and led its anti-parliamentarian wing. While
stressing he was not an anarchist, there is little real difference
between the ideas of Morris and most anarcho-communists (Morris said he
was a communist and saw no need to append "anarchist" to it as, for him,
communism was democratic and liberatory). A prominent member of the
"Arts and Crafts" movement, Morris argued for humanising work and it
was, to quoted the title of one of his most famous essays, as case of
**Useful Work vrs Useless Toil**. His utopia novel **News from Nowhere**
paints a compelling vision of a libertarian communist society where
industrialisation has been replaced with a communal craft-based economy.
It is a utopia which has long appealed to most social anarchists. For a
discussion of Morris' ideas, placed in the context of his famous utopia,
see **William Morris and News from Nowhere: A Vision for Our Time**
(Stephen Coleman and Paddy O'Sullivan (eds.))

Also of note is the Greek thinker Cornelius Castoriadis. Originally a
Trotskyist, Castoriadis evaluation of Trotsky's deeply flawed analysis
of Stalinist Russia as a degenerated workers' state lead him to reject
first Leninism and then Marxism itself. This led him to libertarian
conclusions, seeing the key issue not who owns the means of production
but rather hierarchy. Thus the class struggle was between those with
power and those subject to it. This led him to reject Marxist economics
as its value analysis abstracted from (i.e. ignored!) the class struggle
at the heart of production (Autonomist Marxism rejects this
interpretation of Marx, but they are the only Marxists who do).
Castoriadis, like social anarchists, saw the future society as one based
on radical autonomy, generalised self-management and workers' councils
organised from the bottom up. His three volume collected works
(**Political and Social Writings**) are essential reading for anyone
interested in libertarian socialist politics and a radical critique of
Marxism.

Special mention should also be made of Maurice Brinton, who, as well as
translating many works by Castoriadis, was a significant libertarian
socialist thinker and activist as well. An ex-Trotskyist like
Castoriadis, Brinton carved out a political space for a revolutionary
libertarian socialism, opposed to the bureaucratic reformism of Labour
as well as the police-state "socialism" of Stalinism and the
authoritarianism of the Leninism which produced it. He produced numerous
key pamphlets which shaped the thinking of a generation of anarchists
and other libertarian socialists. These included **Paris: May 1968**,
his brilliant eyewitness account of the near-revolution in France, the
essential **The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control** in which he exposed
Lenin's hostility to workers' self-management, and **The Irrational in
Politics**, a restatement and development of the early work of Wilhelm
Reich. These and many more articles have been collected in the book
**For Workers' Power: The Selected Writings of Maurice Brinton**, edited
by David Goodway.

The American radical historian Howard Zinn has sometimes called himself
an anarchist and is well informed about the anarchist tradition (he
wrote an excellent introductory essay on *"Anarchism"* for a US edition
of a Herbert Read book) . As well as his classic **A People's History of
the United States**, his writings of civil disobedience and non-violent
direct action are essential. An excellent collection of essays by this
libertarian socialist scholar has been produced under the title **The
Zinn Reader**. Another notable libertarian socialists close to anarchism
are Edward Carpenter (see, for example, Sheila Rowbotham's **Edward
Carpenter: Prophet of the New Life**) and Simone Weil (**Oppression and
Liberty**)

It would also be worthwhile to mention those market socialists who, like
anarchists, base their socialism on workers' self-management. Rejecting
central planning, they have turned back to the ideas of industrial
democracy and market socialism advocated by the likes of Proudhon
(although, coming from a Marxist background, they generally fail to
mention the link which their central-planning foes stress). Allan Engler
(in **Apostles of Greed**) and David Schweickart (in **Against
Capitalism** and **After Capitalism**) have provided useful critiques of
capitalism and presented a vision of socialism rooted in co-operatively
organised workplaces. While retaining an element of government and state
in their political ideas, these socialists have placed economic
self-management at the heart of their economic vision and, consequently,
are closer to anarchism than most socialists.

A.4.4 Are there any Marxist thinkers close to anarchism?
--------------------------------------------------------

None of the libertarian socialists we highlighted in the last section
were Marxists. This is unsurprising as most forms of Marxism are
authoritarian. However, this is not the case for all schools of Marxism.
There are important sub-branches of Marxism which shares the anarchist
vision of a self-managed society. These include Council Communism,
Situationism and Autonomism. Perhaps significantly, these few Marxist
tendencies which are closest to anarchism are, like the branches of
anarchism itself, not named after individuals. We will discuss each in
turn.

Council Communism was born in the German Revolution of 1919 when
Marxists inspired by the example of the Russian soviets and disgusted by
the centralism, opportunism and betrayal of the mainstream Marxist
social-democrats, drew similar anti-parliamentarian, direct actionist
and decentralised conclusions to those held by anarchists since Bakunin.
Like Marx's libertarian opponent in the First International, they argued
that a federation of workers' councils would form the basis of a
socialist society and, consequently, saw the need to build militant
workplace organisations to promote their formation. Lenin attacked these
movements and their advocates in his diatribe **Left-wing Communism: An
Infantile Disorder**, which council communist Herman Gorter demolished
in his **An Open Letter to Comrade Lenin**. By 1921, the council
communists broke with the Bolshevism that had already effectively
expelled them from both the national Communist Parties and the Communist
International.

Like the anarchists, they argued that Russia was a state-capitalist
party dictatorship and had nothing to be with socialism. And, again like
anarchists, the council communists argue that the process of building a
new society, like the revolution itself, is either the work of the
people themselves or doomed from the start. As with the anarchists, they
too saw the Bolshevik take-over of the soviets (like that of the trade
unions) as subverting the revolution and beginning the restoration of
oppression and exploitation.

To discover more about council communism, the works of Paul Mattick are
essential reading. While best known as a writer on Marxist economic
theory in such works as **Marx and Keynes**, **Economic Crisis and
Crisis Theory** and **Economics, Politics and the Age of Inflation**,
Mattick had been a council communist since the German revolution of
1919/1920. His books **Anti-Bolshevik Communism** and **Marxism: The
Last Refuge of the Bourgeoisie?** are excellent introductions to his
political ideas. Also essential reading is Anton Pannekeok's works. His
classic **Workers' Councils** explains council communism from first
principles while his **Lenin as Philosopher** dissects Lenin's claims to
being a Marxist (Serge Bricianer, **Pannekoek and the Workers'
Councils** is the best study of the development of Panekoek's ideas). In
the UK, the militant suffragette Sylvia Pankhurst became a council
communist under the impact of the Russian Revolution and, along with
anarchists like Guy Aldred, led the opposition to the importation of
Leninism into the communist movement there (see Mark Shipway's
**Anti-Parliamentary Communism: The Movement for Workers Councils in
Britain, 1917-45** for more details of libertarian communism in the UK).
Otto Ruhle and Karl Korsch are also important thinkers in this
tradition.

Building upon the ideas of council communism, the Situationists
developed their ideas in important new directions. Working in the late
1950s and 1960s, they combined council communist ideas with surrealism
and other forms of radical art to produce an impressive critique of
post-war capitalism. Unlike Castoriadis, whose ideas influenced them,
the Situationists continued to view themselves as Marxists, developing
Marx's critique of capitalist economy into a critique of capitalist
society as alienation had shifted from being located in capitalist
production into everyday life. They coined the expression ***"The
Spectacle"*** to describe a social system in which people become
alienated from their own lives and played the role of an audience, of
spectators. Thus capitalism had turned being into having and now, with
the spectacle, it turned having into appearing. They argued that we
could not wait for a distant revolution, but rather should liberate
ourselves in the here and now, creating events (*"situations"*) which
would disrupt the ordinary and normal to jolt people out of their
allotted roles within society. A social revolution based on sovereign
rank and file assemblies and self-managed councils would be the ultimate
"situation" and the aim of all Situationists.

While critical of anarchism, the differences between the two theories
are relatively minor and the impact of the Situationists on anarchism
cannot be underestimated. Many anarchists embraced their critique of
modern capitalist society, their subversion of modern art and culture
for revolutionary purposes and call for revolutionising everyday life.
Ironically, while Situationism viewed itself as an attempt to transcend
tradition forms of Marxism and anarchism, it essentially became subsumed
by anarchism. The classic works of situationism are Guy Debord's
**Society of the Spectacle** and Raoul Veneigem's **The Revolution of
Everyday Life**. The **Situationist International Anthology** (edited by
Ken Knabb) is essential reading for any budding Situationists, as is
Knabb's own **Public Secrets**.

Lastly there is Autonomist Marxism. Drawing on the works of the council
communism, Castoriadis, situationism and others, it places the class
struggle at the heart of its analysis of capitalism. It initially
developed in Italy during the 1960s and has many currents, some closer
to anarchism than others. While the most famous thinker in the
Autonomist tradition is probably Antonio Negri (who coined the wonderful
phrase *"money has only one face, that of the boss"* in **Marx Beyond
Marx**) his ideas are more within traditional Marxist. For an Autonomist
whose ideas are closer to anarchism, we need to turn to the US thinker
and activist who has written the one of the best summaries of
Kropotkin's ideas in which he usefully indicates the similarities
between anarcho-communism and Autonomist Marxism (*"Kropotkin,
Self-valorisation and the Crisis of Marxism,"* **Anarchist Studies**,
vol. 2, no. 3). His book **Reading Capital Politically** is an essential
text for understanding Autonomism and its history.

For Cleaver, *"autonomist Marxism"* as generic name for a variety of
movements, politics and thinkers who have emphasised the autonomous
power of workers -- autonomous from capital, obviously, but also from
their official organisations (e.g. the trade unions, the political
parties) and, moreover, the power of particular groups of working class
people to act autonomously from other groups (e.g. women from men). By
*"autonomy"* it is meant the ability of working class people to define
their own interests and to struggle for them and, critically, to go
beyond mere reaction to exploitation and to take the offensive in ways
that shape the class struggle and define the future. Thus they place
working class power at the centre of their thinking about capitalism,
how it develops and its dynamics as well as in the class conflicts
within it. This is not limited to just the workplace and just as workers
resist the imposition of work inside the factory or office, via
slowdowns, strikes and sabotage, so too do the non-waged resist the
reduction of their lives to work. For Autonomists, the creation of
communism is not something that comes later but is something which is
repeatedly created by current developments of new forms of working class
self-activity.

The similarities with social anarchism are obvious. Which probably
explains why Autonomists spend so much time analysing and quoting Marx
to justify their ideas for otherwise other Marxists will follow Lenin's
lead on the council communists and label them anarchists and ignore
them! For anarchists, all this Marx quoting seems amusing. Ultimately,
if Marx really was an Autonomist Marxist then why do Autonomists have to
spend so much time re-constructing what Marx "really" meant? Why did he
not just say it clearly to begin with? Similarly, why root out
(sometimes obscure) quotes and (sometimes passing) comments from Marx to
justify your insights? Does something stop being true if Marx did not
mention it first? Whatever the insights of Autonomism its Marxism will
drag it backwards by rooting its politics in the texts of two long dead
Germans. Like the surreal debate between Trotsky and Stalin in the 1920s
over *"Socialism in One Country"* conducted by means of Lenin quotes,
all that will be proved is not whether a given idea is right but simply
that the mutually agreed authority figure (Lenin or Marx) may have held
it. Thus anarchists suggest that Autonomists practice some autonomy when
it comes to Marx and Engels.

Other libertarian Marxists close to anarchism include Erich Fromm and
Wilhelm Reich. Both tried to combine Marx with Freud to produce a
radical analysis of capitalism and the personality disorders it causes.
Erich Fromm, in such books as **The Fear of Freedom**, **Man for
Himself**, **The Sane Society** and **To Have or To Be?** developed a
powerful and insightful analysis of capitalism which discussed how it
shaped the individual and built psychological barriers to freedom and
authentic living. His works discuss many important topics, including
ethics, the authoritarian personality (what causes it and how to change
it), alienation, freedom, individualism and what a good society would be
like.

Fromm's analysis of capitalism and the *"having"* mode of life are
incredibly insightful, especially in context with today's consumerism.
For Fromm, the way we live, work and organise together influence how we
develop, our health (mental and physical), our happiness more than we
suspect. He questions the sanity of a society which covets property over
humanity and adheres to theories of submission and domination rather
than self-determination and self-actualisation. His scathing indictment
of modern capitalism shows that it is the main source of the isolation
and alienation prevalent in today. Alienation, for Fromm, is at the
heart of the system (whether private or state capitalism). We are happy
to the extent that we realise ourselves and for this to occur our
society must value the human over the inanimate (property).

Fromm rooted his ideas in a humanistic interpretation of Marx, rejecting
Leninism and Stalinism as an authoritarian corruption of his ideas
(*"the destruction of socialism . . . began with Lenin."*). Moreover, he
stressed the need for a decentralised and libertarian form of socialism,
arguing that the anarchists had been right to question Marx's
preferences for states and centralisation. As he put it, the *"errors of
Marx and Engels . . . [and] their centralistic orientation, were due to
the fact they were much more rooted in the middle-class tradition of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, both psychologically and
intellectually, than men like Fourier, Owen, Proudhon and Kropotkin."*
As the *"contradiction"* in Marx between *"the principles of
centralisation and decentralisation,"* for Fromm *"Marx and Engels were
much more 'bourgeois' thinkers than were men like Proudhon, Bakunin,
Kropotkin and Landauer. Paradoxical as it sounds, the Leninist
development of Socialism represented a regression to the bourgeois
concepts of the state and of political power, rather than the new
socialist concept as it was expressed so much clearer by Owen, Proudhon
and others."* [**The Sane Society**, p. 265, p. 267 and p. 259] Fromm's
Marxism, therefore, was fundamentally of a libertarian and humanist type
and his insights of profound importance for anyone interested in
changing society for the better.

Wilheim Reich, like Fromm, set out to elaborate a social psychology
based on both Marxism and psychoanalysis. For Reich, sexual repression
led to people amenable to authoritarianism and happy to subject
themselves to authoritarian regimes. While he famously analysed Nazism
in this way (in **The Mass Psychology of Fascism**, his insights also
apply to other societies and movements (it is no co-incidence, for
example, that the religious right in America oppose pre-martial sex and
use scare tactics to get teenagers to associate it with disease, dirt
and guilt).

His argument is that due to sexual repression we develop what he called
*"character armour"* which internalises our oppressions and ensures that
we can function in a hierarchical society. This social conditioning is
produced by the patriarchal family and its net results is a powerful
reinforcement and perpetuation of the dominant ideology and the mass
production of individuals with obedience built into them, individuals
ready to accept the authority of teacher, priest, employer and
politician as well as to endorse the prevailing social structure. This
explains how individuals and groups can support movements and
institutions which exploit or oppress them. In other words, act think,
feel and act against themselves and, moreover, can internalise their own
oppression to such a degree that they may even seek to defend their
subordinate position.

Thus, for Reich, sexual repression produces an individual who is
adjusted to the authoritarian order and who will submit to it in spite
of all misery and degradation it causes them. The net result is fear of
freedom, and a conservative, reactionary mentality. Sexual repression
aids political power, not only through the process which makes the mass
individual passive and unpolitical, but also by creating in their
character structure an interest in actively supporting the authoritarian
order.

While his uni-dimensional focus on sex is misplaced, his analysis of how
we internalise our oppression in order to survive under hierarchy is
important for understanding why so many of the most oppressed people
seem to love their social position and those who rule over them. By
understanding this collective character structure and how it forms also
provides humanity with new means of transcending such obstacles to
social change. Only an awareness of how people's character structure
prevents them from becoming aware of their real interests can it be
combated and social self-emancipation assured.

Maurice Brinton's **The Irrational in Politics** is an excellent short
introduction to Reich's ideas which links their insights to libertarian
socialism.
