Section A - What is Anarchism?
==============================

Modern civilisation faces three potentially catastrophic crises: (1)
social breakdown, a shorthand term for rising rates of poverty,
homelessness, crime, violence, alienation, drug and alcohol abuse,
social isolation, political apathy, dehumanisation, the deterioration of
community structures of self-help and mutual aid, etc.; (2) destruction
of the planet's delicate ecosystems on which all complex forms of life
depend; and (3) the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly nuclear weapons.

Orthodox opinion, including that of Establishment "experts," mainstream
media, and politicians, generally regards these crises as separable,
each having its own causes and therefore capable of being dealt with on
a piecemeal basis, in isolation from the other two. Obviously, however,
this "orthodox" approach isn't working, since the problems in question
are getting worse. Unless some better approach is taken soon, we are
clearly headed for disaster, either from catastrophic war, ecological
Armageddon, or a descent into urban savagery -- or all of the above.

Anarchism offers a unified and coherent way of making sense of these
crises, by tracing them to a common source. This source is the principle
of **hierarchical authority**, which underlies the major institutions of
all "civilised" societies, whether capitalist or "communist." Anarchist
analysis therefore starts from the fact that all of our major
institutions are in the form of hierarchies, i.e. organisations that
concentrate power at the top of a pyramidal structure, such as
corporations, government bureaucracies, armies, political parties,
religious organisations, universities, etc. It then goes on to show how
the authoritarian relations inherent in such hierarchies negatively
affect individuals, their society, and culture. In the first part of
this FAQ (**sections A to E**) we will present the anarchist analysis of
hierarchical authority and its negative effects in greater detail.

It should not be thought, however, that anarchism is just a critique of
modern civilisation, just "negative" or "destructive." Because it is
much more than that. For one thing, it is also a proposal for a free
society. Emma Goldman expressed what might be called the "anarchist
question" as follows: *"The problem that confronts us today. . . is how
to be one's self and yet in oneness with others, to feel deeply with all
human beings and still retain one's own characteristic qualities."*
[**Red Emma Speaks**, pp. 158-159] In other words, how can we create a
society in which the potential for each individual is realised but not
at the expense of others? In order to achieve this, anarchists envision
a society in which, instead of being controlled ***"from the top
down"*** through hierarchical structures of centralised power, the
affairs of humanity will, to quote Benjamin Tucker, *"be managed by
individuals or voluntary associations."* [**Anarchist Reader**, p. 149]
While later sections of the FAQ (**sections I and J**) will describe
anarchism's positive proposals for organising society in this way, "from
the bottom up," some of the constructive core of anarchism will be seen
even in the earlier sections. The positive core of anarchism can even be
seen in the anarchist critique of such flawed solutions to the social
question as Marxism and right-wing "libertarianism" (**sections F and
H**, respectively).

As Clifford Harper elegantly puts it, *"[l]ike all great ideas,
anarchism is pretty simple when you get down to it -- human beings are
at their best when they are living free of authority, deciding things
among themselves rather than being ordered about."* [**Anarchy: A
Graphic Guide**, p. vii] Due to their desire to maximise individual and
therefore social freedom, anarchists wish to dismantle all institutions
that repress people:

> *"Common to all Anarchists is the desire to free society of all
> political and social coercive institutions which stand in the way of
> the development of a free humanity."* [Rudolf Rocker,
> **Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 9]

As we'll see, all such institutions are hierarchies, and their
repressive nature stems directly from their hierarchical form.

Anarchism is a socio-economic and political theory, but not an ideology.
The difference is **very** important. Basically, theory means you have
ideas; an ideology means ideas have you. Anarchism is a body of ideas,
but they are flexible, in a constant state of evolution and flux, and
open to modification in light of new data. As society changes and
develops, so does anarchism. An ideology, in contrast, is a set of
"fixed" ideas which people believe dogmatically, usually ignoring
reality or "changing" it so as to fit with the ideology, which is (by
definition) correct. All such "fixed" ideas are the source of tyranny
and contradiction, leading to attempts to make everyone fit onto a
Procrustean Bed. This will be true regardless of the ideology in
question -- Leninism, Objectivism, "Libertarianism," or whatever -- all
will all have the same effect: the destruction of real individuals in
the name of a doctrine, a doctrine that usually serves the interest of
some ruling elite. Or, as Michael Bakunin puts it:

> *"Until now all human history has been only a perpetual and bloody
> immolation of millions of poor human beings in honour of some pitiless
> abstraction -- God, country, power of state, national honour,
> historical rights, judicial rights, political liberty, public
> welfare."* [**God and the State**, p. 59]

Dogmas are static and deathlike in their rigidity, often the work of
some dead "prophet," religious or secular, whose followers erect his or
her ideas into an idol, immutable as stone. Anarchists want the living
to bury the dead so that the living can get on with their lives. The
living should rule the dead, not vice versa. Ideologies are the nemesis
of critical thinking and consequently of freedom, providing a book of
rules and "answers" which relieve us of the "burden" of thinking for
ourselves.

In producing this FAQ on anarchism it is not our intention to give you
the "correct" answers or a new rule book. We will explain a bit about
what anarchism has been in the past, but we will focus more on its
modern forms and why **we** are anarchists today. The FAQ is an attempt
to provoke thought and analysis on your part. If you are looking for a
new ideology, then sorry, anarchism is not for you.

While anarchists try to be realistic and practical, we are not
"reasonable" people. "Reasonable" people uncritically accept what the
"experts" and "authorities" tell them is true, and so they will always
remain slaves! Anarchists know that, as Bakunin wrote:

> *"[a] person is strong only when he stands upon his own truth, when he
> speaks and acts from his deepest convictions. Then, whatever the
> situation he may be in, he always knows what he must say and do. He
> may fall, but he cannot bring shame upon himself or his causes."*
> [quoted in Albert Meltzer, **I couldn't Paint Golden Angels**, p. 2]

What Bakunin describes is the power of independent thought, which is the
power of freedom. We encourage you not to be "reasonable," not to accept
what others tell you, but to think and act for yourself!

One last point: to state the obvious, this is **not** the final word on
anarchism. Many anarchists will disagree with much that is written here,
but this is to be expected when people think for themselves. All we wish
to do is indicate the **basic** ideas of anarchism and give our analysis
of certain topics based on how we understand and apply these ideas. We
are sure, however, that all anarchists will agree with the core ideas we
present, even if they may disagree with our application of them here and
there.
