A.3 What types of anarchism are there?
======================================

One thing that soon becomes clear to any one interested in anarchism is
that there is not one single form of anarchism. Rather, there are
different schools of anarchist thought, different types of anarchism
which have many disagreements with each other on numerous issues. These
types are usually distinguished by tactics and/or goals, with the latter
(the vision of a free society) being the major division.

This means that anarchists, while all sharing a few key ideas, can be
grouped into broad categories, depending on the economic arrangements
that they consider to be most suitable to human freedom. However, all
types of anarchists share a basic approach. To quote Rudolf Rocker:

> *"In common with the founders of Socialism, Anarchists demand the
> abolition of all economic monopolies and the common ownership of the
> soil and all other means of production, the use of which must be
> available to all without distinction; for personal and social freedom
> is conceivable only on the basis of equal economic advantages for
> everybody. Within the Socialist movement itself the Anarchists
> represent the viewpoint that the war against capitalism must be at the
> same time a war against all institutions of political power, for in
> history economic exploitation has always gone hand in hand with
> political and social oppression. The exploitation of man by man and
> the domination of man over man are inseparable, and each is the
> condition of the other."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, pp. 62-3]

It is within this general context that anarchists disagree. The main
differences are between ***"individualist"*** and ***"social"***
anarchists, although the economic arrangements each desire are not
mutually exclusive. Of the two, social anarchists (communist-anarchists,
anarcho-syndicalists and so on) have always been the vast majority, with
individualist anarchism being restricted mostly to the United States. In
this section we indicate the differences between these main trends
within the anarchist movement. As will soon become clear, while social
and individualist anarchists both oppose the state and capitalism, they
disagree on the nature of a free society (and how to get there). In a
nutshell, social anarchists prefer communal solutions to social problems
and a communal vision of the good society (i.e. a society that protects
and encourages individual freedom). Individualist anarchists, as their
name suggests, prefer individual solutions and have a more
individualistic vision of the good society. However, we must not let
these difference cloud what both schools have in common, namely a desire
to maximise individual freedom and end state and capitalist domination
and exploitation.

In addition to this major disagreement, anarchists also disagree over
such issues as syndicalism, pacifism, "lifestylism," animal rights and a
whole host of other ideas, but these, while important, are only
different aspects of anarchism. Beyond a few key ideas, the anarchist
movement (like life itself) is in a constant state of change, discussion
and thought -- as would be expected in a movement that values freedom so
highly.

The most obvious thing to note about the different types of anarchism is
that *"[n]one are named after some Great Thinker; instead, they are
invariably named either after some kind of practice, or, most often,
organisational principle . . . Anarchists like to distinguish themselves
by what they do, and how they organise themselves to go about doing
it."* [David Graeber, **Fragments of An Anarchist Anthropology**, p. 5]
This does not mean that anarchism does not have individuals who have
contributed significantly to anarchist theory. Far from it, as can be
seen in [section A.4](secA4.html) there are many such people. Anarchists
simply recognise that to call your theory after an individual is a kind
of idolatry. Anarchists know that even the greatest thinker is only
human and, consequently, can make mistakes, fail to live up to their
ideals or have a partial understanding of certain issues (see [section
H.2](secH2.html) for more discussion on this). Moreover, we see that the
world changes and, obviously, what was a suitable practice or programme
in, say, industrialising France of the 1840s may have its limitations in
21st century France!

Consequently, it is to be expected that a social theory like anarchism
would have numerous schools of thought and practice associated with it.
Anarchism, as we noted in [section A.5](secA5.html), has its roots in
the struggles of working class people against oppression. Anarchist
ideas have developed in many different social situations and,
consequently, have reflected those circumstances. Most obviously,
individualist anarchism initially developed in pre-industrial America
and as a result has a different perspective on many issues than social
anarchism. As America changed, going from a predominantly pre-capitalist
rural society to an industrialised capitalist one, American anarchism
changed:

> *"Originally the American movement, the native creation which arose
> with Josiah Warren in 1829, was purely individualistic; the student of
> economy will easily understand the material and historical causes for
> such development. But within the last twenty years the communist idea
> has made great progress, owning primarily to that concentration in
> capitalist production which has driven the American workingman [and
> woman] to grasp at the idea of solidarity, and, secondly, to the
> expulsion of active communist propagandists from Europe."* [Voltairine
> de Cleyre, **The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**, p. 110]

Thus rather than the numerous types of anarchism being an expression of
some sort of "incoherence" within anarchism, it simply shows a movement
which has its roots in real life rather than the books of long dead
thinkers. It also shows a healthy recognition that people are different
and that one person's dream may be another's nightmare and that
different tactics and organisations may be required at different social
periods and struggles. So while anarchists have their preferences on how
they think a free society will, in general, be like and be created they
are aware that other forms of anarchism and libertarian tactics may be
more suitable for other people and social circumstances. However, just
because someone calls themselves or their theory anarchism does not make
it so. Any genuine type of anarchism must share the fundamental
perspectives of the movement, in other words be anti-state and
anti-capitalist.

Moreover, claims of anarchist "incoherence" by its critics are usually
overblown. After all, being followers of Marx and/or Lenin has not
stopped Marxists from splitting into numerous parties, groups and sects.
Nor has it stopped sectarian conflict between them based on whose
interpretation of the holy writings are the "correct" ones or who has
used the "correct" quotes to bolster attempts to adjust their ideas and
practice to a world significantly different from Europe in the 1850s or
Russia in the 1900s. At least anarchists are honest about their
differences!

Lastly, to put our cards on the table, the writers of this FAQ place
themselves firmly in the "social" strand of anarchism. This does not
mean that we ignore the many important ideas associated with
individualist anarchism, only that we think social anarchism is more
appropriate for modern society, that it creates a stronger base for
individual freedom, and that it more closely reflects the sort of
society we would like to live in.

A.3.1 What are the differences between individualist and social anarchists?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

While there is a tendency for individuals in both camps to claim that
the proposals of the other camp would lead to the creation of some kind
of state, the differences between individualists and social anarchists
are not very great. Both are anti-state, anti-authority and
anti-capitalist. The major differences are twofold.

The first is in regard to the means of action in the here and now (and
so the manner in which anarchy will come about). Individualists
generally prefer education and the creation of alternative institutions,
such as mutual banks, unions, communes, etc. They usually support
strikes and other non-violent forms of social protest (such as rent
strikes, the non-payment of taxes and so on). Such activity, they argue,
will ensure that present society will gradually develop out of
government into an anarchist one. They are primarily evolutionists, not
revolutionists, and dislike social anarchists' use of direct action to
create revolutionary situations. They consider revolution as being in
contradiction to anarchist principles as it involves the expropriation
of capitalist property and, therefore, authoritarian means. Rather they
seek to return to society the wealth taken out of society by property by
means of an new, alternative, system of economics (based around mutual
banks and co-operatives). In this way a general "social liquidation"
would be rendered easy, with anarchism coming about by reform and not by
expropriation.

Most social anarchists recognise the need for education and to create
alternatives (such as libertarian unions), but most disagree that this
is enough in itself. They do not think capitalism can be reformed piece
by piece into anarchy, although they do not ignore the importance of
reforms by social struggle that increase libertarian tendencies within
capitalism. Nor do they think revolution is in contradiction with
anarchist principles as it is not authoritarian to destroy authority (be
it state or capitalist). Thus the expropriation of the capitalist class
and the destruction of the state by social revolution is a libertarian,
not authoritarian, act by its very nature as it is directed against
those who govern and exploit the vast majority. In short, social
anarchists are usually evolutionists **and** revolutionists, trying to
strengthen libertarian tendencies within capitalism while trying to
abolish that system by social revolution. However, as some social
anarchists are purely evolutionists too, this difference is not the most
important one dividing social anarchists from individualists.

The second major difference concerns the form of anarchist economy
proposed. Individualists prefer a market-based system of distribution to
the social anarchists need-based system. Both agree that the current
system of capitalist property rights must be abolished and that use
rights must replace property rights in the means of life (i.e. the
abolition of rent, interest and profits -- *"usury,"* to use the
individualist anarchists' preferred term for this unholy trinity). In
effect, both schools follow Proudhon's classic work **What is
Property?** and argue that possession must replace property in a free
society (see [section B.3](secB3.html) for a discussion of anarchist
viewpoints on property). Thus property *"will lose a certain attribute
which sanctifies it now. The absolute ownership of it -- 'the right to
use or abuse' -- will be abolished, and possession, use, will be the
only title. It will be seen how impossible it would be for one person to
'own' a million acres of land, without a title deed, backed by a
government ready to protect the title at all hazards."* [Lucy Parsons,
**Freedom, Equality & Solidarity**, p. 33

However, within this use-rights framework, the two schools of anarchism
propose different systems. The social anarchist generally argues for
communal (or social) ownership and use. This would involve social
ownership of the means of production and distribution, with personal
possessions remaining for things you use, but not what was used to
create them. Thus *"your watch is your own, but the watch factory
belongs to the people."* *"Actual use,"* continues Berkman, *"will be
considered the only title -- not to ownership but to possession. The
organisation of the coal miners, for example, will be in charge of the
coal mines, not as owners but as the operating agency . . . Collective
possession, co-operatively managed in the interests of the community,
will take the place of personal ownership privately conducted for
profit."* [**What is Anarchism?**, p. 217]

This system would be based on workers' self-management of their work and
(for most social anarchists) the free sharing of the product of that
labour (i.e. an economic system without money). This is because *"in the
present state of industry, when everything is interdependent, when each
branch of production is knit up with all the rest, the attempt to claim
an individualist origin for the products of industry is untenable."*
Given this, it is impossible to *"estimate the share of each in the
riches which **all** contribute to amass"* and, moreover, the *"common
possession of the instruments of labour must necessarily bring with it
the enjoyment in common of the fruits of common labour."* [Kropotkin,
**The Conquest of Bread**, p. 45 and p. 46] By this social anarchists
simply mean that the social product which is produced by all would be
available to all and each individual who has contributed productively to
society can take what they need (how quickly we can reach such an ideal
is a moot point, as we discuss in [section I.2.2](secI2.html#seci22")).
Some social anarchists, like mutualists for example, are against such a
system of libertarian (or free) communism, but, in general, the vast
majority of social anarchists look forward to the end of money and,
therefore, of buying and selling. All agree, however, that anarchy will
see *"Capitalistic and proprietary exploitation stopped everywhere"* and
*"the wage system abolished"* whether by *"equal and just exchange"*
(like Proudhon) or by the free sharing (like Kropotkin). [Proudhon,
**The General Idea of the Revolution**, p. 281]

In contrast, the individualist anarchist (like the mutualist) denies
that this system of use-rights should include the product of the workers
labour. Instead of social ownership, individualist anarchists propose a
more market based system in which workers would possess their own means
of production and exchange the product of their labour freely with other
workers. They argue that capitalism is not, in fact, a truly free
market. Rather, by means of the state, capitalists have placed fetters
on the market to create and protect their economic and social power
(market discipline for the working class, state aid for the ruling class
in other words). These state created monopolies (of money, land, tariffs
and patents) and state enforcement of capitalist property rights are the
source of economic inequality and exploitation. With the abolition of
government, **real** free competition would result and ensure the end of
capitalism and capitalist exploitation (see Benjamin Tucker's essay
**State Socialism and Anarchism** for an excellent summary of this
argument).

The Individualist anarchists argue that the means of production (bar
land) are the product of individual labour and so they accept that
people should be able to sell the means of production they use, if they
so desire. However, they reject capitalist property rights and instead
favour an *"occupancy and use"* system. If the means of production, say
land, is not in use, it reverts back to common ownership and is
available to others for use. They think this system, called mutualism,
will result in workers control of production and the end of capitalist
exploitation and usury. This is because, logically and practically, a
regime of "occupancy and use" cannot be squared with wage labour. If a
workplace needs a group to operate it then it must be owned by the group
who use it. If one individual claims to own it and it is, in fact, used
by more than that person then, obviously, "occupancy and use" is
violated. Equally, if an owner employs others to use the workplace then
the boss can appropriate the product of the workers' labour, so
violating the maxim that labour should receive its full product. Thus
the principles of individualist anarchism point to anti-capitalist
conclusions (see [section G.3](secG3.html)).

This second difference is the most important. The individualist fears
being forced to join a community and thus losing his or her freedom
(including the freedom to exchange freely with others). Max Stirner puts
this position well when he argues that *"Communism, by the abolition of
all personal property, only presses me back still more into dependence
on another, to wit, on the generality or collectivity . . . [which is] a
condition hindering my free movement, a sovereign power over me.
Communism rightly revolts against the pressure that I experience from
individual proprietors; but still more horrible is the might that it
puts in the hands of the collectivity."* [**The Ego and Its Own**, p.
257] Proudhon also argued against communism, stating that the community
becomes the proprietor under communism and so capitalism and communism
are based on property and so authority (see the section
*"Characteristics of communism and of property"* in **What is
Property?**). Thus the Individualist anarchist argues that social
ownership places the individual's freedom in danger as any form of
communism subjects the individual to society or the commune. They fear
that as well as dictating individual morality, socialisation would
effectively eliminate workers' control as "society" would tell workers
what to produce and take the product of their labour. In effect, they
argue that communism (or social ownership in general) would be similar
to capitalism, with the exploitation and authority of the boss replaced
with that of "society."

Needless to say, social anarchists disagree. They argue that Stirner's
and Proudhon's comments are totally correct -- but only about
authoritarian communism. As Kropotkin argued, *"before and in 1848, the
theory [of communism] was put forward in such a shape as to fully
account for Proudhon's distrust as to its effect upon liberty. The old
idea of Communism was the idea of monastic communities under the severe
rule of elders or of men of science for directing priests. The last
vestiges of liberty and of individual energy would be destroyed, if
humanity ever had to go through such a communism."* [**Act for
Yourselves**, p. 98] Kropotkin always argued that communist-anarchism
was a **new** development and given that it dates from the 1870s,
Proudhon's and Stirner's remarks cannot be considered as being directed
against it as they could not be familiar with it.

Rather than subject the individual to the community, social anarchists
argue that communal ownership would provide the necessary framework to
protect individual liberty in all aspects of life by abolishing the
power of the property owner, in whatever form it takes. In addition,
rather than abolish **all** individual "property," communist anarchism
acknowledges the importance of individual possessions and individual
space. Thus we find Kropotkin arguing against forms of communism that
*"desire to manage the community after the model of a family . . . [to
live] all in the same house and . . . thus forced to continuously meet
the same 'brethren and sisters' . . . [it is] a fundamental error to
impose on all the 'great family' instead of trying, on the contrary, to
guarantee as much freedom and home life to each individual."* [**Small
Communal Experiments and Why They Fail**, pp. 8-9] The aim of
anarchist-communism is, to again quote Kropotkin, to place *"the product
reaped or manufactured at the disposal of all, leaving to each the
liberty to consume them as he pleases in his own home."* [**The Place of
Anarchism in the Evolution of Socialist Thought**, p. 7] This ensures
individual expression of tastes and desires and so individuality -- both
in consumption **and** in production, as social anarchists are firm
supporters of workers' self-management.

Thus, for social anarchists, the Individualist Anarchist opposition to
communism is only valid for state or authoritarian communism and ignores
the fundamental nature of communist-anarchism. Communist anarchists do
not replace individuality with community but rather use community to
defend individuality. Rather than have "society" control the individual,
as the Individualist Anarchist fears, social anarchism is based on
importance of individuality and individual expression:

> *"Anarchist Communism maintains that most valuable of all conquests --
> individual liberty -- and moreover extends it and gives it a solid
> basis -- economic liberty -- without which political liberty is
> delusive; it does not ask the individual who has rejected god, the
> universal tyrant, god the king, and god the parliament, to give unto
> himself a god more terrible than any of the proceeding -- god the
> Community, or to abdicate upon its altar his [or her] independence,
> his [or her] will, his [or her] tastes, and to renew the vow of
> asceticism which he formally made before the crucified god. It says to
> him, on the contrary, 'No society is free so long as the individual is
> not so! . . .'"* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 14-15]

In addition, social anarchists have always recognised the need for
voluntary collectivisation. If people desire to work by themselves, this
is not seen as a problem (see Kropotkin's **The Conquest of Bread**, p.
61 and **Act for Yourselves**, pp. 104-5 as well as Malatesta's **Errico
Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 99 and p. 103). This, social
anarchists, stress does not in any way contradict their principles or
the communist nature of their desired society as such exceptions are
rooted in the "use rights" system both are based in (see [section
I.6.2](secI.html#seci62) for a full discussion). In addition, for social
anarchists an association exists solely for the benefit of the
individuals that compose it; it is the means by which people co-operate
to meet their common needs. Therefore, **all** anarchists emphasise the
importance of free agreement as the basis of an anarchist society. Thus
all anarchists agree with Bakunin:

> *"Collectivism could only imposed only on slaves, and this kind of
> collectivism would then be the negation of humanity. In a free
> community, collectivism can only come about through the pressure of
> circumstances, not by imposition from above but by a free spontaneous
> movement from below."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 200]

If individualists desire to work for themselves and exchange goods with
others, social anarchists have no objection. Hence our comments that the
two forms of anarchism are not mutually exclusive. Social anarchists
support the right of individuals **not** to join a commune while
Individualist Anarchists support the rights of individuals to pool their
possessions as they see fit, including communistic associations.
However, if, in the name of freedom, an individual wished to claim
property rights so as to exploit the labour of others, social anarchists
would quickly resist this attempt to recreate statism in the name of
"liberty." Anarchists do not respect the "freedom" to be a ruler! In the
words of Luigi Galleani:

> *"No less sophistical is the tendency of those who, under the
> comfortable cloak of anarchist individualism, would welcome the idea
> of domination . . . But the heralds of domination presume to practice
> individualism in the name of their ego, over the obedient, resigned,
> or inert ego of others."* [**The End of Anarchism?**, p. 40]

Moreover, for social anarchists, the idea that the means of production
can be sold implies that private property could be reintroduced in an
anarchist society. In a free market, some succeed and others fail. As
Proudhon argued, in competition victory goes to the strongest. When
one's bargaining power is weaker than another then any "free exchange"
will benefit the stronger party. Thus the market, even a non-capitalist
one, will tend to magnify inequalities of wealth and power over time
rather than equalising them. Under capitalism this is more obvious as
those with only their labour power to sell are in a weaker position than
those with capital but individualist anarchism would also be affected.

Thus, social anarchists argue, much against its will an individualist
anarchist society would evolve away from fair exchanges back into
capitalism. If, as seems likely, the "unsuccessful" competitors are
forced into unemployment they may have to sell their labour to the
"successful" in order to survive. This would create authoritarian social
relationships and the domination of the few over the many via "free
contracts." The enforcement of such contracts (and others like them), in
all likelihood, *"opens . . . the way for reconstituting under the
heading of 'defence' all the functions of the State."* [Peter Kropotkin,
**Anarchism**, p. 297]

Benjamin Tucker, the anarchist most influenced by liberalism and free
market ideas, also faced the problems associated with all schools of
abstract individualism -- in particular, the acceptance of authoritarian
social relations as an expression of "liberty." This is due to the
similarity of property to the state. Tucker argued that the state was
marked by two things, aggression and *"the assumption of authority over
a given area and all within it, exercised generally for the double
purpose of more complete oppression of its subjects and extension of its
boundaries."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 22] However, the boss and
landlord also has authority over a given area (the property in question)
and all within it (workers and tenants). The former control the actions
of the latter just as the state rules the citizen or subject. In other
words, individual ownership produces the same social relationships as
that created by the state, as it comes from the same source (monopoly of
power over a given area and those who use it).

Social anarchists argue that the Individualist Anarchists acceptance of
individual ownership and their individualistic conception of individual
freedom can lead to the denial of individual freedom by the creation of
social relationships which are essentially authoritarian/statist in
nature. *"The individualists,"* argued Malatesta, *"give the greatest
importance to an abstract concept of freedom and fail to take into
account, or dwell on the fact that real, concrete freedom is the outcome
of solidarity and voluntary co-operation."* [**The Anarchist
Revolution**, p. 16] Thus wage labour, for example, places the worker in
the same relationship to the boss as citizenship places the citizen to
the state, namely of one of domination and subjection. Similarly with
the tenant and the landlord.

Such a social relationship cannot help but produce the other aspects of
the state. As Albert Meltzer points out, this can have nothing but
statist implications, because *"the school of Benjamin Tucker -- by
virtue of their individualism -- accepted the need for police to break
strikes so as to guarantee the employer's 'freedom.' All this school of
so-called Individualists accept . . . the necessity of the police force,
hence for government, and the prime definition of anarchism is **no
government.**"* [**Anarchism: Arguments For and Against**, p. 8] It is
partly for this reason social anarchists support social ownership as the
best means of protecting individual liberty.

Accepting individual ownership this problem can only be "got round" by
accepting, along with Proudhon (the source of many of Tucker's economic
ideas), the need for co-operatives to run workplaces that require more
than one worker. This naturally complements their support for "occupancy
and use" for land, which would effectively abolish landlords. Without
co-operatives, workers will be exploited for *"it is well enough to talk
of [the worker] buying hand tools, or small machinery which can be moved
about; but what about the gigantic machinery necessary to the operation
of a mine, or a mill? It requires many to work it. If one owns it, will
he not make the others pay tribute for using it?"* This is because *"no
man would employ another to work for him unless he could get more for
his product than he had to pay for it, and that being the case, the
inevitable course of exchange and re-exchange would be that the man
**having received less than the full amount.**"* [Voltairine de Cleyre,
*"Why I am an Anarchist"*, **Exquisite Rebel**, p. 61 and p. 60] Only
when the people who use a resource own it can individual ownership not
result in hierarchical authority or exploitation (i.e.
statism/capitalism). Only when an industry is co-operatively owned, can
the workers ensure that they govern themselves during work and can get
the full value of the goods they make once they are sold.

This solution is the one Individualist Anarchists ***do*** seem to
accept and the only one consistent with all their declared principles
(as well as anarchism). This can be seen when French individualist E.
Armand argued that the key difference between his school of anarchism
and communist-anarchism is that as well as seeing *"ownership of the
consumer goods representing an extension of [the worker's] personality"*
it also *"regards ownership of the means of production and free disposal
of his produce as the quintessential guarantee of the autonomy of the
individual. The understanding is that such ownership boils down to the
chance to deploy (as individuals, couples, family groups, etc.) the
requisite plot of soil or machinery of production to meet the
requirements of the social unit, provided that the proprietor does not
transfer it to someone else or reply upon the services of someone else
in operating it."* Thus the individualist anarchist could *"defend
himself against . . . the exploitation of anyone by one of his
neighbours who will set him to work in his employ and for his benefit"*
and *"greed, which is to say the opportunity for an individual, couple
or family group to own more than strictly required for their normal
upkeep."* [*"Mini-Manual of the Anarchist Individualist"*, pp. 145-9,
**Anarchism**, Robert Graham (ed.), p. 147 and pp. 147-8]

The ideas of the American individualist anarchists logically flow to the
same conclusions. "Occupancy and Use" automatically excludes wage labour
and so exploitation and oppression. As Wm. Gary Kline correctly points
out, the US Individualist anarchists *"expected a society of largely
self-employed workmen with no significant disparity of wealth between
any of them."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 104] It is this
vision of a self-employed society that logically flows from their
principles which ensures that their ideas are truly anarchist. As it is,
their belief that their system would ensure the elimination of profit,
rent and interest place them squarely in the anti-capitalist camp
alongside social anarchists.

Needless to say, social anarchists disagree with individualist
anarchism, arguing that there are undesirable features of even
non-capitalist markets which would undermine freedom and equality.
Moreover, the development of industry has resulted in **natural**
barriers of entry into markets and this not only makes it almost
impossible to abolish capitalism by competing against it, it also makes
the possibility of recreating usury in new forms likely. Combine this
with the difficulty in determining the exact contribution of each worker
to a product in a modern economy and you see why social anarchists argue
that the only real solution to capitalism is to ensure community
ownership and management of the economy. It is this recognition of the
developments within the capitalist economy which make social anarchists
reject individualist anarchism in favour of communalising, and so
decentralising, production by freely associated and co-operative labour
on a large-scale rather than just in the workplace.

For more discussion on the ideas of the Individualist anarchists, and
why social anarchists reject them, see section G -- ["Is individualist
anarchism capitalistic?"](secGcon.html)

A.3.2 Are there different types of social anarchism?
----------------------------------------------------

Yes. Social anarchism has four major trends -- mutualism, collectivism,
communism and syndicalism. The differences are not great and simply
involve differences in strategy. The one major difference that does
exist is between mutualism and the other kinds of social anarchism.
Mutualism is based around a form of market socialism -- workers'
co-operatives exchanging the product of their labour via a system of
community banks. This mutual bank network would be *"formed by the whole
community, not for the especial advantage of any individual or class,
but for the benefit of all . . . [with] no interest . . . exacted on
loans, except enough to cover risks and expenses."* Such a system would
end capitalist exploitation and oppression for by *"introducing
mutualism into exchange and credit we introduce it everywhere, and
labour will assume a new aspect and become truly democratic."* [Charles
A. Dana, **Proudhon and his *"Bank of the People"***, pp. 44-45 and p.
45]

The social anarchist version of mutualism differs from the individualist
form by having the mutual banks owned by the local community (or
commune) instead of being independent co-operatives. This would ensure
that they provided investment funds to co-operatives rather than to
capitalistic enterprises. Another difference is that some social
anarchist mutualists support the creation of what Proudhon termed an
***"agro-industrial federation"*** to complement the federation of
libertarian communities (called communes by Proudhon). This is a
*"confederation . . . intended to provide reciprocal security in
commerce and industry"* and large scale developments such as roads,
railways and so on. The purpose of *"specific federal arrangements is to
protect the citizens of the federated states [sic!] from capitalist and
financial feudalism, both within them and from the outside."* This is
because *"political right requires to be buttressed by economic right."*
Thus the agro-industrial federation would be required to ensure the
anarchist nature of society from the destabilising effects of market
exchanges (which can generate increasing inequalities in wealth and so
power). Such a system would be a practical example of solidarity, as
*"industries are sisters; they are parts of the same body; one cannot
suffer without the others sharing in its suffering. They should
therefore federate, not to be absorbed and confused together, but in
order to guarantee mutually the conditions of common prosperity . . .
Making such an agreement will not detract from their liberty; it will
simply give their liberty more security and force."* [**The Principle of
Federation**, p. 70, p. 67 and p. 72]

The other forms of social anarchism do not share the mutualists support
for markets, even non-capitalist ones. Instead they think that freedom
is best served by communalising production and sharing information and
products freely between co-operatives. In other words, the other forms
of social anarchism are based upon common (or social) ownership by
federations of producers' associations and communes rather than
mutualism's system of individual co-operatives. In Bakunin's words, the
*"future social organisation must be made solely from the bottom
upwards, by the free association or federation of workers, firstly in
their unions, then in the communes, regions, nations and finally in a
great federation, international and universal"* and *"the land, the
instruments of work and all other capital may become the collective
property of the whole of society and be utilised only by the workers, in
other words by the agricultural and industrial associations."*
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 206 and p. 174] Only by
extending the principle of co-operation beyond individual workplaces can
individual liberty be maximised and protected (see [section
I.1.3](secI1.html#seci13) for why most anarchists are opposed to
markets). In this they share some ground with Proudhon, as can be seen.
The industrial confederations would *"guarantee the mutual use of the
tools of production which are the property of each of these groups and
which will by a reciprocal contract become the collective property of
the whole . . . federation. In this way, the federation of groups will
be able to . . . regulate the rate of production to meet the fluctuating
needs of society."* [James Guillaume, **Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 376]

These anarchists share the mutualists support for workers'
self-management of production within co-operatives but see
confederations of these associations as being the focal point for
expressing mutual aid, not a market. Workplace autonomy and
self-management would be the basis of any federation, for *"the workers
in the various factories have not the slightest intention of handing
over their hard-won control of the tools of production to a superior
power calling itself the 'corporation.'"* [Guillaume, **Op. Cit.**, p.
364] In addition to this industry-wide federation, there would also be
cross-industry and community confederations to look after tasks which
are not within the exclusive jurisdiction or capacity of any particular
industrial federation or are of a social nature. Again, this has
similarities to Proudhon's mutualist ideas.

Social anarchists share a firm commitment to common ownership of the
means of production (excluding those used purely by individuals) and
reject the individualist idea that these can be "sold off" by those who
use them. The reason, as noted earlier, is because if this could be
done, capitalism and statism could regain a foothold in the free
society. In addition, other social anarchists do not agree with the
mutualist idea that capitalism can be reformed into libertarian
socialism by introducing mutual banking. For them capitalism can only be
replaced by a free society by social revolution.

The major difference between collectivists and communists is over the
question of "money" after a revolution. Anarcho-communists consider the
abolition of money to be essential, while anarcho-collectivists consider
the end of private ownership of the means of production to be the key.
As Kropotkin noted, collectivist anarchism *"express[es] a state of
things in which all necessaries for production are owned in common by
the labour groups and the free communes, while the ways of retribution
[i.e. distribution] of labour, communist or otherwise, would be settled
by each group for itself."* [**Anarchism**, p. 295] Thus, while
communism and collectivism both organise production in common via
producers' associations, they differ in how the goods produced will be
distributed. Communism is based on free consumption of all while
collectivism is more likely to be based on the distribution of goods
according to the labour contributed. However, most anarcho-collectivists
think that, over time, as productivity increases and the sense of
community becomes stronger, money will disappear. Both agree that, in
the end, society would be run along the lines suggested by the communist
maxim: ***"From each according to their abilities, to each according to
their needs."*** They just disagree on how quickly this will come about
(see [section I.2.2](secI2.html#seci22)).

For anarcho-communists, they think that *"communism -- at least partial
-- has more chances of being established than collectivism"* after a
revolution. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 298] They think that moves towards
communism are essential as collectivism *"begins by abolishing private
ownership of the means of production and immediately reverses itself by
returning to the system of remuneration according to work performed
which means the re-introduction of inequality."* [Alexander Berkman,
**What is Anarchism?**, p. 230] The quicker the move to communism, the
less chances of new inequalities developing. Needless to say, these
positions are **not** that different and, in practice, the necessities
of a social revolution and the level of political awareness of those
introducing anarchism will determine which system will be applied in
each area.

Syndicalism is the other major form of social anarchism.
Anarcho-syndicalists, like other syndicalists, want to create an
industrial union movement based on anarchist ideas. Therefore they
advocate decentralised, federated unions that use direct action to get
reforms under capitalism until they are strong enough to overthrow it.
In many ways anarcho-syndicalism can be considered as a new version of
collectivist-anarchism, which also stressed the importance of anarchists
working within the labour movement and creating unions which prefigure
the future free society.

Thus, even under capitalism, anarcho-syndicalists seek to create *"free
associations of free producers."* They think that these associations
would serve as *"a practical school of anarchism"* and they take very
seriously Bakunin's remark that the workers' organisations must create
*"not only the ideas but also the facts of the future itself"* in the
pre-revolutionary period.

Anarcho-syndicalists, like all social anarchists, *"are convinced that a
Socialist economic order cannot be created by the decrees and statutes
of a government, but only by the solidaric collaboration of the workers
with hand and brain in each special branch of production; that is,
through the taking over of the management of all plants by the producers
themselves under such form that the separate groups, plants, and
branches of industry are independent members of the general economic
organism and systematically carry on production and the distribution of
the products in the interest of the community on the basis of free
mutual agreements."* [Rudolf Rocker, **Anarcho-syndicalism**, p. 55]

Again, like all social anarchists, anarcho-syndicalists see the
collective struggle and organisation implied in unions as the school for
anarchism. As Eugene Varlin (an anarchist active in the First
International who was murdered at the end of the Paris Commune) put it,
unions have *"the enormous advantage of making people accustomed to
group life and thus preparing them for a more extended social
organisation. They accustom people not only to get along with one
another and to understand one another, but also to organise themselves,
to discuss, and to reason from a collective perspective."* Moreover, as
well as mitigating capitalist exploitation and oppression in the here
and now, the unions also *"form the natural elements of the social
edifice of the future; it is they who can be easily transformed into
producers associations; it is they who can make the social ingredients
and the organisation of production work."* [quoted by Julian P. W.
Archer, **The First International in France, 1864-1872**, p. 196]

The difference between syndicalists and other revolutionary social
anarchists is slight and purely revolves around the question of
anarcho-syndicalist unions. Collectivist anarchists agree that building
libertarian unions is important and that work within the labour movement
is essential in order to ensure *"the development and organisation . . .
of the social (and, by consequence, anti-political) power of the working
masses."* [Bakunin, **Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 197]
Communist anarchists usually also acknowledge the importance of working
in the labour movement but they generally think that syndicalistic
organisations will be created by workers in struggle, and so consider
encouraging the ***"spirit of revolt"*** as more important than creating
syndicalist unions and hoping workers will join them (of course,
anarcho-syndicalists support such autonomous struggle and organisation,
so the differences are not great). Communist-anarchists also do not
place as great an emphasis on the workplace, considering struggles
within it to be equal in importance to other struggles against hierarchy
and domination outside the workplace (most anarcho-syndicalists would
agree with this, however, and often it is just a question of emphasis).
A few communist-anarchists reject the labour movement as hopelessly
reformist in nature and so refuse to work within it, but these are a
small minority.

Both communist and collectivist anarchists recognise the need for
anarchists to unite together in purely anarchist organisations. They
think it is essential that anarchists work together as anarchists to
clarify and spread their ideas to others. Syndicalists often deny the
importance of anarchist groups and federations, arguing that
revolutionary industrial and community unions are enough in themselves.
Syndicalists think that the anarchist and union movements can be fused
into one, but most other anarchists disagree. Non-syndicalists point out
the reformist nature of unionism and urge that to keep syndicalist
unions revolutionary, anarchists must work within them as part of an
anarchist group or federation. Most non-syndicalists consider the fusion
of anarchism and unionism a source of potential **confusion** that would
result in the two movements failing to do their respective work
correctly. For more details on anarcho-syndicalism see [section
J.3.8](secJ3.html#secj38) (and [section J.3.9](secJ3.html#secj39) on why
many anarchists reject aspects of it). It should be stressed that
non-syndicalist anarchists do **not** reject the need for collective
struggle and organisation by workers (see [section
H.2.8](secH2.html#sech28) on that particular Marxist myth).

In practice, few anarcho-syndicalists totally reject the need for an
anarchist federation, while few anarchists are totally anti-syndicalist.
For example, Bakunin inspired both anarcho-communist and
anarcho-syndicalist ideas, and anarcho-communists like Kropotkin,
Malatesta, Berkman and Goldman were all sympathetic to
anarcho-syndicalist movements and ideas.

For further reading on the various types of social anarchism, we would
recommend the following: mutualism is usually associated with the works
of Proudhon, collectivism with Bakunin's, communism with Kropotkin's,
Malatesta's, Goldman's and Berkman's. Syndicalism is somewhat different,
as it was far more the product of workers' in struggle than the work of
a "famous" name (although this does not stop academics calling George
Sorel the father of syndicalism, even though he wrote about a
syndicalist movement that already existed. The idea that working class
people can develop their own ideas, by themselves, is usually lost on
them). However, Rudolf Rocker is often considered a leading
anarcho-syndicalist theorist and the works of Fernand Pelloutier and
Emile Pouget are essential reading to understand anarcho-syndicalism.
For an overview of the development of social anarchism and key works by
its leading lights, Daniel Guerin's excellent anthology **No Gods No
Masters** cannot be bettered.

A.3.3 What kinds of green anarchism are there?
----------------------------------------------

An emphasis on anarchist ideas as a solution to the ecological crisis is
a common thread in most forms of anarchism today. The trend goes back to
the late nineteenth century and the works of Peter Kropotkin and Elisee
Reclus. The latter, for example, argued that a *"secret harmony exists
between the earth and the people whom it nourishes, and when imprudent
societies let themselves violate this harmony, they always end up
regretting it."* Similarly, no contemporary ecologist would disagree
with his comments that the *"truly civilised man [and women] understands
that his [or her] nature is bound up with the interest of all and with
that of nature. He [or she] repairs the damage caused by his
predecessors and works to improve his domain."* [quoted by George
Woodcock, *"Introduction"*, Marie Fleming, **The Geography of Freedom**,
p. 15]

With regards Kropotkin, he argued that an anarchist society would be
based on a confederation of communities that would integrate manual and
brain work as well as decentralising and integrating industry and
agriculture (see his classic work **Fields, Factories, and Workshops**).
This idea of an economy in which *"small is beautiful"* (to use the
title of E.F. Schumacher's Green classic) was proposed nearly 70 years
before it was taken up by what was to become the green movement. In
addition, in **Mutual Aid** Kropotkin documented how co-operation within
species and between them and their environment is usually of more
benefit to them than competition. Kropotkin's work, combined with that
of William Morris, the Reclus brothers (both of whom, like Kropotkin,
were world-renowned geographers), and many others laid the foundations
for the current anarchist interest in ecological issues.

However, while there are many themes of an ecological nature within
classical anarchism, it is only relatively recently that the
similarities between ecological thought and anarchism has come to the
fore (essentially from the publication of Murray Bookchin's classic
essay *"Ecology and Revolutionary Thought"* in 1965). Indeed, it would
be no exaggeration to state that it is the ideas and work of Murray
Bookchin that has placed ecology and ecological issues at the heart of
anarchism and anarchist ideals and analysis into many aspects of the
green movement.

Before discussing the types of green anarchism (also called
eco-anarchism) it would be worthwhile to explain exactly **what**
anarchism and ecology have in common. To quote Murray Bookchin, *"both
the ecologist and the anarchist place a strong emphasis on spontaneity"*
and *"to both the ecologist and the anarchist, an ever-increasing unity
is achieved by growing differentiation. **An expanding whole is created
by the diversification and enrichment of its parts.**"* Moreover,
*"[j]ust as the ecologist seeks to expand the range of an eco-system and
promote free interplay between species, so the anarchist seeks to expand
the range of social experiments and remove all fetters to its
development."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 36]

Thus the anarchist concern with free development, decentralisation,
diversity and spontaneity is reflected in ecological ideas and concerns.
Hierarchy, centralisation, the state and concentrations of wealth reduce
diversity and the free development of individuals and their communities
by their very nature, and so weakens the social eco-system as well as
the actual eco-systems human societies are part of. As Bookchin argues,
*"the reconstructive message of ecology. . . [is that] we must conserve
and promote variety"* but within modern capitalist society *"[a]ll that
is spontaneous, creative and individuated is circumscribed by the
standardised, the regulated and the massified."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 35
and p. 26] So, in many ways, anarchism can be considered the application
of ecological ideas to society, as anarchism aims to empower individuals
and communities, decentralise political, social and economic power so
ensuring that individuals and social life develops freely and so becomes
increasingly diverse in nature. It is for this reason Brian Morris
argues that *"the only political tradition that complements and, as it
were, integrally connects with ecology -- in a genuine and authentic way
-- is that of anarchism."* [**Ecology and Anarchism**, p. 132]

So what kinds of green anarchism are there? While almost all forms of
modern anarchism consider themselves to have an ecological dimension,
the specifically eco-anarchist thread within anarchism has two main
focal points, ***Social Ecology*** and ***"primitivist"***. In addition,
some anarchists are influenced by ***Deep Ecology***, although not many.
Undoubtedly Social Ecology is the most influential and numerous current.
Social Ecology is associated with the ideas and works of Murray
Bookchin, who has been writing on ecological matters since the 1950's
and, from the 1960s, has combined these issues with revolutionary social
anarchism. His works include **Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, **Toward an
Ecological Society**, **The Ecology of Freedom** and a host of others.

Social Ecology locates the roots of the ecological crisis firmly in
relations of domination between people. The domination of nature is seen
as a product of domination within society, but this domination only
reaches crisis proportions under capitalism. In the words of Murray
Bookchin:

> *"The notion that man must dominate nature emerges directly from the
> domination of man by man. . . But it was not until organic community
> relations. . . dissolved into market relationships that the planet
> itself was reduced to a resource for exploitation. This centuries-long
> tendency finds its most exacerbating development in modern capitalism.
> Owing to its inherently competitive nature, bourgeois society not only
> pits humans against each other, it also pits the mass of humanity
> against the natural world. Just as men are converted into commodities,
> so every aspect of nature is converted into a commodity, a resource to
> be manufactured and merchandised wantonly . . . The plundering of the
> human spirit by the market place is paralleled by the plundering of
> the earth by capital."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 24-5]

*"Only insofar,"* Bookchin stresses, *"as the ecology **consciously**
cultivates an anti-hierarchical and a non-domineering sensibility,
structure, and strategy for social change can it retain its very
**identity** as the voice for a new balance between humanity and nature
and its **goal** for a truly ecological society."* Social ecologists
contrast this to what Bookchin labels *"environmentalism"* for while
social ecology *"seeks to eliminate the concept of the domination of
nature by humanity by eliminating domination of human by human,
environmentalism reflects an 'instrumentalist' or technical sensibility
in which nature is viewed merely as a passive habit, an agglomeration of
external objects and forces, that must be made more 'serviceable' for
human use, irrespective of what these uses may be. Environmentalism . .
. does not bring into question the underlying notions of the present
society, notably that man must dominate nature. On the contrary, it
seeks to facilitate that domination by developing techniques for
diminishing the hazards caused by domination."* [Murray Bookchin,
**Towards an Ecological Society**, p. 77]

Social ecology offers the vision of a society in harmony with nature,
one which *"involves a fundamental reversal of all the trends that mark
the historic development of capitalist technology and bourgeois society
-- the minute specialisation of machines and labour, the concentration
of resources and people in gigantic industrial enterprises and urban
entities, the stratification and bureaucratisation of nature and human
beings."* Such an ecotopia *"establish entirely new eco-communities that
are artistically moulded to the eco-systems in which they are located."*
Echoing Kropotkin, Bookchin argues that *"[s]uch an eco-community . . .
would heal the split between town and country, between mind and body by
fusing intellectual with physical work, industry with agricultural in a
rotation or diversification of vocational tasks."* This society would be
based on the use of appropriate and green technology, a *"new kind of
technology -- or eco-technology -- one composed of flexible, versatile
machinery whose productive applications would emphasise durability and
quality, not built in obsolescence, and insensate quantitative output of
shoddy goods, and a rapid circulation of expendable commodities . . .
Such an eco-technology would use the inexhaustible energy capacities of
nature -- the sun and wind, the tides and waterways, the temperature
differentials of the earth and the abundance of hydrogen around us as
fuels -- to provide the eco-community with non-polluting materials or
wastes that could be recycled."* [Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 68-9]

However, this is not all. As Bookchin stresses an ecological society
*"is more than a society that tries to check the mounting disequilibrium
that exists between humanity and the natural world. Reduced to simple
technical or political issues, this anaemic view of such a society's
function degrades the issues raised by an ecological critique and leads
them to purely technical and instrumental approaches to ecological
problems. Social ecology is, first of all, a **sensibility** that
includes not only a critique of hierarchy and domination but a
reconstructive outlook . . . guided by an ethics that emphasises variety
without structuring differences into a hierarchical order . . . the
precepts for such an ethics . . . [are] participation and
differentiation."* [**The Modern Crisis**, pp. 24-5]

Therefore social ecologists consider it essential to attack hierarchy
and capitalism, not civilisation as such as the root cause of ecological
problems. This is one of the key areas in which they disagree with
"Primitivist" Anarchist ideas, who tend to be far more critical of
**all** aspects of modern life, with some going so far as calling for
*"the end of civilisation"* including, apparently, all forms of
technology and large scale organisation. We discuss these ideas in
[section A.3.9](secA3.html#seca39).

We must note here that other anarchists, while generally agreeing with
its analysis and suggestions, are deeply critical of Social Ecology's
support for running candidates in municipal elections. While Social
Ecologists see this as a means of creating popular self-managing
assemblies and creating a counter power to the state, few anarchists
agree. Rather they see it as inherently reformist as well as being
hopelessly naive about the possibilities of using elections to bring
about social change (see [section J.5.14](secJ5.html#secj514) for a
fuller discussion of this). Instead they propose direct action as the
means to forward anarchist and ecological ideas, rejecting
electioneering as a dead-end which ends up watering down radical ideas
and corrupting the people involved (see section J.2 -- [What is Direct
Action?](secJ2.html)).

Lastly, there is "deep ecology," which, because of its bio-centric
nature, many anarchists reject as anti-human. There are few anarchists
who think that **people,** as people, are the cause of the ecological
crisis, which many deep ecologists seem to suggest. Murray Bookchin, for
example, has been particularly outspoken in his criticism of deep
ecology and the anti-human ideas that are often associated with it (see
**Which Way for the Ecology Movement?**, for example). David Watson has
also argued against Deep Ecology (see his **How Deep is Deep Ecology?**
written under the name George Bradford). Most anarchists would argue
that it is not people but the current system which is the problem, and
that only people can change it. In the words of Murray Bookchin:

> *"[Deep Ecology's problems] stem from an authoritarian streak in a
> crude biologism that uses 'natural law' to conceal an ever-diminishing
> sense of humanity and papers over a profound ignorance of social
> reality by ignoring the fact it is **capitalism** we are talking
> about, not an abstraction called 'Humanity' and 'Society.'"* [**The
> Philosophy of Social Ecology**, p. 160]

Thus, as Morris stresses, *"by focusing entirely on the category of
'humanity' the Deep Ecologists ignore or completely obscure the social
origins of ecological problems, or alternatively, biologise what are
essentially social problems."* To submerge ecological critique and
analysis into a simplistic protest against the human race ignores the
real causes and dynamics of ecological destruction and, therefore,
ensures an end to this destruction cannot be found. Simply put, it is
hardly "people" who are to blame when the vast majority have no real say
in the decisions that affect their lives, communities, industries and
eco-systems. Rather, it is an economic and social system that places
profits and power above people and planet. By focusing on "Humanity"
(and so failing to distinguish between rich and poor, men and women,
whites and people of colour, exploiters and exploited, oppressors and
oppressed) the system we live under is effectively ignored, and so are
the institutional causes of ecological problems. This can be *"both
reactionary and authoritarian in its implications, and substitutes a
naive understanding of 'nature' for a critical study of real social
issues and concerns."* [Morris, **Op. Cit.**, p. 135]

Faced with a constant anarchist critique of certain of their
spokes-persons ideas, many Deep Ecologists have turned away from the
anti-human ideas associated with their movement. Deep ecology,
particularly the organisation ***Earth First!*** (EF!), has changed
considerably over time, and EF! now has a close working relationship
with the ***Industrial Workers of the World*** (IWW), a syndicalist
union. While deep ecology is not a thread of eco-anarchism, it shares
many ideas and is becoming more accepted by anarchists as EF! rejects
its few misanthropic ideas and starts to see that hierarchy, not the
human race, is the problem (for a discussion between Murray Bookchin and
leading Earth Firster! Dave Foreman see the book **Defending the
Earth**).

A.3.4 Is anarchism pacifistic?
------------------------------

A pacifist strand has long existed in anarchism, with Leo Tolstoy being
one of its major figures. This strand is usually called
***"anarcho-pacifism"*** (the term ***"non-violent anarchist"*** is
sometimes used, but this term is unfortunate because it implies the rest
of the movement are "violent," which is not the case!). The union of
anarchism and pacifism is not surprising given the fundamental ideals
and arguments of anarchism. After all, violence, or the threat of
violence or harm, is a key means by which individual freedom is
destroyed. As Peter Marshall points out, *"[g]iven the anarchist's
respect for the sovereignty of the individual, in the long run it is
non-violence and not violence which is implied by anarchist values."*
[**Demanding the Impossible**, p.637] Malatesta is even more explicit
when he wrote that the *"main plank of anarchism is the removal of
violence from human relations"* and that anarchists *"are opposed to
violence."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 53]

However, although many anarchists reject violence and proclaim pacifism,
the movement, in general, is not essentially pacifistic (in the sense of
opposed all forms of violence at all times). Rather, it is
anti-militarist, being against the organised violence of the state but
recognising that there are important differences between the violence of
the oppressor and the violence of the oppressed. This explains why the
anarchist movement has always placed a lot of time and energy in
opposing the military machine and capitalist wars while, at the same
time, supporting and organising armed resistance against oppression (as
in the case of the Makhnovist army during the Russian Revolution which
resisted both Red and White armies and the militias the anarchists
organised to resist the fascists during the Spanish Revolution -- see
sections [A.5.4](secA5.html#seca54) and [A.5.6](secA5.html#seca56),
respectively).

On the question of non-violence, as a rough rule of thumb, the movement
divides along Individualist and Social lines. Most Individualist
anarchists support purely non-violent tactics of social change, as do
the Mutualists. However, Individualist anarchism is not pacifist as
such, as many support the idea of violence in self-defence against
aggression. Most social anarchists, on the other hand, do support the
use of revolutionary violence, holding that physical force will be
required to overthrow entrenched power and to resist state and
capitalist aggression (although it was an anarcho-syndicalist, Bart de
Ligt, who wrote the pacifist classic, **The Conquest of Violence**). As
Malatesta put it, violence, while being *"in itself an evil,"* is
*"justifiable only when it is necessary to defend oneself and others
from violence"* and that a *"slave is always in a state of legitimate
defence and consequently, his violence against the boss, against the
oppressor, is always morally justifiable."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 55 and pp.
53-54] Moreover, they stress that, to use the words of Bakunin, since
social oppression *"stems far less from individuals than from the
organisation of things and from social positions"* anarchists aim to
*"ruthlessly destroy positions and things"* rather than people, since
the aim of an anarchist revolution is to see the end of privileged
classes *"not as individuals, but as classes."* [quoted by Richard B.
Saltman, **The Social and Political Thought of Michael Bakunin** p. 121,
p. 124 and p. 122]

Indeed, the question of violence is relatively unimportant to most
anarchists, as they do not glorify it and think that it should be kept
to a minimum during any social struggle or revolution. All anarchists
would agree with the Dutch pacifist anarcho-syndicalist Bart de Ligt
when he argued that *"the violence and warfare which are characteristic
conditions of the capitalist world do not go with the liberation of the
individual, which is the historic mission of the exploited classes. The
greater the violence, the weaker the revolution, even where violence has
deliberately been put at the service of the revolution."* [**The
Conquest of Violence**, p. 75]

Similarly, all anarchists would agree with de Ligt on, to use the name
of one of his book's chapters, *"the absurdity of bourgeois pacifism."*
For de Ligt, and all anarchists, violence is inherent in the capitalist
system and any attempt to make capitalism pacifistic is doomed to
failure. This is because, on the one hand, war is often just economic
competition carried out by other means. Nations often go to war when
they face an economic crisis, what they cannot gain in economic struggle
they attempt to get by conflict. On the other hand, *"violence is
indispensable in modern society. . . [because] without it the ruling
class would be completely unable to maintain its privileged position
with regard to the exploited masses in each country. The army is used
first and foremost to hold down the workers. . . when they become
discontented."* [Bart de Ligt, **Op. Cit.**, p. 62] As long as the state
and capitalism exist, violence is inevitable and so, for
anarcho-pacifists, the consistent pacifist must be an anarchist just as
the consistent anarchist must be a pacifist.

For those anarchists who are non-pacifists, violence is seen as an
unavoidable and unfortunate result of oppression and exploitation as
well as the only means by which the privileged classes will renounce
their power and wealth. Those in authority rarely give up their power
and so must be forced. Hence the need for *"transitional"* violence *"to
put an end to the far greater, and permanent, violence which keeps the
majority of mankind in servitude."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 55] To
concentrate on the issue of violence versus non-violence is to ignore
the real issue, namely how do we change society for the better. As
Alexander Berkman pointed out, those anarchists who are pacifists
confuse the issue, like those who think *"it's the same as if rolling up
your sleeves for work should be considered the work itself."* To the
contrary, *"[t]he fighting part of revolution is merely rolling up your
sleeves. The real, actual task is ahead."* [**What is Anarchism?**, p.
183] And, indeed, most social struggle and revolutions start relatively
peaceful (via strikes, occupations and so on) and only degenerate into
violence when those in power try to maintain their position (a classic
example of this is in Italy, in 1920, when the occupation of factories
by their workers was followed by fascist terror -- see [section
A.5.5](secA5.html#seca55)).

As noted above, all anarchists are anti-militarists and oppose both the
military machine (and so the "defence" industry) as well as
statist/capitalist wars (although a few anarchists, like Rudolf Rocker
and Sam Dolgoff, supported the anti-fascist capitalist side during the
second world war as the lesser evil). The anti-war machine message of
anarchists and anarcho-syndicalists was propagated long before the start
of the first world war, with syndicalists and anarchists in Britain and
North America reprinting a French CGT leaflet urging soldiers not to
follow orders and repress their striking fellow workers. Emma Goldman
and Alexander Berkman were both arrested and deported from America for
organising a ***"No-Conscription League"*** in 1917 while many
anarchists in Europe were jailed for refusing to join the armed forces
in the first and second world wars. The anarcho-syndicalist influenced
IWW was crushed by a ruthless wave of government repression due to the
threat its organising and anti-war message presented to the powerful
elites who favoured war. More recently, anarchists, (including people
like Noam Chomsky and Paul Goodman) have been active in the peace
movement as well as contributing to the resistance to conscription where
it still exists. Anarchists took an active part in opposing such wars as
the Vietnam War, the Falklands war as well as the Gulf wars of 1991 and
2003 (including, in Italy and Spain, helping to organise strikes in
protest against it). And it was during the 1991 Gulf War when many
anarchists raised the slogan ***"No war but the class war"*** which
nicely sums up the anarchist opposition to war -- namely an evil
consequence of any class system, in which the oppressed classes of
different countries kill each other for the power and profits of their
rulers. Rather than take part in this organised slaughter, anarchists
urge working people to fight for their own interests, not those of their
masters:

> *"More than ever we must avoid compromise; deepen the chasm between
> capitalists and wage slaves, between rulers and ruled; preach
> expropriation of private property and the destruction of states such
> as the only means of guaranteeing fraternity between peoples and
> Justice and Liberty for all; and we must prepare to accomplish these
> things."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 251]

We must note here that Malatesta's words were written in part against
Peter Kropotkin who, for reasons best known to himself, rejected
everything he had argued for decades and supported the allies in the
First World War as a lesser evil against German authoritarianism and
Imperialism. Of course, as Malatesta pointed out, *"all Governments and
all capitalist classes"* do *"misdeeds . . . against the workers and
rebels of their own countries."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 246] He, along with
Berkman, Goldman and a host of other anarchists, put their name to
International Anarchist Manifesto against the First World War. It
expressed the opinion of the bulk of the anarchist movement (at the time
and consequently) on war and how to stop it. It is worth quoting from:

> "The truth is that the cause of wars . . . rests solely in the
> existence of the State, which is the form of privilege . . . Whatever
> the form it may assume, the State is nothing but organised oppression
> for the advantage of a privileged minority . . .
>
> "The misfortune of the peoples, who were deeply attached to peace, is
> that, in order to avoid war, they placed their confidence in the State
> with its intriguing diplomatists, in democracy, and in political
> parties . . . This confidence has been deliberately betrayed, and
> continues to be so, when governments, with the aid of the whole of the
> press, persuade their respective people that this war is a war of
> liberation.
>
> "We are resolutely against all wars between peoples, and . . . have
> been, are, and ever will be most energetically opposed to war.
>
> "The role of the Anarchists . . . is to continue to proclaim that
> there is only one war of liberation: that which in all countries is
> waged by the oppressed against the oppressors, by the exploited
> against the exploiters. Our part is to summon the slaves to revolt
> against their masters.
>
> "Anarchist action and propaganda should assiduously and perseveringly
> aim at weakening and dissolving the various States, at cultivating the
> spirit of revolt, and arousing discontent in peoples and armies. . .
>
> "We must take advantage of all the movements of revolt, of all the
> discontent, in order to foment insurrection, and to organise the
> revolution which we look to put end to all social wrongs. . . Social
> justice realised through the free organisation of producers: war and
> militarism done away with forever; and complete freedom won, by the
> abolition of the State and its organs of destruction."
> [*"International Anarchist Manifesto on the War,"* **Anarchy! An
> Anthology of Emma Goldman's Mother Earth**, pp. 386-8]

Thus, the attraction of pacifism to anarchists is clear. Violence **is**
authoritarian and coercive, and so its use does contradict anarchist
principles. That is why anarchists would agree with Malatesta when he
argues that *"[w]e are on principle opposed to violence and for this
reason wish that the social struggle should be conducted as humanely as
possible."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 57] Most, if not all,
anarchists who are not strict pacifists agree with pacifist-anarchists
when they argue that violence can often be counterproductive, alienating
people and giving the state an excuse to repress both the anarchist
movement and popular movements for social change. All anarchists support
non-violent direct action and civil disobedience, which often provide
better roads to radical change.

So, to sum up, anarchists who are pure pacifists are rare. Most accept
the use of violence as a necessary evil and advocate minimising its use.
All agree that a revolution which **institutionalises** violence will
just recreate the state in a new form. They argue, however, that it is
not authoritarian to destroy authority or to use violence to resist
violence. Therefore, although most anarchists are not pacifists, most
reject violence except in self-defence and even then kept to the
minimum.

A.3.5 What is Anarcha-Feminism?
-------------------------------

Although opposition to the state and all forms of authority had a strong
voice among the early feminists of the 19th century, the more recent
feminist movement which began in the 1960's was founded upon anarchist
practice. This is where the term anarcha-feminism came from, referring
to women anarchists who act within the larger feminist and anarchist
movements to remind them of their principles.

The modern anarcha-feminists built upon the feminist ideas of previous
anarchists, both male and female. Indeed, anarchism and feminism have
always been closely linked. Many outstanding feminists have also been
anarchists, including the pioneering Mary Wollstonecraft (author of **A
Vindication of the Rights of Woman**), the Communard Louise Michel, and
the American anarchists (and tireless champions of women's freedom)
Voltairine de Cleyre and Emma Goldman (for the former, see her essays
*"Sex Slavery"*, *"Gates of Freedom"*, *"The Case of Woman vs.
Orthodoxy"*, *"Those Who Marry Do Ill"*; for the latter see *"The
Traffic in Women"*, *"Woman Suffrage"*, *"The Tragedy of Woman's
Emancipation"*, *"Marriage and Love"* and *"Victims of Morality"*, for
example). **Freedom**, the world's oldest anarchist newspaper, was
founded by Charlotte Wilson in 1886. Anarchist women like Virgilia
D'Andrea and Rose Pesota played important roles in both the libertarian
and labour movements. The ***"Mujeres Libres"*** (*"Free Women"*)
movement in Spain during the Spanish revolution is a classic example of
women anarchists organising themselves to defend their basic freedoms
and create a society based on women's freedom and equality (see **Free
Women of Spain** by Martha Ackelsberg for more details on this important
organisation). In addition, all the male major anarchist thinkers (bar
Proudhon) were firm supporters of women's equality. For example, Bakunin
opposed patriarchy and how the law *"subjects [women] to the absolute
domination of the man."* He argued that *"[e]qual rights must belong to
men and women"* so that women can *"become independent and be free to
forge their own way of life."* He looked forward to the end of *"the
authoritarian juridical family"* and *"the full sexual freedom of
women."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 396 and p. 397]

Thus anarchism has since the 1860s combined a radical critique of
capitalism and the state with an equally powerful critique of patriarchy
(rule by men). Anarchists, particularly female ones, recognised that
modern society was dominated by men. As Ana Maria Mozzoni (an Italian
anarchist immigrant in Buenos Aires) put it, women *"will find that the
priest who damns you is a man; that the legislator who oppresses you is
a man, that the husband who reduces you to an **object** is a man; that
the libertine who harasses you is a man; that the capitalist who
enriches himself with your ill-paid work and the speculator who calmly
pockets the price of your body, are men."* Little has changed since
then. Patriarchy still exists and, to quote the anarchist paper **La
Questione Sociale**, it is still usually the case that women *"are
slaves both in social and private life. If you are a proletarian, you
have two tyrants: the man and the boss. If bourgeois, the only
sovereignty left to you is that of frivolity and coquetry."* [quoted by
Jose Moya, **Italians in Buenos Aires's Anarchist Movement**, pp. 197-8
and p. 200]

Anarchism, therefore, is based on an awareness that fighting patriarchy
is as important as fighting against the state or capitalism. For *"[y]ou
can have no free, or just, or equal society, nor anything approaching
it, so long as womanhood is bought, sold, housed, clothed, fed, and
**protected**, as a chattel."* [Voltairine de Cleyre, *"The Gates of
Freedom"*, pp. 235-250, Eugenia C. Delamotte, **Gates of Freedom**, p.
242] To quote Louise Michel:

> *"The first thing that must change is the relationship between the
> sexes. Humanity has two parts, men and women, and we ought to be
> walking hand in hand; instead there is antagonism, and it will last as
> long as the 'stronger' half controls, or think its controls, the
> 'weaker' half."* [**The Red Virgin: Memoirs of Louise Michel**, p.
> 139]

Thus anarchism, like feminism, fights patriarchy and for women's
equality. Both share much common history and a concern about individual
freedom, equality and dignity for members of the female sex (although,
as we will explain in more depth below, anarchists have always been very
critical of mainstream/liberal feminism as not going far enough).
Therefore, it is unsurprising that the new wave of feminism of the
sixties expressed itself in an anarchistic manner and drew much
inspiration from anarchist figures such as Emma Goldman. Cathy Levine
points out that, during this time, *"independent groups of women began
functioning without the structure, leaders, and other factotums of the
male left, creating, independently and simultaneously, organisations
similar to those of anarchists of many decades and regions. No accident,
either."* [*"The Tyranny of Tyranny,"* **Quiet Rumours: An
Anarcha-Feminist Reader**, p. 66] It is no accident because, as feminist
scholars have noted, women were among the first victims of hierarchical
society, which is thought to have begun with the rise of patriarchy and
ideologies of domination during the late Neolithic era. Marilyn French
argues (in **Beyond Power**) that the first major social stratification
of the human race occurred when men began dominating women, with women
becoming in effect a "lower" and "inferior" social class.

The links between anarchism and modern feminism exist in both ideas and
action. Leading feminist thinker Carole Pateman notes that her
*"discussion [on contract theory and its authoritarian and patriarchal
basis] owes something to"* libertarian ideas, that is the *"anarchist
wing of the socialist movement."* [**The Sexual Contract**, p. 14]
Moreover, she noted in the 1980s how the *"major locus of criticism of
authoritarian, hierarchical, undemocratic forms of organisation for the
last twenty years has been the women's movement . . . After Marx
defeated Bakunin in the First International, the prevailing form of
organisation in the labour movement, the nationalised industries and in
the left sects has mimicked the hierarchy of the state . . . The women's
movement has rescued and put into practice the long-submerged idea [of
anarchists like Bakunin] that movements for, and experiments in, social
change must 'prefigure' the future form of social organisation."* [**The
Disorder of Women**, p. 201]

Peggy Kornegger has drawn attention to these strong connections between
feminism and anarchism, both in theory and practice. *"The radical
feminist perspective is almost pure anarchism,"* she writes. *"The basic
theory postulates the nuclear family as the basis of all authoritarian
systems. The lesson the child learns, from father to teacher to boss to
god, is to **obey** the great anonymous voice of Authority. To graduate
from childhood to adulthood is to become a full-fledged automaton,
incapable of questioning or even of thinking clearly."* [*"Anarchism:
The Feminist Connection,"* **Quiet Rumours: An Anarcha-Feminist
Reader**, p. 26] Similarly, the Zero Collective argues that
Anarcha-feminism *"consists in recognising the anarchism of feminism and
consciously developing it."* [*"Anarchism/Feminism,"* pp. 3-7, **The
Raven**, no. 21, p. 6]

Anarcha-feminists point out that authoritarian traits and values, for
example, domination, exploitation, aggressiveness, competitiveness,
desensitisation etc., are highly valued in hierarchical civilisations
and are traditionally referred to as "masculine." In contrast,
non-authoritarian traits and values such as co-operation, sharing,
compassion, sensitivity, warmth, etc., are traditionally regarded as
"feminine" and are devalued. Feminist scholars have traced this
phenomenon back to the growth of patriarchal societies during the early
Bronze Age and their conquest of co-operatively based "organic"
societies in which "feminine" traits and values were prevalent and
respected. Following these conquests, however, such values came to be
regarded as "inferior," especially for a man, since men were in charge
of domination and exploitation under patriarchy. (See e.g. Riane Eisler,
**The Chalice and the Blade**; Elise Boulding, **The Underside of
History**). Hence anarcha-feminists have referred to the creation of a
non-authoritarian, anarchist society based on co-operation, sharing,
mutual aid, etc. as the "feminisation of society."

Anarcha-feminists have noted that "feminising" society cannot be
achieved without both self-management and decentralisation. This is
because the patriarchal-authoritarian values and traditions they wish to
overthrow are embodied and reproduced in hierarchies. Thus feminism
implies decentralisation, which in turn implies self-management. Many
feminists have recognised this, as reflected in their experiments with
collective forms of feminist organisations that eliminate hierarchical
structure and competitive forms of decision making. Some feminists have
even argued that directly democratic organisations are specifically
female political forms. [see e.g. Nancy Hartsock *"Feminist Theory and
the Development of Revolutionary Strategy,"* in Zeila Eisenstein, ed.,
**Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism**, pp.
56-77] Like all anarchists, anarcha-feminists recognise that
self-liberation is the key to women's equality and thus, freedom. Thus
Emma Goldman:

> *"Her development, her freedom, her independence, must come from and
> through herself. First, by asserting herself as a personality, and not
> as a sex commodity. Second, by refusing the right of anyone over her
> body; by refusing to bear children, unless she wants them, by refusing
> to be a servant to God, the State, society, the husband, the family,
> etc., by making her life simpler, but deeper and richer. That is, by
> trying to learn the meaning and substance of life in all its
> complexities; by freeing herself from the fear of public opinion and
> public condemnation."* [**Anarchism and Other Essays**, p. 211]

Anarcha-feminism tries to keep feminism from becoming influenced and
dominated by authoritarian ideologies of either the right or left. It
proposes direct action and self-help instead of the mass reformist
campaigns favoured by the "official" feminist movement, with its
creation of hierarchical and centralist organisations and its illusion
that having more women bosses, politicians, and soldiers is a move
towards "equality." Anarcha-feminists would point out that the so-called
"management science" which women have to learn in order to become
mangers in capitalist companies is essentially a set of techniques for
controlling and exploiting wage workers in corporate hierarchies,
whereas "feminising" society requires the elimination of capitalist
wage-slavery and managerial domination altogether. Anarcha-feminists
realise that learning how to become an effective exploiter or oppressor
is not the path to equality (as one member of the Mujeres Libres put it,
*"[w]e did not want to substitute a feminist hierarchy for a masculine
one"* [quoted by Martha A. Ackelsberg, **Free Women of Spain**, pp.
22-3] -- also see [section B.1.4](secB1.html#secb14) for a further
discussion on patriarchy and hierarchy).

Hence anarchism's traditional hostility to liberal (or mainstream)
feminism, while supporting women's liberation and equality. Federica
Montseny (a leading figure in the Spanish Anarchist movement) argued
that such feminism advocated equality for women, but did not challenge
existing institutions. She argued that (mainstream) feminism's only
ambition is to give to women of a particular class the opportunity to
participate more fully in the existing system of privilege and if these
institutions *"are unjust when men take advantage of them, they will
still be unjust if women take advantage of them."* [quoted by Martha A.
Ackelsberg, **Op. Cit.**, p. 119] Thus, for anarchists, women's freedom
did not mean an equal chance to become a boss or a wage slave, a voter
or a politician, but rather to be a free and equal individual
co-operating as equals in free associations. *"Feminism,"* stressed
Peggy Kornegger, *"doesn't mean female corporate power or a woman
President; it means no corporate power and no Presidents. The Equal
Rights Amendment will not transform society; it only gives women the
'right' to plug into a hierarchical economy. Challenging sexism means
challenging all hierarchy -- economic, political, and personal. And that
means an anarcha-feminist revolution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 27]

Anarchism, as can be seen, included a class and economic analysis which
is missing from mainstream feminism while, at the same time, showing an
awareness to domestic and sex-based power relations which eluded the
mainstream socialist movement. This flows from our hatred of hierarchy.
As Mozzoni put it, *"Anarchy defends the cause of all the oppressed, and
because of this, and in a special way, it defends your [women's] cause,
oh! women, doubly oppressed by present society in both the social and
private spheres."* [quoted by Moya, **Op. Cit.**, p. 203] This means
that, to quote a Chinese anarchist, what anarchists *"mean by equality
between the sexes is not just that the men will no longer oppress women.
We also want men to no longer to be oppressed by other men, and women no
longer to be oppressed by other women."* Thus women should *"completely
overthrow rulership, force men to abandon all their special privileges
and become equal to women, and make a world with neither the oppression
of women nor the oppression of men."* [He Zhen, quoted by Peter Zarrow,
**Anarchism and Chinese Political Culture**, p. 147]

So, in the historic anarchist movement, as Martha Ackelsberg notes,
liberal/mainstream feminism was considered as being *"too narrowly
focused as a strategy for women's emancipation; sexual struggle could
not be separated from class struggle or from the anarchist project as a
whole."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 119] Anarcha-feminism continues this
tradition by arguing that all forms of hierarchy are wrong, not just
patriarchy, and that feminism is in conflict with its own ideals if it
desires simply to allow women to have the same chance of being a boss as
a man does. They simply state the obvious, namely that they *"do not
believe that power in the hands of women could possibly lead to a
non-coercive society"* nor do they *"believe that anything good can come
out of a mass movement with a leadership elite."* The *"central issues
are always power and social hierarchy"* and so people *"are free only
when they have power over their own lives."* [Carole Ehrlich,
*"Socialism, Anarchism and Feminism"*, **Quiet Rumours: An
Anarcha-Feminist Reader**, p. 44] For if, as Louise Michel put it, *"a
proletarian is a slave; the wife of a proletarian is even more a slave"*
ensuring that the wife experiences an equal level of oppression as the
husband misses the point. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 141]

Anarcha-feminists, therefore, like all anarchists oppose capitalism as a
denial of liberty. Their critique of hierarchy in the society does not
start and end with patriarchy. It is a case of wanting freedom
everywhere, of wanting to *"[b]reak up . . . every home that rests in
slavery! Every marriage that represents the sale and transfer of the
individuality of one of its parties to the other! Every institution,
social or civil, that stands between man and his right; every tie that
renders one a master, another a serf."* [Voltairine de Cleyre, *"The
Economic Tendency of Freethought"*, **The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**,
p. 72] The ideal that an "equal opportunity" capitalism would free women
ignores the fact that any such system would still see working class
women oppressed by bosses (be they male or female). For
anarcha-feminists, the struggle for women's liberation cannot be
separated from the struggle against hierarchy **as such.** As L. Susan
Brown puts it:

> *"Anarchist-feminism, as an expression of the anarchist sensibility
> applied to feminist concerns, takes the individual as its starting
> point and, in opposition to relations of domination and subordination,
> argues for non-instrumental economic forms that preserve individual
> existential freedom, for both men and women."* [**The Politics of
> Individualism**, p. 144]

Anarcha-feminists have much to contribute to our understanding of the
origins of the ecological crisis in the authoritarian values of
hierarchical civilisation. For example, a number of feminist scholars
have argued that the domination of nature has paralleled the domination
of women, who have been identified with nature throughout history (See,
for example, Caroline Merchant, **The Death of Nature**, 1980). Both
women and nature are victims of the obsession with control that
characterises the authoritarian personality. For this reason, a growing
number of both radical ecologists and feminists are recognising that
hierarchies must be dismantled in order to achieve their respective
goals.

In addition, anarcha-feminism reminds us of the importance of treating
women equally with men while, at the same time, respecting women's
differences from men. In other words, that recognising and respecting
diversity includes women as well as men. Too often many male anarchists
assume that, because they are (in theory) opposed to sexism, they are
not sexist in practice. Such an assumption is false. Anarcha-feminism
brings the question of consistency between theory and practice to the
front of social activism and reminds us all that we must fight not only
external constraints but also internal ones.

This means that anarcha-feminism urges us to practice what we preach. As
Voltairine de Cleyre argued, *"I never expect men to **give** us
liberty. No, Women, we are not **worth** it, until we **take** it."*
This involves *"insisting on a new code of ethics founded on the law of
equal freedom: a code recognising the complete individuality of woman.
By making rebels wherever we can. By ourselves **living our beliefs** .
. . . We are revolutionists. And we shall use propaganda by speech,
deed, and most of all life -- **being** what we teach."* Thus
anarcha-feminists, like all anarchists, see the struggle against
patriarchy as being a struggle of the oppressed for their own
self-liberation, for *"**as a class** I have nothing to hope from men .
. . No tyrant ever renounced his tyranny until he had to. If history
ever teaches us anything it teaches this. Therefore my hope lies in
creating rebellion in the breasts of women."* [*"The Gates of Freedom"*,
pp. 235-250, Eugenia C. Delamotte, **Gates of Freedom**, p. 249 and p.
239] This was sadly as applicable within the anarchist movement as it
was outside it in patriarchal society.

Faced with the sexism of male anarchists who spoke of sexual equality,
women anarchists in Spain organised themselves into the **Mujeres
Libres** organisation to combat it. They did not believe in leaving
their liberation to some day after the revolution. Their liberation was
a integral part of that revolution and had to be started today. In this
they repeated the conclusions of anarchist women in Illinois Coal towns
who grew tried of hearing their male comrades *"shout in favour"* of
sexual equality *"in the future society"* while doing nothing about it
in the here and now. They used a particularly insulting analogy,
comparing their male comrades to priests who *"make false promises to
the starving masses . . . [that] there will be rewards in paradise."*
The argued that mothers should make their daughters *"understand that
the difference in sex does not imply inequality in rights"* and that as
well as being *"rebels against the social system of today,"* they
*"should fight especially against the oppression of men who would like
to retain women as their moral and material inferior."* [Ersilia Grandi,
quoted by Caroline Waldron Merithew, **Anarchist Motherhood**, p. 227]
They formed the ***"Luisa Michel"*** group to fight against capitalism
and patriarchy in the upper Illinois valley coal towns over three
decades before their Spanish comrades organised themselves.

For anarcha-feminists, combating sexism is a key aspect of the struggle
for freedom. It is not, as many Marxist socialists argued before the
rise of feminism, a diversion from the "real" struggle against
capitalism which would somehow be automatically solved after the
revolution. It is an essential part of the struggle:

> *"We do not need any of your titles . . . We want none of them. What
> we do want is knowledge and education and liberty. We know what our
> rights are and we demand them. Are we not standing next to you
> fighting the supreme fight? Are you not strong enough, men, to make
> part of that supreme fight a struggle for the rights of women? And
> then men and women together will gain the rights of all humanity."*
> [Louise Michel, **Op. Cit.**, p. 142]

A key part of this revolutionising modern society is the transformation
of the current relationship between the sexes. Marriage is a particular
evil for *"the old form of marriage, based on the Bible, 'till death
doth part,' . . . [is] an institution that stands for the sovereignty of
the man over the women, of her complete submission to his whims and
commands."* Women are reduced *"to the function of man's servant and
bearer of his children."* [Goldman, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 220-1] Instead of
this, anarchists proposed ***"free love,"*** that is couples and
families based on free agreement between equals than one partner being
in authority and the other simply obeying. Such unions would be without
sanction of church or state for *"two beings who love each other do not
need permission from a third to go to bed."* [Mozzoni, quoted by Moya,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 200]

Equality and freedom apply to more than just relationships. For *"if
social progress consists in a constant tendency towards the equalisation
of the liberties of social units, then the demands of progress are not
satisfied so long as half society, Women, is in subjection. . . . Woman
. . . is beginning to feel her servitude; that there is a requisite
acknowledgement to be won from her master before he is put down and she
exalted to -- Equality. This acknowledgement is, **the freedom to
control her own person**. "* [Voltairine de Cleyre, *"The Gates of
Freedom"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 242] Neither men nor state nor church should
say what a woman does with her body. A logical extension of this is that
women must have control over their own reproductive organs. Thus
anarcha-feminists, like anarchists in general, are pro-choice and
pro-reproductive rights (i.e. the right of a woman to control her own
reproductive decisions). This is a long standing position. Emma Goldman
was persecuted and incarcerated because of her public advocacy of birth
control methods and the extremist notion that women should decide when
they become pregnant (as feminist writer Margaret Anderson put it, *"In
1916, Emma Goldman was sent to prison for advocating that 'women need
not always keep their mouth shut and their wombs open.'"*).

Anarcha-feminism does not stop there. Like anarchism in general, it aims
at changing **all** aspects of society not just what happens in the
home. For, as Goldman asked, *"how much independence is gained if the
narrowness and lack of freedom of the home is exchanged for the
narrowness and lack of freedom of the factory, sweat-shop, department
store, or office?"* Thus women's equality and freedom had to be fought
everywhere and defended against all forms of hierarchy. Nor can they be
achieved by voting. Real liberation, argue anarcha-feminists, is only
possible by direct action and anarcha-feminism is based on women's
self-activity and self-liberation for while the *"right to vote, or
equal civil rights, may be good demands . . . true emancipation begins
neither at the polls nor in the courts. It begins in woman's soul . . .
her freedom will reach as far as her power to achieve freedom reaches."*
[Goldman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 216 and p. 224]

The history of the women's movement proves this. Every gain has come
from below, by the action of women themselves. As Louise Michel put it,
*"[w]e women are not bad revolutionaries. Without begging anyone, we are
taking our place in the struggles; otherwise, we could go ahead and pass
motions until the world ends and gain nothing."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 139]
If women waited for others to act for them their social position would
never have changed. This includes getting the vote in the first place.
Faced with the militant suffrage movement for women's votes, British
anarchist Rose Witcop recognised that it was *"true that this movement
shows us that women who so far have been so submissive to their masters,
the men, are beginning to wake up at last to the fact they are not
inferior to those masters."* Yet she argued that women would not be
freed by votes but *"by their own strength."* [quoted by Sheila
Rowbotham, **Hidden from History**, pp. 100-1 and p. 101] The women's
movement of the 1960s and 1970s showed the truth of that analysis. In
spite of equal voting rights, women's social place had remained
unchanged since the 1920s.

Ultimately, as Anarchist Lily Gair Wilkinson stressed, the *"call for
'votes' can never be a call to freedom. For what is it to vote? To vote
is to register assent to being ruled by one legislator or another?"*
[quoted by Sheila Rowbotham, **Op. Cit.**, p. 102] It does not get to
the heart of the problem, namely hierarchy and the authoritarian social
relationships it creates of which patriarchy is only a subset of. Only
by getting rid of all bosses, political, economic, social and sexual can
**genuine** freedom for women be achieved and *"make it possible for
women to be human in the truest sense. Everything within her that craves
assertion and activity should reach its fullest expression; all
artificial barriers should be broken, and the road towards greater
freedom cleared of every trace of centuries of submission and slavery."*
[Emma Goldman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 214]

A.3.6 What is Cultural Anarchism?
---------------------------------

For our purposes, we will define cultural anarchism as the promotion of
anti-authoritarian values through those aspects of society traditionally
regarded as belonging to the sphere of "culture" rather than "economics"
or "politics" -- for example, through art, music, drama, literature,
education, child-rearing practices, sexual morality, technology, and so
forth.

Cultural expressions are anarchistic to the extent that they
deliberately attack, weaken, or subvert the tendency of most traditional
cultural forms to promote authoritarian values and attitudes,
particularly domination and exploitation. Thus a novel that portrays the
evils of militarism can be considered as cultural anarchism if it goes
beyond the simple "war-is-hell" model and allows the reader to see how
militarism is connected with authoritarian institutions (e.g. capitalism
and statism) or methods of authoritarian conditioning (e.g. upbringing
in the traditional patriarchal family). Or, as John Clark expresses it,
cultural anarchism implies *"the development of arts, media, and other
symbolic forms that expose various aspects of the system of domination
and contrast them with a system of values based on freedom and
community."* This *"**cultural** struggle"* would be part of a general
struggle *"to combat the material and ideological power of all
dominating classes, whether economic, political, racial, religious, or
sexual, with a multi-dimensional practice of liberation."* In other
words, an *"expanded conception of class analysis"* and *"an amplified
practice of class struggle"* which includes, but is not limited to,
*"**economic** actions like strikes, boycotts, job actions, occupation,
organisations of direct action groups and federations of libertarian
workers' groups and development of workers' assemblies, collectives and
co-operatives"* and *"**political** activity"* like the *"active
interference with implementation of repressive governmental policies,"*
the *"non-compliance and resistance against regimentation and
bureaucratisation of society"* and *"participation in movements for
increasing direct participation in decision-making and local control."*
[**The Anarchist Moment**, p. 31]

Cultural anarchism is important -- indeed essential -- because
authoritarian values are embedded in a total system of domination with
many aspects besides the political and economic. Hence those values
cannot be eradicated even by a combined economic and political
revolution if there it is not also accompanied by profound psychological
changes in the majority of the population. For mass acquiescence in the
current system is rooted in the psychic structure of human beings (their
*"character structure,"* to use Wilhelm Reich's expression), which is
produced by many forms of conditioning and socialisation that have
developed with patriarchal-authoritarian civilisation during the past
five or six thousand years.

In other words, even if capitalism and the state were overthrown
tomorrow, people would soon create new forms of authority in their
place. For authority -- a strong leader, a chain of command, someone to
give orders and relieve one of the responsibility of thinking for
oneself -- are what the submissive/authoritarian personality feels most
comfortable with. Unfortunately, the majority of human beings fear real
freedom, and indeed, do not know what to do with it -- as is shown by a
long string of failed revolutions and freedom movements in which the
revolutionary ideals of freedom, democracy, and equality were betrayed
and a new hierarchy and ruling class were quickly created. These
failures are generally attributed to the machinations of reactionary
politicians and capitalists, and to the perfidy of revolutionary
leaders; but reactionary politicians only attract followers because they
find a favourable soil for the growth of their authoritarian ideals in
the character structure of ordinary people.

Hence the prerequisite of an anarchist revolution is a period of
consciousness-raising in which people gradually become aware of
submissive/authoritarian traits within themselves, see how those traits
are reproduced by conditioning, and understand how they can be mitigated
or eliminated through new forms of culture, particularly new
child-rearing and educational methods. We will explore this issue more
fully in section B.1.5 ([What is the mass-psychological basis for
authoritarian civilisation?](secB1.html#secb15)), J.6 ([What methods of
child rearing do anarchists advocate?](secJ6.html)), and J.5.13 ([What
are Modern Schools?](secJ5.html#secj510))

Cultural anarchist ideas are shared by almost all schools of anarchist
thought and consciousness-raising is considered an essential part of any
anarchist movement. For anarchists, its important to *"build the new
world in the shell of the old"* in all aspects of our lives and creating
an anarchist culture is part of that activity. Few anarchists, however,
consider consciousness-raising as enough in itself and so combine
cultural anarchist activities with organising, using direct action and
building libertarian alternatives in capitalist society. The anarchist
movement is one that combines practical self-activity with cultural
work, with both activities feeding into and supporting the other.

A.3.7 Are there religious anarchists?
-------------------------------------

Yes, there are. While most anarchists have opposed religion and the idea
of God as deeply anti-human and a justification for earthly authority
and slavery, a few believers in religion have taken their ideas to
anarchist conclusions. Like all anarchists, these religious anarchists
have combined an opposition to the state with a critical position with
regards to private property and inequality. In other words, anarchism is
not necessarily atheistic. Indeed, according to Jacques Ellul,
*"biblical thought leads directly to anarchism, and that this is the
only 'political anti-political' position in accord with Christian
thinkers."* [quoted by Peter Marshall, **Demanding the Impossible**, p.
75]

There are many different types of anarchism inspired by religious ideas.
As Peter Marshall notes, the *"first clear expression of an anarchist
sensibility may be traced back to the Taoists in ancient China from
about the sixth century BC"* and *"Buddhism, particularly in its Zen
form, . . . has . . . a strong libertarian spirit."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
53 and p. 65] Some, like the anti-globalisation activist Starhawk,
combine their anarchist ideas with Pagan and Spiritualist influences.
However, religious anarchism usually takes the form of Christian
Anarchism, which we will concentrate on here.

Christian Anarchists take seriously Jesus' words to his followers that
*"kings and governors have domination over men; let there be none like
that among you."* Similarly, Paul's dictum that there *"is no authority
except God"* is taken to its obvious conclusion with the denial of state
authority within society. Thus, for a true Christian, the state is
usurping God's authority and it is up to each individual to govern
themselves and discover that (to use the title of Tolstoy's famous book)
**The Kingdom of God is within you**.

Similarly, the voluntary poverty of Jesus, his comments on the
corrupting effects of wealth and the Biblical claim that the world was
created for humanity to be enjoyed in common have all been taken as the
basis of a socialistic critique of private property and capitalism.
Indeed, the early Christian church (which could be considered as a
liberation movement of slaves, although one that was later co-opted into
a state religion) was based upon communistic sharing of material goods,
a theme which has continually appeared within radical Christian
movements inspired, no doubt, by such comments as *"all that believed
were together, and had all things in common, and they sold their
possessions and goods, and parted them all, according as every man has
need"* and *"the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and
of one soul, not one of them said that all of the things which he
possessed was his own; but they had all things in common."* (Acts,
2:44,45; 4:32)

Unsurprisingly, the Bible would have been used to express radical
libertarian aspirations of the oppressed, which, in later times, would
have taken the form of anarchist or Marxist terminology). As Bookchin
notes in his discussion of Christianity's contributions to *"the legacy
of freedom,"* *"[b]y spawning nonconformity, heretical conventicles, and
issues of authority over person and belief, Christianity created not
merely a centralised authoritarian Papacy, but also its very antithesis:
a quasi-religious anarchism."* Thus *"Christianity's mixed message can
be grouped into two broad and highly conflicting systems of belief. On
one side there was a radical, activistic, communistic, and libertarian
vision of the Christian life"* and *"on the other side there was a
conservative, quietistic, materially unwordly, and hierarchical
vision."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 266 and pp. 274-5]

Thus clergyman's John Ball's egalitarian comments (as quoted by Peter
Marshall [**Op. Cit.**, p. 89]) during the Peasant Revolt in 1381 in
England:

*"When Adam delved and Eve span,\
 Who was then a gentleman?"*

The history of Christian anarchism includes the ***Heresy of the Free
Spirit*** in the Middle Ages, numerous Peasant revolts and the
***Anabaptists*** in the 16th century. The libertarian tradition within
Christianity surfaced again in the 18th century in the writings of
William Blake and the American Adam Ballou reached anarchist conclusions
in his **Practical Christian Socialism** in 1854. However, Christian
anarchism became a clearly defined thread of the anarchist movement with
the work of the famous Russian author Leo Tolstoy.

Tolstoy took the message of the Bible seriously and came to consider
that a true Christian must oppose the state. From his reading of the
Bible, Tolstoy drew anarchist conclusions:

> *"ruling means using force, and using force means doing to him whom
> force is used, what he does not like and what he who uses force would
> certainly not like done to himself. Consequently ruling means doing to
> others what we would not they should do unto us, that is, doing
> wrong."* [**The Kingdom of God is Within You**, p. 242]

Thus a true Christian must refrain from governing others. From this
anti-statist position he naturally argued in favour of a society
self-organised from below:

> *"Why think that non-official people could not arrange their life for
> themselves, as well as Government people can arrange it nor for
> themselves but for others?"* [**The Slavery of Our Times**, p. 46]

This meant that *"people can only be freed from slavery by the abolition
of Governments."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 49] Tolstoy urged non-violent action
against oppression, seeing a spiritual transformation of individuals as
the key to creating an anarchist society. As Max Nettlau argues, the
*"great truth stressed by Tolstoy is that the recognition of the power
of the good, of goodness, of solidarity - and of all that is called love
- lies within **ourselves**, and that it can and must be awakened,
developed and exercised **in our own behaviour.**"* [**A Short History
of Anarchism**, pp. 251-2] Unsurprisngly, Tolstoy thought the
*"anarchists are right in everything . . . They are mistaken only in
thinking that anarchy can be instituted by a revolution."* [quoted by
Peter Marshall, **Op. Cit.**, p. 375]

Like all anarchists, Tolstoy was critical of private property and
capitalism. He greatly admired and was heavily influenced by Proudhon,
considering the latter's *"property is theft"* as *"an absolute truth"*
which would *"survive as long as humanity."* [quoted by Jack Hayward,
**After the French Revolution**, p. 213] Like Henry George (whose ideas,
like those of Proudhon, had a strong impact on him) he opposed private
property in land, arguing that *"were it not for the defence of landed
property, and its consequent rise in price, people would not be crowded
into such narrow spaces, but would scatter over the free land of which
there is still so much in the world."* Moreover, *"in this struggle [for
landed property] it is not those who work in the land, but always those
who take part in government violence, who have the advantage."* Thus
Tolstoy recognised that property rights in anything beyond use require
state violence to protect them as possession is *"always protected by
custom, public opinion, by feelings of justice and reciprocity, and they
do not need to be protected by violence."* [**The Slavery of Our
Times**, p. 47] Indeed, he argues that:

> *"Tens of thousands of acres of forest lands belonging to one
> proprietor -- while thousands of people close by have no fuel -- need
> protection by violence. So, too, do factories and works where several
> generations of workmen have been defrauded and are still being
> defrauded. Yet more do the hundreds of thousands of bushels of grain,
> belonging to one owner, who has held them back to sell at triple price
> in time of famine."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 47-8]

As with other anarchists, Tolstoy recognised that under capitalism,
economic conditions *"compel [the worker] to go into temporary or
perpetual slavery to a capitalist"* and so is *"obliged to sell his
liberty."* This applied to both rural and urban workers, for the
*"slaves of our times are not only all those factory and workshop hands,
who must sell themselves completely into the power of the factory and
foundry owners in order to exist; but nearly all the agricultural
labourers are slaves, working as they do unceasingly to grow another's
corn on another's field."* Such a system could only be maintained by
violence, for *"first, the fruit of their toil is unjustly and violently
taken form the workers, and then the law steps in, and these very
articles which have been taken from the workmen -- unjustly and by
violence -- are declared to be the absolute property of those who have
stolen them."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 34, p. 31 and p. 38]

Tolstoy argued that capitalism morally and physically ruined individuals
and that capitalists were *"slave-drivers."* He considered it impossible
for a true Christian to be a capitalist, for a *"manufacturer is a man
whose income consists of value squeezed out of the workers, and whose
whole occupation is based on forced, unnatural labour"* and therefore,
*"he must first give up ruining human lives for his own profit."* [**The
Kingdom Of God is Within You**, p. 338 and p. 339] Unsurprisingly,
Tolstoy argued that co-operatives were the *"only social activity which
a moral, self-respecting person who doesn't want to be a party of
violence can take part in."* [quoted by Peter Marshall, **Op. Cit.**, p.
378]

So, for Tolstoy, *"taxes, or land-owning or property in articles of use
or in the means of production"* produces *"the slavery of our times."*
However, he rejected the state socialist solution to the social problem
as political power would create a new form of slavery on the ruins of
the old. This was because *"the fundamental cause of slavery is
legislation: the fact that there are people who have the power to make
laws."* This requires *"organised violence used by people who have
power, in order to compel others to obey the laws they (the powerful)
have made -- in other words, to do their will."* Handing over economic
life to the state would simply mean *"there will be people to whom power
will be given to regulate all these matters. Some people will decide
these questions, and others will obey them."* [Tolstoy, **Op. Cit.**, p.
40, p. 41, p. 43 and p. 25] He correctly prophetised that *"the only
thing that will happen"* with the victory of Marxism would be *"that
despotism will be passed on. Now the capitalists are ruling, but then
the directors of the working class will rule."* [quoted by Marshall,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 379]

From his opposition to violence, Tolstoy rejects both state and private
property and urged pacifist tactics to end violence within society and
create a just society. For Tolstoy, government could only be destroyed
by a mass refusal to obey, by non-participation in govermmental violence
and by exposing fraud of statism to the world. He rejected the idea that
force should be used to resist or end the force of the state. In
Nettlau's words, he *"asserted . . . **resistance to evil**; and to one
of the ways of resistance - by active force - he added another way:
**resistance through disobedience, the passive force.**"* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 251] In his ideas of a free society, Tolstoy was clearly influenced
by rural Russian life and aimed for a society based on peasant farming
of communal land, artisans and small-scale co-operatives. He rejected
industrialisation as the product of state violence, arguing that *"such
division of labour as now exists will . . . be impossible in a free
society."* [Tolstoy, **Op. Cit.**, p. 26]

Tolstoy's ideas had a strong influence on Gandhi, who inspired his
fellow country people to use non-violent resistance to kick Britain out
of India. Moreover, Gandhi's vision of a free India as a federation of
peasant communes is similar to Tolstoy's anarchist vision of a free
society (although we must stress that Gandhi was not an anarchist). The
**Catholic Worker Group** in the United States was also heavily
influenced by Tolstoy (and Proudhon), as was Dorothy Day a staunch
Christian pacifist and anarchist who founded it in 1933. The influence
of Tolstoy and religious anarchism in general can also be found in
**Liberation Theology** movements in Latin and South America who combine
Christian ideas with social activism amongst the working class and
peasantry (although we should note that Liberation Theology is more
generally inspired by state socialist ideas rather than anarchist ones).

So there is a minority tradition within anarchism which draws anarchist
conclusions from religion. However, as we noted in [section
A.2.20](secA2.html#seca220), most anarchists disagree, arguing that
anarchism implies atheism and it is no coincidence that the biblical
thought has, historically, been associated with hierarchy and defence of
earthly rulers. Thus the vast majority of anarchists have been and are
atheists, for *"to worship or revere any being, natural or supernatural,
will always be a form of self-subjugation and servitude that will give
rise to social domination. As [Bookchin] writes: 'The moment that human
beings fall on their knees before anything that is 'higher' than
themselves, hierarchy will have made its first triumph over freedom.'"*
[Brian Morris, **Ecology and Anarchism**, p. 137] This means that most
anarchists agree with Bakunin that if God existed it would be necessary,
for human freedom and dignity, to abolish it. Given what the Bible says,
few anarchists think it can be used to justify libertarian ideas rather
than support authoritarian ones and are not surprised that the
hierarchical side of Christianity has predominated in its long (and
generally oppressive) history.

Atheist anarchists point to the fact that the Bible is notorious for
advocating all kinds of abuses. How does the Christian anarchist
reconcile this? Are they a Christian first, or an anarchist? Equality,
or adherence to the Scripture? For a believer, it seems no choice at
all. If the Bible is the word of God, how can an anarchist support the
more extreme positions it takes while claiming to believe in God, his
authority and his laws?

For example, no capitalist nation would implement the no working on the
Sabbath law which the Bible expounds. Most Christian bosses have been
happy to force their fellow believers to work on the seventh day in
spite of the Biblical penalty of being stoned to death (*"Six days shall
work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day,
a sabbath of rest to the Lord: whosoever doeth work therein shall be put
to death."* Exodus 35:2). Would a Christian anarchist advocate such a
punishment for breaking God's law? Equally, a nation which allowed a
woman to be stoned to death for not being a virgin on her wedding night
would, rightly, be considered utterly evil. Yet this is the fate
specified in the "good book" (Deuteronomy 22:13-21). Would premarital
sex by women be considered a capital crime by a Christian anarchist? Or,
for that matter, should *"a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not
obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother"* also suffer
the fate of having *"all the men of his city . . . stone him with
stones, that he die"*? (Deuteronomy 21:18-21) Or what of the Bible's
treatment of women: *"Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands."*
(Colossians 3:18) They are also ordered to *"keep silence in the
churches."* (I Corinthians 14:34-35). Male rule is explicitly stated:
*"I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ; and the
head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God."* (I
Corinthians 11:3)

Clearly, a Christian anarchist would have to be as highly selective as
non-anarchist believers when it comes to applying the teachings of the
Bible. The rich rarely proclaim the need for poverty (at least for
themselves) and seem happy to forgot (like the churches) the difficulty
a rich man apparently has entering heaven, for example. They seem happy
to ignore Jesus' admonition that *"If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell
that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven: and come and follow me."* (Matthew 19:21). The followers of the
Christian right do not apply this to their political leaders, or, for
that matter, their spiritual ones. Few apply the maxim to *"Give to
every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask
them not again."* (Luke 6:30, repeated in Matthew 5:42) Nor do they hold
*"all things common"* as practised by the first Christian believers.
(Acts 4:32) So if non-anarchist believers are to be considered as
ignoring the teachings of the Bible by anarchist ones, the same can be
said of them by those they attack.

Moreover idea that Christianity is basically anarchism is hard to
reconcile with its history. The Bible has been used to defend injustice
far more than it has been to combat it. In countries where Churches hold
**de facto** political power, such as in Ireland, in parts of South
America, in nineteenth and early twentieth century Spain and so forth,
typically anarchists are strongly anti-religious because the Church has
the power to suppress dissent and class struggle. Thus the actual role
of the Church belies the claim that the Bible is an anarchist text.

In addition, most social anarchists consider Tolstoyian pacifism as
dogmatic and extreme, seeing the need (sometimes) for violence to resist
greater evils. However, most anarchists would agree with Tolstoyians on
the need for individual transformation of values as a key aspect of
creating an anarchist society and on the importance of non-violence as a
general tactic (although, we must stress, that few anarchists totally
reject the use of violence in self-defence, when no other option is
available).

A.3.8 What is *"anarchism without adjectives"*?
-----------------------------------------------

In the words of historian George Richard Esenwein, *"anarchism without
adjectives"* in its broadest sense *"referred to an unhyphenated form of
anarchism, that is, a doctrine without any qualifying labels such as
communist, collectivist, mutualist, or individualist. For others, . . .
[it] was simply understood as an attitude that tolerated the coexistence
of different anarchist schools."* [**Anarchist Ideology and the Working
Class Movement in Spain, 1868-1898**, p. 135]

The originator of the expression was Cuban born Fernando Tarrida del
Marmol who used it in November, 1889, in Barcelona. He directed his
comments towards the communist and collectivist anarchists in Spain who
at the time were having an intense debate over the merits of their two
theories. "Anarchism without adjectives" was an attempt to show greater
tolerance between anarchist tendencies and to be clear that anarchists
should not impose a preconceived economic plan on anyone -- even in
theory. Thus the economic preferences of anarchists should be of
*"secondary importance"* to abolishing capitalism and the state, with
free experimentation the one rule of a free society.

Thus the theoretical perspective known as *"anarquismo sin adjetives"*
("anarchism without adjectives") was one of the by-products of a intense
debate within the movement itself. The roots of the argument can be
found in the development of Communist Anarchism after Bakunin's death in
1876. While not entirely dissimilar to Collectivist Anarchism (as can be
seen from James Guillaume's famous work *"On Building the New Social
Order"* within **Bakunin on Anarchism**, the collectivists did see their
economic system evolving into free communism), Communist Anarchists
developed, deepened and enriched Bakunin's work just as Bakunin had
developed, deepened and enriched Proudhon's. Communist Anarchism was
associated with such anarchists as Elisee Reclus, Carlo Cafiero, Errico
Malatesta and (most famously) Peter Kropotkin.

Quickly Communist-Anarchist ideas replaced Collectivist Anarchism as the
main anarchist tendency in Europe, except in Spain. Here the major issue
was not the question of communism (although for Ricardo Mella this
played a part) but a question of the modification of strategy and
tactics implied by Communist Anarchism. At this time (the 1880s), the
Communist Anarchists stressed local (pure) cells of anarchist militants,
generally opposed trade unionism (although Kropotkin was not one of
these as he saw the importance of militant workers organisations) as
well as being somewhat anti-organisation as well. Unsurprisingly, such a
change in strategy and tactics came in for a lot of discussion from the
Spanish Collectivists who strongly supported working class organisation
and struggle.

This conflict soon spread outside of Spain and the discussion found its
way into the pages of **La Revolte** in Paris. This provoked many
anarchists to agree with Malatesta's argument that *"[i]t is not right
for us, to say the least, to fall into strife over mere hypotheses."*
[quoted by Max Nettlau, **A Short History of Anarchism**, pp. 198-9]
Over time, most anarchists agreed (to use Nettlau's words) that *"we
cannot foresee the economic development of the future"* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 201] and so started to stress what they had in common (opposition to
capitalism and the state) rather than the different visions of how a
free society would operate. As time progressed, most
Communist-Anarchists saw that ignoring the labour movement ensured that
their ideas did not reach the working class while most
Collectivist-Anarchists stressed their commitment to communist ideals
and their arrival sooner, rather than later, after a revolution. Thus
both groups of anarchists could work together as there was *"no reason
for splitting up into small schools, in our eagerness to overemphasise
certain features, subject to variation in time and place, of the society
of the future, which is too remote from us to permit us to envision all
its adjustments and possible combinations."* Moreover, in a free society
*"the methods and the individual forms of association and agreements, or
the organisation of labour and of social life, will not be uniform and
we cannot, at this moment, make and forecasts or determinations
concerning them."* [Malatesta, quoted by Nettlau, **Op. Cit.**, p. 173]

Thus, Malatesta continued, *"[e]ven the question as between
anarchist-collectivism and anarchist-communism is a matter of
qualification, of method and agreement"* as the key is that, no matter
the system, *"a new moral conscience will come into being, which will
make the wage system repugnant to men [and women] just as legal slavery
and compulsion are now repugnant to them."* If this happens then,
*"whatever the specific forms of society may turn out to be, the basis
of social organisation will be communist."* As long as we *"hold to
fundamental principles and . . . do our utmost to instil them in the
masses"* we need not *"quarrel over mere words or trifles but give
post-revolutionary society a direction towards justice, equality and
liberty."* [quoted by Nettlau, **Op. Cit.**, p. 173 and p. 174]

Similarly, in the United States there was also an intense debate at the
same time between Individualist and Communist anarchists. There Benjamin
Tucker was arguing that Communist-Anarchists were not anarchists while
John Most was saying similar things about Tucker's ideas. Just as people
like Mella and Tarrida put forward the idea of tolerance between
anarchist groups, so anarchists like Voltairine de Cleyre *"came to
label herself simply 'Anarchist,' and called like Malatesta for an
'Anarchism without Adjectives,' since in the absence of government many
different experiments would probably be tried in various localities in
order to determine the most appropriate form."* [Peter Marshall,
**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 393] In her own words, a whole range of
economic systems would be *"advantageously tried in different
localities. I would see the instincts and habits of the people express
themselves in a free choice in every community; and I am sure that
distinct environments would call out distinct adaptations."*
[*"Anarchism"*, **Exquisite Rebel**, p. 79] Consequently, individualist
and communist anarchist *"forms of society, as well as many
intermediations, would, in the absence of government, be tried in
various localities, according to the instincts and material condition of
the people . . . Liberty and experiment alone can determine the best
forms of society. Therefore I no longer label myself otherwise than
'Anarchist' simply."* [*"The Making of An Anarchist"*, **The Voltairine
de Cleyre Reader**, pp. 107-8]

These debates had a lasting impact on the anarchist movement, with such
noted anarchists as de Cleyre, Malatesta, Nettlau and Reclus adopting
the tolerant perspective embodied in the expression "anarchism without
adjectives" (see Nettlau's **A Short History of Anarchism**, pages 195
to 201 for an excellent summary of this). It is also, we add, the
dominant position within the anarchist movement today with most
anarchists recognising the right of other tendencies to the name
"anarchist" while, obviously, having their own preferences for specific
types of anarchist theory and their own arguments why other types are
flawed. However, we must stress that the different forms of anarchism
(communism, syndicalism, religious etc) are not mutually exclusive and
you do not have to support one and hate the others. This tolerance is
reflected in the expression "anarchism without adjectives."

One last point, some "anarcho"-capitalists have attempted to use the
tolerance associated with "anarchism without adjectives" to argue that
their ideology should be accepted as part of the anarchist movement.
After all, they argue, anarchism is just about getting rid of the state,
economics is of secondary importance. However, such a use of *"anarchism
without adjectives"* is bogus as it was commonly agreed at the time that
the types of economics that were being discussed were
**anti-capitalist** (i.e. socialistic). For Malatesta, for example,
there were *"anarchists who foresee and propose other solution, other
future forms of social organisation"* than communist anarchism, but they
*"desire, just as we do, to destroy political power and private
property."* *"Let us do away,"* he argued, *"with all exclusivism of
schools of thinking"* and let us *"come to an understanding on ways and
means, and go forwards."* [quoted by Nettlau, **Op. Cit.**, p. 175] In
other words, it was agreed that capitalism had to be abolished along
with the state and once this was the case free experimentation would
develop. Thus the struggle against the state was just one part of a
wider struggle to end oppression and exploitation and could not be
isolated from these wider aims. As "anarcho"-capitalists do not seek the
abolition of capitalism along with the state they are not anarchists and
so "anarchism without adjectives" does not apply to the so-called
"anarchist" capitalists (see [section F](secFcon.html) on why
"anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchist).

This is not to say that after a revolution "anarcho"-capitalist
communities would not exist. Far from it. If a group of people wanted to
form such a system then they could, just as we would expect a community
which supported state socialism or theocracy to live under that regime.
Such enclaves of hierarchy would exist simply because it is unlikely
that everyone on the planet, or even in a given geographical area, will
become anarchists all at the same time. The key thing to remember is
that no such system would be anarchist and, consequently, is not
*"anarchism without adjectives."*

A.3.9 What is anarcho-primitivism?
----------------------------------

As discussed in [section A.3.3](secA3.html#seca33), most anarchists
would agree with Situationist Ken Knabb in arguing that *"in a liberated
world computers and other modern technologies could be used to eliminate
dangerous or boring tasks, freeing everyone to concentrate on more
interesting activities."* Obviously *"[c]ertain technologies -- nuclear
power is the most obvious example -- are indeed so insanely dangerous
that they will no doubt be brought to a prompt halt. Many other
industries which produce absurd, obsolete or superfluous commodities
will, of course, cease automatically with the disappearance of their
commercial rationales. But many technologies . . ., however they may
presently be misused, have few if any **inherent** drawbacks. It's
simply a matter of using them more sensibly, bringing them under popular
control, introducing a few ecological improvements, and redesigning them
for human rather than capitalistic ends."* [**Public Secrets**, p. 79
and p. 80] Thus most eco-anarchists see the use of appropriate
technology as the means of creating a society which lives in balance
with nature.

However, a small but vocal minority of self-proclaimed Green anarchists
disagree. Writers such as John Zerzan, John Moore and David Watson have
expounded a vision of anarchism which, they claim, aims to critique
every form of power and oppression. This is often called
*"anarcho-primitivism,"* which according to Moore, is simply *"a
shorthand term for a radical current that critiques the totality of
civilisation from an anarchist perspective, and seeks to initiate a
comprehensive transformation of human life."* [**Primitivist Primer**]

How this current expresses itself is diverse, with the most extreme
elements seeking the end of all forms of technology, division of labour,
domestication, "Progress", industrialism, what they call *"mass
society"* and, for some, even symbolic culture (i.e. numbers, language,
time and art). They tend to call any system which includes these
features *"civilisation"* and, consequently, aim for *"the destruction
of civilisation"*. How far back they wish to go is a moot point. Some
see the technological level that existed before the Industrial
Revolution as acceptable, many go further and reject agriculture and all
forms of technology beyond the most basic. For them, a return to the
wild, to a hunter-gatherer mode of life, is the only way for anarchy is
exist and dismiss out of hand the idea that appropriate technology can
be used to create an anarchist society based on industrial production
which minimises its impact on ecosystems.

Thus we find the primitivist magazine **"Green Anarchy"** arguing that
those, like themselves, *"who prioritise the values of personal autonomy
or wild existence have reason to oppose and reject all large-scale
organisations and societies on the grounds that they necessitate
imperialism, slavery and hierarchy, regardless of the purposes they may
be designed for."* They oppose capitalism as it is *"civilisation's
current dominant manifestation."* However, they stress that it is
*"Civilisation, not capitalism per se, was the genesis of systemic
authoritarianism, compulsory servitude and social isolation. Hence, an
attack upon capitalism that fails to target civilisation can never
abolish the institutionalised coercion that fuels society. To attempt to
collectivise industry for the purpose of democratising it is to fail to
recognise that all large-scale organisations adopt a direction and form
that is independent of its members' intentions."* Thus, they argue,
genuine anarchists must oppose industry and technology for
*"[h]ierarchical institutions, territorial expansion, and the
mechanisation of life are all required for the administration and
process of mass production to occur."* For primitivists, *"[o]nly small
communities of self-sufficient individuals can coexist with other
beings, human or not, without imposing their authority upon them."* Such
communities would share essential features with tribal societies,
*"[f]or over 99% of human history, humans lived within small and
egalitarian extended family arrangements, while drawing their
subsistence directly from the land."* [**Against Mass Society**]

While such tribal communities, which lived in harmony with nature and
had little or no hierarchies, are seen as inspirational, primitivists
look (to use the title of a John Zerzan book) forward to seeing the
*"Future Primitive."* As John Moore puts it, *"the future envisioned by
anarcho-primitivism . . . is without precedent. Although primitive
cultures provide intimations of the future, and that future may well
incorporate elements derived from those cultures, an anarcho-primitivist
world would likely be quite different from previous forms of anarchy."*
[**Op. Cit.**]

For the primitivist, other forms of anarchism are simply self-managed
alienation within essentially the same basic system we now endure. Hence
Moore's comment that *"classical anarchism"* wants *"to take over
civilisation, rework its structures to some degree, and remove its worst
abuses and oppressions. However, 99% of life in civilisation remains
unchanged in their future scenarios, precisely because the aspects of
civilisation they question are minimal . . . overall life patterns
wouldn't change too much."* Thus *"[f]rom the perspective of
anarcho-primitivism, all other forms of radicalism appear as reformist,
whether or not they regard themselves as revolutionary."* [**Op. Cit.**]

In reply, "classical anarchists" point out three things. Firstly, to
claim that the *"worst abuses and oppressions"* account for 1% of
capitalist society is simply nonsense and, moreover, something an
apologist of that system would happily agree with. Secondly, it is
obvious from reading any "classical" anarchist text that Moore's
assertions are nonsense. "Classical" anarchism aims to transform society
radically from top to bottom, not tinker with minor aspects of it. Do
primitivists really think that people who went to the effort to abolish
capitalism would simply continue doing 99% of the same things they did
before hand? Of course not. In other words, it is not enough to get rid
of the boss, although this is a necessary first step! Thirdly, and most
importantly, Moore's argument ensures that his new society would be
impossible to reach.

So, as can be seen, primitivism has little or no bearing to the
traditional anarchist movement and its ideas. The visions of both are
simply incompatible, with the ideas of the latter dismissed as
authoritarian by the former and anarchists questioning whether
primitivism is practical in the short term or even desirable in the
long. While supporters of primitivism like to portray it as the most
advanced and radical form of anarchism, others are less convinced. They
consider it as a confused ideology which draws its followers into absurd
positions and, moreover, is utterly impractical. They would agree with
Ken Knabb that primitivism is rooted in *"fantasies [which] contain so
many obvious self-contradictions that it is hardly necessary to
criticise them in any detail. They have questionable relevance to actual
past societies and virtually no relevance to present possibilities. Even
supposing that life was better in one or another previous era, **we have
to begin from where we are now.** Modern technology is so interwoven
with all aspects of our life that it could not be abruptly discontinued
without causing a global chaos that would wipe out billions of people."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 79]

The reason for this is simply that we live in a highly industrialised
and interconnected system in which most people do not have the skills
required to live in a hunter-gatherer or even agricultural society.
Moreover, it is extremely doubtful that six billion people **could**
survive as hunter-gatherers even if they had the necessary skills. As
Brian Morris notes, *"[t]he future we are told is 'primitive.' How this
is to be achieved in a world that presently sustains almost six billion
people (for evidence suggests that the hunter-gatherer lifestyle is only
able to support 1 or 2 people per sq. mile)"* primitivists like Zerzan
do not tell us. [*"Anthropology and Anarchism,"* pp. 35-41, **Anarchy: A
Journal of Desire Armed**, no. 45, p. 38] Most anarchists, therefore,
agree with Chomsky's summation that *"I do not think that they are
realising that what they are calling for is the mass genocide of
millions of people because of the way society is now structured and
organised . . . If you eliminate these structures everybody dies . . .
And, unless one thinks through these things, it's not really serious."*
[**Chomsky on Anarchism**, p. 226]

Somewhat ironically, many proponents of primitivsm agree with its
critics that the earth would be unable to support six billion living as
a hunter-gatherers. This, critics argue, gives primitivism a key problem
in that population levels will take time to fall and so any
"primitivist" rebellion faces two options. Either it comes about via
some kind of collapse of "civilisation" or it involves a lengthy
transition period during which "civilisation" and its industrial
legacies are decommissioned safely, population levels drop naturally to
an appropriate level and people gain the necessary skills required for
their new existence.

The problems with the first option should be obvious but, sadly, it is
implied by many primitivist writers. Moore, for example, talks about
*"when civilisation collapses"* (*"through its own volition, through our
efforts, or a combination of the two"*). This implies an extremely
speedy process which is confirmed when he talks about the need for
*"positive alternatives"* to be built now as *"the social disruption
caused by collapse could easily create the psychological insecurity and
social vacuum in which fascism and other totalitarian dictatorships
could flourish."* [**Op. Cit.**] Social change based on *"collapse,"*
*"insecurity"* and *"social disruption"* does not sound like a recipe
for a successful revolution.

Then there are the anti-organisation dogmas expounded by primitivism.
Moore is typical, asserting that *"[o]rganisations, for
anarcho-primitivists, are just rackets, gangs for putting a particular
ideology in power"* and reiterates the point by saying primitivists
stand for *"the abolition of all power relations, including the State .
. . and any kind of party or organisation."* [**Op. Cit.**] Yet without
organisation, no modern society could function. There would be a total
and instant collapse which would see not only mass starvation but also
ecological destruction as nuclear power stations meltdown, industrial
waste seeps into the surrounding environment, cities and towns decay and
hordes of starving people fighting over what vegetables, fruits and
animals they could find in the countryside. Clearly an anti-organisation
dogma can only be reconciled with the idea of a near overnight
*"collapse"* of civilisation, not with a steady progress towards a long
term goal. Equally, how many *"positive alternatives"* could exist
without organisation?

Moore dismissed any critique that points out that a collapse would cause
mass destruction as *"just smear tactics,"* *"weird fantasies spread by
some commentators hostile to anarcho-primitivism who suggest that the
population levels envisaged by anarcho-primitivists would have to be
achieved by mass die-offs or nazi-style death camps."* The *"commitment
of anarcho-primitivists to the abolition of all power relations . . .
means that such orchestrated slaughter remains an impossibility as well
as just plain horrendous."* [**Op. Cit.**] Yet no critic is suggesting
that primitivists desire such a die-off or seek to organise it. They
simply point out that the collapse of civilisation would result in a
mass die-off due to the fact that most people do not have the skills
necessary to survive it nor could the Earth provide enough food for six
billion people trying to live in a primitivist manner. Other
primitivists have asserted that it can, stating *"[i]t is not possible
for all six billion of the planet's current inhabitants to survive as
hunter-gatherers, but it is possible for those who can't to grow their
own food in significantly smaller spaces . . . as has been demonstrated
by permaculture, organic gardening, and indigenous horticulture
techniques."* [**Against Mass Society**] Unfortunately no evidence was
provided to show the truth of this assertion nor that people could
develop the necessary skills in time even if it were. It seems a slim
hope to place the fate of billions on, so that humanity can be "wild"
and free from such tyrannies as hospitals, books and electricity.

Faced with the horrors that such a *"collapse"* would entail, those
primitivists who have thought the issue through end up accepting the
need for a transition period. John Zerzan, for example, argues that it
*"seems evident that industrialisation and the factories could not be
gotten rid of instantly, but equally clear that their liquidation must
be pursued with all the vigour behind the rush of break-out."* Even the
existence of cities is accepted, for *"[c]ultivation within the cities
is another aspect of practical transition."* [**On the Transition:
Postscript to Future Primitive**]

However, to accept the necessity of a transition period does little more
than expose the contradictions within primitivism. Zerzan notes that
*"the means of reproducing the prevailing Death Ship (e.g. its
technology) cannot be used to fashion a liberated world."* He ponders:
*"What would we keep? 'Labour-saving devices?' Unless they involve no
division of labour (e.g. a lever or incline), this concept is a fiction;
behind the 'saving' is hidden the congealed drudgery of many and the
despoliation of the natural world."* How this is compatible with
maintaining *"industrialisation and the factories"* for a
(non-specified) period is unclear. Similarly, he argues that *"[i]nstead
of the coercion of work -- and how much of the present could continue
without precisely that coercion? -- an existence without constraints is
an immediate, central objective."* [**Op. Cit.**] How that is compatible
with the arguing that industry would be maintained for a time is left
unasked, never mind unanswered. And if "work" continues, how is this
compatible with the typical primitivist dismissal of "traditional"
anarchism, namely that self-management is managing your own alienation
and that no one will want to work in a factory or in a mine and,
therefore, coercion will have to be used to make them do so? Does
working in a self-managed workplace somehow become less alienating and
authoritarian during a primitivist transition?

It is an obvious fact that the human population size cannot be reduced
significantly by voluntary means in a short period of time. For
primitivism to be viable, world population levels need to drop by
something like 90%. This implies a drastic reduction of population will
take decades, if not centuries, to achieve voluntarily. Given that it is
unlikely that (almost) everyone on the planet will decide not to have
children, this time scale will almost certainly be centuries and so
agriculture and most industries will have to continue (and an exodus
from the cities would be impossible immediately). Likewise, reliable
contraceptives are a product of modern technology and, consequently, the
means of producing them would have to maintained over that time --
unless primitivists argue that along with refusing to have children,
people will also refuse to have sex.

Then there is the legacy of industrial society, which simply cannot be
left to decay on its own. To take just one obvious example, leaving
nuclear power plants to melt down would hardly be eco-friendly.
Moreover, it is doubtful that the ruling elite will just surrender its
power without resistance and, consequently, any social revolution would
need to defend itself against attempts to reintroduce hierarchy.
Needless to say, a revolution which shunned all organisation and
industry as inherently authoritarian would not be able to do this (it
would have been impossible to produce the necessary military supplies to
fight Franco's fascist forces during the Spanish Revolution if the
workers had not converted and used their workplaces to do so, to note
another obvious example).

Then there is another, key, contradiction. For if you accept that there
is a need for a transition from 'here' to 'there' then primitivism
automatically excludes itself from the anarchist tradition. The reason
is simple. Moore asserts that *"mass society"* involves *"people
working, living in artificial, technologised environments, and [being]
subject to forms of coercion and control."* [**Op. Cit.**] So if what
primitivists argue about technology, industry and mass society are all
true, then any primitivist transition would, by definition, not be
libertarian. This is because *"mass society"* will have to remain for
some time (at the very least decades, more likely centuries) after a
successful revolution and, consequently from a primitivist perspective,
be based on *"forms of coercion and control."* There is an ideology
which proclaims the need for a transitional system which will be based
on coercion, control and hierarchy which will, in time, disappear into a
stateless society. It also, like primitivism, stresses that industry and
large scale organisation is impossible without hierarchy and authority.
That ideology is Marxism. Thus it seems ironic to "classical" anarchists
to hear self-proclaimed anarchists repeating Engels arguments against
Bakunin as arguments for "anarchy" (see [section H.4](secH4.html) for a
discussion of Engels claims that industry excludes autonomy).

So if, as seems likely, any transition will take centuries to achieve
then the primivitist critique of "traditional" anarchism becomes little
more than a joke -- and a hindrance to meaningful anarchist practice and
social change. It shows the contradiction at the heart of primitivism.
While its advocates attack other anarchists for supporting technology,
organisation, self-management of work, industrialisation and so on, they
are themselves are dependent on the things they oppose as part of any
humane transition to a primitivist society. And given the passion with
which they attack other anarchists on these matters, unsurprisingly the
whole notion of a primitivist transition period seems impossible to
other anarchists. To denounce technology and industrialism as inherently
authoritarian and then turn round and advocate their use after a
revolution simply does not make sense from a logical or libertarian
perspective.

Thus the key problem with primitivism can be seen. It offers no
practical means of achieving its goals in a libertarian manner. As Knabb
summarises, *"[w]hat begins as a valid questioning of excessive faith in
science and technology ends up as a desperate and even less justified
faith in the return of a primeval paradise, accompanied by a failure to
engage the present system in any but an abstract, apocalyptical way."*
To avoid this, it is necessary to take into account where we are now
and, consequently, we will have to *"seriously consider how we will deal
with all the practical problems that will be posed in the interim."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 80 and p. 79] Sadly, primitivist ideology excludes
this possibility by dismissing the starting point any real revolution
would begin from as being inherently authoritarian. Moreover, they are
blocking genuine social change by ensuring that no mass movement would
ever be revolutionary enough to satisfy their criteria:

> *"Those who proudly proclaim their 'total opposition' to all
> compromise, all authority, all organisation, all theory, all
> technology, etc., usually turn out to have no **revolutionary**
> perspective whatsoever -- no practical conception of how the present
> system might be overthrown or how a post-revolutionary society might
> work. Some even attempt to justify this lack by declaring that a mere
> revolution could never be radical enough to satisfy their eternal
> ontological rebelliousness. Such all-or-nothing bombast may
> temporarily impress a few spectators, but its ultimate effect is
> simply to make people blas."* [Knabb, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 31-32]

Then there is the question of the means suggested for achieving
primitivism. Moore argues that the *"kind of world envisaged by
anarcho-primitivism is one unprecedented in human experience in terms of
the degree and types of freedom anticipated ... so there can't be any
limits on the forms of resistance and insurgency that might develop."*
[**Op. Cit.**] Non-primitivists reply by saying that this implies
primitivists don't know what they want nor how to get there. Equally,
they stress that there **must be** limits on what are considered
acceptable forms of resistance. This is because means shape the ends
created and so authoritarian means will result in authoritarian ends.
Tactics are not neutral and support for certain tactics betray an
authoritarian perspective.

This can be seen from the UK magazine **"Green Anarchist,"** part of the
extreme end of "Primitivism." Due to its inherent unattractiveness for
most people, it could never come about by libertarian means (i.e. by the
free choice of individuals who create it by their own acts) and so
cannot be anarchist as very few people would actually voluntarily
embrace such a situation. This led to **"Green Anarchist"** developing a
form of eco-vanguardism in order, to use Rousseau's expression, to
"force people to be free." This was expressed when the magazine
supported the actions and ideas of the (non-anarchist) Unabomber and
published an article (*"The Irrationalists"*) by one its editors stating
that *"the Oklahoma bombers had the right idea. The pity was that they
did not blast any more government offices . . . The Tokyo sarin cult had
the right idea. The pity was that in testing the gas a year prior to the
attack they gave themselves away."* [**Green Anarchist**, no. 51, p. 11]
A defence of these remarks was published in the next issue and a
subsequent exchange of letters in the US-based **Anarchy: A Journal of
Desire Armed** magazine (numbers 48 to 52) saw the other editor justify
this sick, authoritarian nonsense as simply examples of *"unmediated
resistance"* conducted *"under conditions of extreme repression."*
Whatever happened to the anarchist principle that means shape the ends?
This means there **are** *"limits"* on tactics, as some tactics are not
and can never be libertarian.

However, few primitivists take such an extreme position. Most
"primitivist" anarchists rather than being anti-technology and
anti-civilisation as such instead (to use David Watson's expression)
believe it is a case of the *"affirmation of aboriginal lifeways"* and
of taking a far more critical approach to issues such as technology,
rationality and progress than that associated with Social Ecology. These
eco-anarchists reject *"a dogmatic primitivism which claims we can
return in some linear way to our primordial roots"* just as much as the
idea of "progress," *"**superseding** both Enlightenment and
Counter-Enlightenment"* ideas and traditions. For them, Primitivism
*"reflects not only a glimpse at life before the rise of the state, but
also a legitimate response to real conditions of life under
civilisation"* and so we should respect and learn from *"palaeolithic
and neolithic wisdom traditions"* (such as those associated with Native
American tribes and other aboriginal peoples). While we *"cannot, and
would not want to abandon secular modes of thinking and experiencing the
world. . . we cannot reduce the experience of life, and the fundamental,
inescapable questions **why** we live, and **how** we live, to secular
terms. . . Moreover, the boundary between the spiritual and the secular
is not so clear. A dialectical understanding that we are our history
would affirm an inspirited reason that honours not only atheistic
Spanish revolutionaries who died for **el ideal,** but also religious
pacifist prisoners of conscience, Lakota ghost dancers, taoist hermits
and executed sufi mystics."* [David Watson, **Beyond Bookchin: Preface
for a future social ecology**, p. 240, p. 103, p. 240 and pp. 66-67]

Such "primitivist" anarchism is associated with a range of magazines,
mostly US-based, like **Fifth Estate**. For example, on the question of
technology, they argue that *"[w]hile market capitalism was a spark that
set the fire, and remains at the centre of the complex, it is only part
of something larger: the forced adaptation of organic human societies to
an economic-instrumental civilisation and its mass technics, which are
not only hierarchical and external but increasingly 'cellular' and
internal. It makes no sense to layer the various elements of this
process in a mechanistic hierarchy of first cause and secondary
effects."* [Watson, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 127-8] For this reason
primitivists are more critical of all aspects of technology, including
calls by social ecologists for the use of **appropriate** technology
essential in order to liberate humanity and the planet:

> *"To speak of technological society is in fact to refer to **the
> technics generated within capitalism,** which in turn generate new
> forms of capital. The notion of a distinct realm of social relations
> that determine this technology is not only ahistorical and
> undialectical, it reflects a kind of simplistic base/superstructure
> schema."* [Watson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 124]

Thus it is not a case of who **uses** technology which determines its
effects, rather the effects of technology are determined to a large
degree by the society that creates it. In other words, technology is
selected which tends to re-enforce hierarchical power as it is those in
power who generally select which technology is introduced within society
(saying that, oppressed people have this excellent habit of turning
technology against the powerful and technological change and social
struggle are inter-related -- see [section D.10](secD10.html)). Thus
even the use of appropriate technology involves more than selecting from
the range of available technology at hand, as these technologies have
certain effects regardless of who uses them. Rather it is a question of
critically evaluating all aspects of technology and modifying and
rejecting it as required to maximise individual freedom, empowerment and
happiness. Few Social Ecologists would disagree with this approach,
though, and differences are usually a question of emphasis rather than a
deep political point.

However, few anarchists are convinced by an ideology which, as Brian
Morris notes, dismisses the *"last eight thousand years or so of human
history"* as little more than a source *"of tyranny, hierarchical
control, mechanised routine devoid of any spontaneity. All those
products of the human creative imagination -- farming, art, philosophy,
technology, science, urban living, symbolic culture -- are viewed
negatively by Zerzan -- in a monolithic sense."* While there is no
reason to worship progress, there is just as little need to dismiss all
change and development out of hand as oppressive. Nor are they convinced
by Zerzan's *"selective culling of the anthropological literature."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 38] Most anarchists would concurr with Murray
Bookchin:

> *"The ecology movement will never gain any real influence or have any
> significant impact on society if it advances a message of despair
> rather than hope, of a regressive and impossible return to primordial
> human cultures, rather than a commitment to human progress and to a
> unique **human** empathy for life as a whole . . . We must recover the
> utopian impulses, the hopefulness, the appreciation of what is good,
> what is worth rescuing in yumn civilisation, as well as what must be
> rejected, if the ecology movement is to play a transformative and
> creative role in human affairs. For without changing society, we will
> not change the diastrous ecological direction in which capitalism is
> moving."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 63]

In addition, a position of "turning back the clock" is deeply flawed,
for while some aboriginal societies are very anarchistic, not all are.
As anarchist anthropologist David Graeber points out, *"we know almost
nothing about like in Palaeolithic, other than the sort of thing that
can be gleaned from studying very old skulls . . . But what we see in
the more recent ethnographic records is endless variety. There were
hunter-gatherer societies with nobles and slaves, there are agrarian
societies that are fiercely egalitarian. Even in . . . Amazonia, one
finds some groups who can justly be described as anarchists, like the
Piaroa, living alongside others (say, the warlike Sherentre, who are
clearly anything but."* [**Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology**, pp.
53-4] Even if we speculate, like Zerzan, that if we go back far enough
we would find all of humanity in anarchistic tribes, the fact remains
that certain of these societies did develop into statist, propertarian
ones implying that a future anarchist society that is predominantly
inspired by and seek to reproduce key elements of prehistoric forms of
anarchy is not the answer as "civilisation" may develop again due to the
same social or environmental factors.

Primitivism confuses two radically different positions, namely support
for a literal return to primitive lifeways and the use of examples from
primitive life as a tool for social critique. Few anarchists would
disagree with the second position as they recognise that current does
not equal better and, consequently, past cultures and societies can have
positive (as well as negative) aspects to them which can shed light on
what a genuinely human society can be like. Similarly if "primitivism"
simply involved questioning technology along with authority, few would
disagree. However, this sensible position is, in the main, subsumed
within the first one, the idea that an anarchist society would be a
literal return to hunter-gatherer society. That this is the case can be
seen from primitivist writings (some primitivists say that they are not
suggesting the Stone Age as a model for their desired society nor a
return to gathering and hunting, yet they seem to exclude any other
options by their critique).

So to suggest that primitivism is simply a critique or some sort of
*"anarchist speculation"* (to use John Moore's term) seems incredulous.
If you demonise technology, organisation, "mass society" and
"civilisation" as inherently authoritarian, you cannot turn round and
advocate their use in a transition period or even in a free society. As
such, the critique points to a mode of action and a vision of a free
society and to suggest otherwise is simply incredulous. Equally, if you
praise foraging bands and shifting horticultural communities of past and
present as examples of anarchy then critics are entitled to conclude
that primitivists desire a similar system for the future. This is
reinforced by the critiques of industry, technology, "mass society" and
agriculture.

Until such time as "primitivists" clearly state which of the two forms
of primitivism they subscribe to, other anarchists will not take their
ideas that seriously. Given that they fail to answer such basic
questions of how they plan to deactivate industry safely and avoid mass
starvation without the workers' control, international links and federal
organisation they habitually dismiss out of hand as new forms of
"governance," other anarchists do not hold much hope that it will happen
soon. Ultimately, we are faced with the fact that a revolution will
start in society as it is. Anarchism recognises this and suggests a
means of transforming it. Primitivism shies away from such minor
problems and, consequently, has little to recommend it in most
anarchists' eyes.

This is not to suggest, of course, that non-primitivist anarchists think
that everyone in a free society must have the same level of technology.
Far from it. An anarchist society would be based on free
experimentation. Different individuals and groups will pick the way of
life that best suits them. Those who seek less technological ways of
living will be free to do so as will those who want to apply the
benefits of (appropriate) technologies. Similarly, all anarchists
support the struggles of those in the developing world against the
onslaught of (capitalist) civilisation and the demands of (capitalist)
progress.

For more on "primitivist" anarchism see John Zerzan's **Future
Primitive** as well as David Watson's **Beyond Bookchin** and **Against
the Mega-Machine**. Ken Knabb's essay **The Poverty of Primitivism** is
an excellent critique of primitivism as is Brian Oliver Sheppard's
**Anarchism vs. Primitivism**.
