B.3 Why are anarchists against private property?
================================================

Private property is one of the three things all anarchists oppose, along
side hierarchical authority and the state. Today, the dominant system of
private property is capitalist in nature and, as such, anarchists tend
to concentrate on this system and its property rights regime. We will be
reflecting this here but do not, because of this, assume that anarchists
consider other forms of private property regime (such as, say,
feudalism) as acceptable. This is not the case -- anarchists are against
every form of property rights regime which results in the many working
for the few.

Anarchist opposition to private property rests on two, related,
arguments. These were summed up by Proudhon's maxims (from What is
Property? that *"property is theft"* and *"property is despotism."* In
his words, *"Property . . . violates equality by the rights of exclusion
and increase, and freedom by despotism . . . [and has] perfect identity
with robbery."* [Proudhon, What is Property, p. 251] Anarchists,
therefore, oppose private property (i.e. capitalism) because it is a
source of coercive, hierarchical authority as well as exploitation and,
consequently, elite privilege and inequality. It is based on and
produces inequality, in terms of both wealth and power.

We will summarise each argument in turn.

The statement *"property is theft"* is one of anarchism's most famous
sayings. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that anyone who rejects
this statement is not an anarchist. This maxim works in two related
ways. Firstly, it recognises the fact that the earth and its resources,
the common inheritance of all, have been monopolised by a few. Secondly,
it argues that, as a consequence of this, those who own property exploit
those who do not. This is because those who do not own have to pay or
sell their labour to those who do own in order to get access to the
resources they need to live and work (such as workplaces, machinery,
land, credit, housing, products under patents, and such like -- see
[section B.3.2](secB3.html#secb32) for more discussion).

As we discuss in [section B.3.3](secB3.html#secb33), this exploitation
(theft) flows from the fact that workers do not own or control the means
of production they use and, as a consequence, are controlled by those
who do during work hours. This alienation of control over labour to the
boss places the employer in a position to exploit that labour -- to get
the worker to produce more than they get paid in wages. That is
precisely **why** the boss employs the worker. Combine this with rent,
interest and intellectual property rights and we find the secret to
maintaining the capitalist system as all allow enormous inequalities of
wealth to continue and keep the resources of the world in the hands of a
few.

Yet labour cannot be alienated. Therefore when you sell your labour you
sell yourself, your liberty, for the time in question. This brings us to
the second reason why anarchists oppose private property, the fact it
produces authoritarian social relationships. For all true anarchists,
property is opposed as a source of authority, indeed despotism. To quote
Proudhon on this subject:

> *"The proprietor, the robber, the hero, the sovereign -- for all these
> titles are synonymous -- imposes his will as law, and suffers neither
> contradiction nor control; that is, he pretends to be the legislative
> and the executive power at once . . . [and so] property engenders
> despotism . . . That is so clearly the essence of property that, to be
> convinced of it, one need but remember what it is, and observe what
> happens around him. Property is the right to **use** and **abuse** . .
> . if goods are property, why should not the proprietors be kings, and
> despotic kings -- kings in proportion to their **facultes
> bonitaires**? And if each proprietor is sovereign lord within the
> sphere of his property, absolute king throughout his own domain, how
> could a government of proprietors be any thing but chaos and
> confusion?"* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 266-7]

In other words, private property is the state writ small, with the
property owner acting as the *"sovereign lord"* over their property, and
so the absolute king of those who use it. As in any monarchy, the worker
is the subject of the capitalist, having to follow their orders, laws
and decisions while on their property. This, obviously, is the total
denial of liberty (and dignity, we may note, as it is degrading to have
to follow orders). And so private property (capitalism) necessarily
excludes participation, influence, and control by those who use, but do
not own, the means of life.

It is, of course, true that private property provides a sphere of
decision-making free from outside interference -- but only for the
property's owners. But for those who are not property owners the
situation if radically different. In a system of exclusively private
property does not guarantee them any such sphere of freedom. They have
only the freedom to sell their liberty to those who **do** own private
property. If I am evicted from one piece of private property, where can
I go? Nowhere, unless another owner agrees to allow me access to their
piece of private property. This means that everywhere I can stand is a
place where I have no right to stand without permission and, as a
consequence, I exist only by the sufferance of the property owning
elite. Hence Proudhon:

> *"Just as the commoner once held his land by the munificence and
> condescension of the lord, so to-day the working-man holds his labour
> by the condescension and necessities of the master and proprietor."*
> [Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 128]

This means that far from providing a sphere of independence, a society
in which all property is private thus renders the property-less
completely dependent on those who own property. This ensures that the
exploitation of another's labour occurs and that some are subjected to
the will of others, in direct contradiction to what the defenders of
property promise. This is unsurprising given the nature of the property
they are defending:

> "Our opponents . . . are in the habit of justifying the right to
> private property by stating that property is the condition and
> guarantee of liberty.
>
> "And we agree with them. Do we not say repeatedly that poverty is
> slavery?
>
> "But then why do we oppose them?
>
> "The reason is clear: in reality the property that they defend is
> capitalist property, namely property that allows its owners to live
> from the work of others and which therefore depends on the existence
> of a class of the disinherited and dispossessed, forced to sell their
> labour to the property owners for a wage below its real value . . .
> This means that workers are subjected to a kind of slavery, which,
> though it may vary in degree of harshness, always means social
> inferiority, material penury and moral degradation, and is the primary
> cause of all the ills that beset today's social order." [Malatesta,
> **The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 113]

It will, of course, be objected that no one forces a worker to work for
a given boss. However, as we discuss in [section
B.4.3](secB4.html#secb43), this assertion (while true) misses the point.
While workers are not forced to work for a **specific** boss, they
inevitably have to work for a boss. This is because there is literally
no other way to survive -- all other economic options have been taken
from them by state coercion. The net effect is that the working class
has little choice but to hire themselves out to those with property and,
as a consequence, the labourer *"has sold and surrendered his liberty"*
to the boss. [Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 130]

Private property, therefore, produces a very specific form of authority
structure within society, a structure in which a few govern the many
during working hours. These relations of production are inherently
authoritarian and embody and perpetuate the capitalist class system. The
moment you enter the factory gate or the office door, you lose all your
basic rights as a human being. You have no freedom of speech nor
association and no right of assembly. If you were asked to ignore your
values, your priorities, your judgement, and your dignity, and leave
them at the door when you enter your home, you would rightly consider
that tyranny yet that is exactly what you do during working hours if you
are a worker. You have no say in what goes on. You may as well be a
horse (to use John Locke's analogy -- see [section
B.4.2](secB4.html#secb42)) or a piece of machinery.

Little wonder, then, that anarchists oppose private property as Anarchy
is *"the absence of a master, of a sovereign"* [Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 264] and call capitalism for what it is, namely **wage slavery**!

For these reasons, anarchists agree with Rousseau when he stated:

> *"The first man who, having fenced off a plot of land, thought of
> saying, 'This is mine' and found people simple enough to believe him
> was the real founder of civil society. How many crimes, wars, murders,
> how many miseries and horrors might the human race had been spared by
> the one who, upon pulling up the stakes or filling in the ditch, had
> shouted to his fellow men: 'Beware of listening to this impostor; you
> are lost if you forget the fruits of the earth belong to all and that
> the earth belongs to no one.'"* [*"Discourse on Inequality,"* **The
> Social Contract and Discourses**, p. 84]

This explains anarchist opposition to capitalism. It is marked by two
main features, *"private property"* (or in some cases, state-owned
property -- see [section B.3.5](secB3.html#secb35)) and, consequently,
wage labour and exploitation and authority. Moreover, such a system
requires a state to maintain itself for as *"long as within society a
possessing and non-possessing group of human beings face one another in
enmity, the state will be indispensable to the possessing minority for
the protection for its privileges."* [Rudolf Rocker,
Anarcho-Syndicalism, p. 11] Thus private ownership of the means of
production is only possible if there is a state, meaning mechanisms of
organised coercion at the disposal of the propertied class (see [section
B.2](secB2.html)).

Also, it ought to be easy to see that capitalism, by giving rise to an
ideologically inalienable *"right"* to private property, will also
quickly give rise to inequalities in the distribution of external
resources, and that this inequality in resource distribution will give
rise to a further inequality in the relative bargaining positions of the
propertied and the property less. While apologists for capitalism
usually attempt to justify private property by claiming that
"self-ownership" is a "universal right" (see section B.4.2 -- [*"Is
capitalism based on self-ownership?"*](secB4.html#secb42)), it is clear
that capitalism actually makes universal autonomy implied by the flawed
concept of self-ownership (for the appeal of the notion of
self-ownership rests on the ideal that people are not used as a means
but only as an end in themselves). The capitalist system, however, has
undermined autonomy and individual freedom, and ironically, has used the
term *"self-ownership"* as the basis for doing so. Under capitalism, as
will be seen in [section B.4](secB4.html), most people are usually left
in a situation where their best option is to allow themselves to be used
in just those ways that are logically incompatible with genuine
self-ownership, i.e. the autonomy which makes it initially an appealing
concept.

Only libertarian socialism can continue to affirm the meaningful
autonomy and individual freedom which self-ownership promises whilst
building the conditions that guarantee it. Only by abolishing private
property can there be access to the means of life for all, so making the
autonomy which self-ownership promises but cannot deliver a reality by
universalising self-management in all aspects of life.

Before discussing the anti-libertarian aspects of capitalism, it will be
necessary to define *"private property"* as distinct from *"personal
possessions"* and show in more detail why the former requires state
protection and is exploitative.

B.3.1 What is the difference between private property and possession?
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Anarchists define *"private property"* (or just *"property,"* for short)
as state-protected monopolies of certain objects or privileges which are
used to control and exploit others. *"Possession,"* on the other hand,
is ownership of things that are not used to exploit others (e.g. a car,
a refrigerator, a toothbrush, etc.). Thus many things can be considered
as either property or possessions depending on how they are used.

To summarise, anarchists are in favour of the kind of property which
*"cannot be used to exploit another -- those kinds of personal
possessions which we accumulate from childhood and which become part of
our lives."* We are opposed to the kind of property *"which can be used
only to exploit people -- land and buildings, instruments of production
and distribution, raw materials and manufactured articles, money and
capital."* [Nicholas Walter, **About Anarchism**, p. 40] As a rule of
thumb, anarchists oppose those forms of property which are owned by a
few people but which are used by others. This leads to the former
controlling the latter and using them to produce a surplus for them
(either directly, as in the case of a employee, or indirectly, in the
case of a tenant).

The key is that *"possession"* is rooted in the concept of *"use
rights"* or *"usufruct"* while *"private property"* is rooted in a
divorce between the users and ownership. For example, a house that one
lives in is a possession, whereas if one rents it to someone else at a
profit it becomes property. Similarly, if one uses a saw to make a
living as a self-employed carpenter, the saw is a possession; whereas if
one employs others at wages to use the saw for one's own profit, it is
property. Needless to say, a capitalist workplace, where the workers are
ordered about by a boss, is an example of *"property"* while a
co-operative, where the workers manage their own work, is an example of
*"possession."* To quote Proudhon:

> *"The proprietor is a man who, having absolute control of an
> instrument of production, claims the right to enjoy the product of the
> instrument without using it himself. To this end he lends it."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 293]

While it may initially be confusing to make this distinction, it is very
useful to understand the nature of capitalist society. Capitalists tend
to use the word *"property"* to mean anything from a toothbrush to a
transnational corporation -- two very different things, with very
different impacts upon society. Hence Proudhon:

> *"Originally the word **property** was synonymous with **proper** or
> **individual possession.** It designated each individual's special
> right to the use of a thing. But when this right of use . . . became
> active and paramount -- that is, when the usufructuary converted his
> right to personally use the thing into the right to use it by his
> neighbour's labour -- then property changed its nature and this idea
> became complex."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 395-6]

Proudhon graphically illustrated the distinction by comparing a lover as
a possessor, and a husband as a proprietor! As he stressed, the *"double
definition of property -- domain and possession -- is of highest
importance; and must be clearly understood, in order to comprehend"*
what anarchism is really about. So while some may question why we make
this distinction, the reason is clear. As Proudhon argued, *"it is
proper to call different things by different names, if we keep the name
'property' for the former [possession], we must call the latter [the
domain of property] robbery, repine, brigandage. If, on the contrary, we
reserve the name 'property' for the latter, we must designate the former
by the term **possession** or some other equivalent; otherwise we should
be troubled with an unpleasant synonym."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 65 and p.
373]

The difference between property and possession can be seen from the
types of authority relations each generates. Taking the example of a
capitalist workplace, its clear that those who own the workplace
determine how it is used, not those who do the actual work. This leads
to an almost totalitarian system. As Noam Chomsky points out, *"the term
'totalitarian' is quite accurate. There is no human institution that
approaches totalitarianism as closely as a business corporation. I mean,
power is completely top-down. You can be inside it somewhere and you
take orders from above and hand 'em down. Ultimately, it's in the hands
of owners and investors."* Thus the actual producer does not control
their own activity, the product of their labour nor the means of
production they use. In modern class societies, the producer is in a
position of subordination to those who actually do own or manage the
productive process.

In an anarchist society, as noted, actual use is considered the only
title. This means that a workplace is organised and run by those who
work within it, thus reducing hierarchy and increasing freedom and
equality within society. Hence anarchist opposition to private property
and capitalism flows naturally from anarchism's basic principles and
ideas. Hence all anarchists agree with Proudhon:

> *"Possession is a right; property is against right. Suppress property
> while maintaining possession."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 271]

As Alexander Berkman frames this distinction, anarchism *"abolishes
private ownership of the means of production and distribution, and with
it goes capitalistic business. Personal possession remains only in the
things you use. Thus, your watch is your own, but the watch factory
belongs to the people. Land, machinery, and all other public utilities
will be collective property, neither to be bought nor sold. Actual use
will be considered the only title -- not to ownership but to
possession."* [**What is Anarchism?**, p. 217]

This analysis of different forms of property is at the heart of both
social and individualist anarchism. This means that all anarchists seek
to change people's opinions on what is to be considered as valid forms
of property, aiming to see that *"the Anarchistic view that occupancy
and use should condition and limit landholding becomes the prevailing
view"* and so ensure that *"individuals should no longer be protected by
their fellows in anything but personal occupation and cultivation [i.e.
use] of land."* [Benjamin Tucker, **The Individualist Anarchists**, p.
159 and p. 85] The key differences, as we noted in [section
A.3.1](secA3.html#seca31), is how they apply this principle.

This anarchist support for possession does not imply the break up of
large scale organisations such as factories or other workplaces which
require large numbers of people to operate. Far from it. Anarchists
argue for association as the complement of possession. This means
applying *"occupancy and use"* to property which is worked by more than
one person results in associated labour, i.e. those who collectively
work together (i.e. use a given property) manage it and their own labour
as a self-governing, directly democratic, association of equals (usually
called *"self-management"* for short).

This logically flows from the theory of possession, of *"occupancy and
use."* For if production is carried on in groups who is the legal
occupier of the land? The employer or their manager? Obviously not, as
they are by definition occupying more than they can use by themselves.
Clearly, the association of those engaged in the work can be the only
rational answer. Hence Proudhon's comment that *"all accumulated capital
being social property, no one can be its exclusive proprietor."* *"In
order to destroy despotism and inequality of conditions, men must . . .
become associates"* and this implies workers' self-management --
*"leaders, instructors, superintendents . . . must be chosen from the
labourers by the labourers themselves."* [Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p.
130, p. 372 and p. 137]

In this way, anarchists seek, in Proudhon's words, *"abolition of the
proletariat"* and consider a key idea of our ideas that *"Industrial
Democracy must. . . succeed Industrial Feudalism."* [Proudhon,
**Selected Writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 179 and p. 167] Thus
an anarchist society would be based on possession, with workers'
self-management being practised at all levels from the smallest one
person workplace or farm to large scale industry (see [section
I.3](secI3.html) for more discussion).

Clearly, then, all anarchists seek to transform and limit property
rights. Capitalist property rights would be ended and a new system
introduced rooted in the concept of possession and use. While the exact
nature of that new system differs between schools of anarchist thought,
the basic principles are the same as they flow from the same anarchist
theory of property to be found in Proudhon's, What is Property?.

Significantly, William Godwin in his Enquiry Concerning Political
Justice makes the same point concerning the difference between property
and possession (although not in the same language) fifty years before
Proudhon, which indicates its central place in anarchist thought. For
Godwin, there were different kinds of property. One kind was *"the
empire to which every [person] is entitled over the produce of his [or
her] own industry."* However, another kind was *"a system, in whatever
manner established, by which one man enters into the faculty of
disposing of the produce of another man's industry."* This *"species of
property is in direct contradiction"* to the former kind (he
similarities with subsequent anarchist ideas is striking). For Godwin,
inequality produces a *"servile"* spirit in the poor and, moreover, a
person who *"is born to poverty, may be said, under a another name, to
be born a slave."* [**The Anarchist Writings of William Godwin**, p.
133, p. 134, p. 125 and p. 126]

Needless to say, anarchists have not be totally consistent in using this
terminology. Some, for example, have referred to the capitalist and
landlord classes as being the *"possessing classes."* Others prefer to
use the term *"personal property"* rather than *"possession"* or
*"capital"* rather than *"private property."* Some, like many
individualist anarchists, use the term *"property"* in a general sense
and qualify it with *"occupancy and use"* in the case of land, housing
and workplaces. However, no matter the specific words used, the key idea
is the same.

B.3.2 What kinds of property does the state protect?
----------------------------------------------------

Kropotkin argued that the state was *"the instrument for establishing
monopolies in favour of the ruling minorities."* [**Anarchism**, p. 286]
In every system of class exploitation, a ruling class controls access to
the means of production in order to extract tribute from labour.
Capitalism is no exception. In this system the state maintains various
kinds of *"class monopolies"* (to use Tucker's phrase) to ensure that
workers do not receive their *"natural wage,"* the full product of their
labour. While some of these monopolies are obvious (such as tariffs,
state granted market monopolies and so on), most are *"behind the
scenes"* and work to ensure that capitalist domination does not need
extensive force to maintain.

Under capitalism, there are four major kinds of property, or
exploitative monopolies, that the state protects:

By enforcing these forms of property, the state ensures that the
objective conditions within the economy favour the capitalist, with the
worker free only to accept oppressive and exploitative contracts within
which they forfeit their autonomy and promise obedience or face misery
and poverty. Due to these *"initiations of force"* conducted
**previously** to any specific contract being signed, capitalists enrich
themselves at our expense because we *"are compelled to pay a heavy
tribute to property holders for the right of cultivating land or putting
machinery into action."* [Kropotkin, **The Conquest of Bread**, p. 103]
These conditions obviously also make a mockery of free agreement (see
[section B.4](secB4.html)).

These various forms of state intervention are considered so normal many
people do not even think of them as such. Thus we find defenders of
"free market" capitalism thundering against forms of "state
intervention" which are designed to aid the poor while seeing nothing
wrong in defending intellectual property rights, corporations, absentee
landlords and the other multitude of laws and taxes capitalists and
their politicians have placed and kept upon the statute-books to skew
the labour market in favour of themselves (see [section F.8](secF8.html)
on the state's role in developing capitalism in the first place).

Needless to say, despite the supposedly subtle role of such
*"objective"* pressures in controlling the working class, working class
resistance has been such that capital has never been able to dispense
with the powers of the state, both direct and indirect. When
*"objective"* means of control fail, the capitalists will always turn to
the use of state repression to restore the *"natural"* order. Then the
*"invisible"* hand of the market is replaced by the visible fist of the
state and the indirect means of securing ruling class profits and power
are supplemented by more direct forms by the state. As we indicate in
[section D.1](secD1.html), state intervention beyond enforcing these
forms of private property is the norm of capitalism, not the exception,
and is done so to secure the power and profits of the capitalist class.

To indicate the importance of these state backed monopolies, we shall
sketch their impact.

The credit monopoly, by which the state controls who can and cannot
issue or loan money, reduces the ability of working class people to
create their own alternatives to capitalism. By charging high amounts of
interest on loans (which is only possible because competition is
restricted) few people can afford to create co-operatives or one-person
firms. In addition, having to repay loans at high interest to capitalist
banks ensures that co-operatives often have to undermine their own
principles by having to employ wage labour to make ends meet (see
[section J.5.11](secJ5.html#secj511)). It is unsurprising, therefore,
that the very successful Mondragon co-operatives in the Basque Country
created their own credit union which is largely responsible for the
experiment's success.

Just as increasing wages is an important struggle within capitalism, so
is the question of credit. Proudhon and his followers supported the idea
of a **People's Bank.** If the working class could take over and control
increasing amounts of money it could undercut capitalist power while
building its own alternative social order (for money is ultimately the
means of buying labour power, and so authority over the labourer - which
is the key to surplus value production). Proudhon hoped that by credit
being reduced to cost (namely administration charges) workers would be
able to buy the means of production they needed. While most anarchists
would argue that increased working class access to credit would no more
bring down capitalism than increased wages, all anarchists recognise how
more cheap credit, like more wages, can make life easier for working
people and how the struggle for such credit, like the struggle for
wages, might play a useful role in the development of the power of the
working class within capitalism. Obvious cases that spring to mind are
those where money has been used by workers to finance their struggles
against capital, from strike funds and weapons to the periodical
avoidance of work made possible by sufficiently high money income.
Increased access to cheap credit would give working class people
slightly more options than selling their liberty or facing misery (just
as increased wages and unemployment benefit also gives us more options).

Therefore, the credit monopoly reduces competition to capitalism from
co-operatives (which are generally more productive than capitalist
firms) while at the same time forcing down wages for all workers as the
demand for labour is lower than it would otherwise be. This, in turn,
allows capitalists to use the fear of the sack to extract higher levels
of surplus value from employees, so consolidating capitalist power
(within and outwith the workplace) and expansion (increasing set-up
costs and so creating oligarchic markets dominated by a few firms). In
addition, high interest rates transfer income directly from producers to
banks. Credit and money are both used as weapons in the class struggle.
This is why, again and again, we see the ruling class call for
centralised banking and use state action (from the direct regulation of
money itself, to the attempted management of its flows by the
manipulation of the interest) in the face of repeated threats to the
nature (and role) of money within capitalism.

The credit monopoly has other advantages for the elite. The 1980s were
marked by a rising debt burden on households as well as the increased
concentration of wealth in the US. The two are linked. Due to *"the
decline in real hourly wages, and the stagnation in household incomes,
the middle and lower classes have borrowed more to stay in place"* and
they have *"borrowed from the very rich who have [become] richer."* By
1997, US households spent \$1 trillion (or 17% of the after-tax incomes)
on debt service. *"This represents a massive upward redistribution of
income."* And why did they borrow? The bottom 40% of the income
distribution *"borrowed to compensate for stagnant or falling incomes"*
while the upper 20% borrowed *"mainly to invest."* Thus *"consumer
credit can be thought of as a way to sustain mass consumption in the
face of stagnant or falling wages. But there's an additional social and
political bonus, from the point of view of the creditor class: it
reduces pressure for higher wages by allowing people to buy goods they
couldn't otherwise afford. It helps to nourish both the appearance and
reality of a middle-class standard of living in a time of polarisation.
And debt can be a great conservatising force; with a large monthly
mortgage and/or MasterCard bill, strikes and other forms of
troublemaking look less appealing than they would other wise."* [Doug
Henwood, **Wall Street**, pp. 64-6]

Thus credit *"is an important form of social coercion; mortgaged workers
are more pliable."* [Henwood, **Op. Cit.**, p. 232] Money is power and
any means which lessens that power by increasing the options of workers
is considered a threat by the capitalist class -- whether it is tight
labour markets, state provided unemployment benefit, or cheap,
self-organised, credit -- will be resisted. The credit monopoly can,
therefore, only be fought as part of a broader attack on all forms of
capitalist social power.

In summary, the credit monopoly, by artificially restricting the option
to work for ourselves, ensures we work for a boss while also enriching
the few at the expense of the many.

The land monopoly consists of enforcement by government of land titles
which do not rest upon personal occupancy and use. It also includes
making the squatting of abandoned housing and other forms of property
illegal. This leads to ground-rent, by which landlords get payment for
letting others use the land they own but do not actually cultivate or
use. It also allows the ownership and control of natural resources like
oil, gas, coal and timber. This monopoly is particularly exploitative as
the owner cannot claim to have created the land or its resources. It was
available to all until the landlord claimed it by fencing it off and
barring others from using it.

Until the nineteenth century, the control of land was probably the
single most important form of privilege by which working people were
forced to accept less than its product as a wage. While this monopoly is
less important in a modern capitalist society (as few people know how to
farm), it still plays a role (particularly in terms of ownership of
natural resources). At a minimum, every home and workplace needs land on
which to be built. Thus while cultivation of land has become less
important, the use of land remains crucial. The land monopoly,
therefore, ensures that working people find no land to cultivate, no
space to set up shop and no place to sleep without first having to pay a
landlord a sum for the privilege of setting foot on the land they own
but neither created nor use. At best, the worker has mortgaged their
life for decades to get their wee bit of soil or, at worse, paid their
rent and remained as property-less as before. Either way, the landlords
are richer for the exchange.

Moreover, the land monopoly did play an important role in **creating**
capitalism (also see [section F.8.3](secF8.html#secf83)). This took two
main forms. Firstly, the state enforced the ownership of large estates
in the hands of a single family. Taking the best land by force, these
landlords turned vast tracks of land into parks and hunting grounds so
forcing the peasants little option but to huddle together on what
remained. Access to superior land was therefore only possible by paying
a rent for the privilege, if at all. Thus an elite claimed ownership of
vacant lands, and by controlling access to it (without themselves ever
directly occupying or working it) they controlled the labouring classes
of the time. Secondly, the ruling elite also simply stole land which had
traditionally been owned by the community. This was called enclosure,
the process by which common land was turned into private property.
Economist William Lazonick summaries this process:

> *"The reorganisation of agricultural land [the enclosure movement] . .
> . inevitably undermined the viability of traditional peasant
> agriculture . . . [it] created a sizeable labour force of disinherited
> peasants with only tenuous attachments to the land. To earn a living,
> many of these peasants turned to 'domestic industry' - the production
> of goods in their cottages . . . It was the eighteenth century
> expansion of domestic industry . . . that laid the basis for the
> British Industrial Revolution. The emergence of labour-saving machine
> technology transformed . . . textile manufacture . . . and the factory
> replaced the family home as the predominant site of production."*
> [**Business Organisation and the Myth of the Market Economy**, pp.
> 3-4]

By being able to *"legally"* bar people from *"their"* property, the
landlord class used the land monopoly to ensure the creation of a class
of people with nothing to sell but their labour (i.e. liberty). Land was
taken from those who traditionally used it, violating common rights, and
it was used by the landlord to produce for their own profit (more
recently, a similar process has been going on in the Third World as
well). Personal occupancy was replaced by landlordism and agricultural
wage slavery, and so *"the Enclosure Acts . . . reduced the agricultural
population to misery, placed them at the mercy of the landowners, and
forced a great number of them to migrate to the towns where, as
proletarians, they were delivered to the mercy of the middle-class
manufacturers."* [Peter Kropotkin, **The Great French Revolution**, vol.
1, pp. 117-8]

A variation of this process took place in countries like America, where
the state took over ownership of vast tracks of land and then sold it to
farmers. As Howard Zinn notes, the Homestead Act *"gave 160 acres of
western land, unoccupied and publicly owned, to anyone who would
cultivate it for fives years. Anyone willing to pay \$1.25 an acre could
buy a homestead. Few ordinary people had the \$200 necessary to do this;
speculators moved in and bought up much of the land."* [**A People's
History of the United States**, p. 233] Those farmers who did pay the
money often had to go into debt to do so, placing an extra burden on
their labour. Vast tracks of land were also given to railroad and other
companies either directly (by gift or by selling cheap) or by lease (in
the form of privileged access to state owned land for the purpose of
extracting raw materials like lumber and oil). Either way, access to
land was restricted and those who actually did work it ended up paying a
tribute to the landlord in one form or another (either directly in rent
or indirectly by repaying a loan).

This was the land monopoly in action (also see sections
[F.8.3](secF8.html#secf83), [F.8.4](secF8.html#secf84) and
[F.8.5](secF8.html#secf85) for more details) and from it sprang the
tools and equipment monopoly as domestic industry could not survive in
the face of industrial capitalism. Confronted with competition from
industrial production growing rich on the profits produced from cheap
labour, the ability of workers to own their own means of production
decreased over time. From a situation where most workers owned their own
tools and, consequently, worked for themselves, we now face an economic
regime were the tools and equipment needed for work are owned by a
capitalists and, consequently, workers now work for a boss.

The tools and equipment monopoly is similar to the land monopoly as it
is based upon the capitalist denying workers access to their capital
unless the worker pays tribute to the owner for using it. While capital
is *"simply stored-up labour which has already received its pay in
full"* and so *"the lender of capital is entitled to its return intact,
and nothing more"* (to use Tucker's words), due to legal privilege the
capitalist is in a position to charge a *"fee"* for its use. This is
because, with the working class legally barred from both the land and
available capital (the means of life), members of that class have little
option but to agree to wage contracts which let capitalists extract a
*"fee"* for the use of their equipment (see [section
B.3.3](secB3.html#secb33)).

Thus the capital-monopoly is, like the land monopoly, enforced by the
state and its laws. This is most clearly seen if you look at the main
form in which such capital is held today, the corporation. This is
nothing more than a legal construct. *"Over the last 150 years,"* notes
Joel Bakan, *"the corporation has risen from relative obscurity to
becomes the world's dominant economic institution."* The law has been
changed to give corporations *"limited liability"* and other perks in
order *"to attract valuable incorporation business . . . by jettisoning
unpopular [to capitalists] restrictions from . . . corporate laws."*
Finally, the courts *"fully transformed the corporation onto a 'person,'
with its own identity . . . and empowered, like a real person, to
conduct business in its own name, acquire assets, employ workers, pay
taxes, and go to court to assert its rights and defend its actions."* In
America, this was achieved using the 14th Amendment (which was passed to
protect freed slaves!). In summary, the corporation *"is not an
independent 'person' with its own rights, needs, and desires . . . It is
a state-created tool for advancing social and economic policy."* [**The
Corporation**, p. 5, p. 13, p. 16 and p. 158]

Nor can it be said that this monopoly is the product of hard work and
saving. The capital-monopoly is a recent development and how this
situation developed is usually ignored. If not glossed over as
irrelevant, some fairy tale is spun in which a few bright people saved
and worked hard to accumulate capital and the lazy majority flocked to
be employed by these (almost superhuman) geniuses. In reality, the
initial capital for investing in industry came from wealth plundered
from overseas or from the proceeds of feudal and landlord exploitation.
In addition, as we discuss in [section F.8](secF8.html), extensive state
intervention was required to create a class of wage workers and ensure
that capital was in the best position to exploit them. This explicit
state intervention was scaled down once the capital-monopoly found its
own feet.

Once this was achieved, state action became less explicit and becomes
focused around defending the capitalists' property rights. This is
because the *"fee"* charged to workers was partly reinvested into
capital, which reduced the prices of goods, ruining domestic industry
and so narrowing the options available to workers in the economy. In
addition, investment also increased the set-up costs of potential
competitors, which continued the dispossession of the working class from
the means of production as these *"natural"* barriers to entry into
markets ensured few members of that class had the necessary funds to
create co-operative workplaces of appropriate size. So while the land
monopoly was essential to create capitalism, the *"tools and equipment"*
monopoly that sprang from it soon became the mainspring of the system.

In this way usury became self-perpetuating, with apparently *"free
exchanges"* being the means by which capitalist domination survives. In
other words, "past initiations of force" combined with the current state
protection of property ensure that capitalist domination of society
continues with only the use of *"defensive"* force (i.e. violence used
to protect the power of property owners against unions, strikes,
occupations, etc.). The *"fees"* extracted from previous generations of
workers has ensured that the current one is in no position to re-unite
itself with the means of life by *"free competition"* (in other words,
the paying of usury ensures that usury continues). Needless to say, the
surplus produced by this generation will be used to increase the capital
stock and so ensure the dispossession of future generations and so usury
becomes self-perpetuating. And, of course, state protection of
*"property"* against *"theft"* by working people ensures that property
remains theft and the **real** thieves keep their plunder.

As far as the *"ideas"* monopoly is concerned, this has been used to
enrich capitalist corporations at the expense of the general public and
the inventor. Patents make an astronomical price difference. Until the
early 1970s, for example, Italy did not recognise drug patents. As a
result, Roche Products charged the British National Health Service over
40 times more for patented components of Librium and Valium than charged
by competitors in Italy. As Tucker argued, the patent monopoly
*"consists in protecting investors and authors against competition for a
period long enough to enable them to extort from the people a reward
enormously in excess of the labour measure of their services, -- in
other words, in giving certain people a right of property for a term of
years and facts of nature, and the power to extract tribute from others
for the use of this natural wealth which should be open to all."* [**The
Individualist Anarchists**, p. 86]

The net effect of this can be terrible. The Uruguay Round of global
trade negotiations *"strengthen intellectual property rights. American
and other Western drug companies could now stop drug companies in India
and Brazil from 'stealing' their intellectual property. But these drug
companies in the developing world were making these life-saving drugs
available to their citizens at a fraction of the price at which the
drugs were sold by the Western drug companies . . . Profits of the
Western drug companies would go up . . . but the increases profits from
sales in the developing world were small, since few could afford the
drugs . . . [and so] thousands were effectively condemned to death,
becomes governments and individuals in developing countries could no
longer pay the high prices demanded."* [Joseph Stiglitz, **Globalisation
and its discontents**, pp. 7-8] While international outrage over AIDS
drugs eventually forced the drug companies to sell the drugs at cost
price in late 2001, the underlying intellectual property rights regime
was still in place.

The irony that this regime was created in a process allegedly about
trade liberalisation should not go unnoticed. *"Intellectual property
rights,"* as Noam Chomsky correctly points out, *"are a protectionist
measure, they have nothing to do with free trade -- in fact, they're the
exact **opposite** of free trade."* [**Understanding Power**, p. 282]
The fundamental injustice of the *"ideas monopoly"* is exacerbated by
the fact that many of these patented products are the result of
government funding of research and development, with private industry
simply reaping monopoly profits from technology it did not spend a penny
to develop. In fact, extending government aid for research and
development is considered an important and acceptable area of state
intervention by governments and companies verbally committed to the
neo-liberal agenda.

The *"ideas monopoly"* actually works against its own rationale. Patents
suppress innovation as much as they encourage it. The research
scientists who actually do the work of inventing are required to sign
over patent rights as a condition of employment, while patents and
industrial security programs used to bolster competitive advantage on
the market actually prevent the sharing of information, so reducing
innovation (this evil is being particularly felt in universities as the
new *"intellectual property rights"* regime is spreading there). Further
research stalls as the incremental innovation based on others' patents
is hindered while the patent holder can rest on their laurels as they
have no fear of a competitor improving the invention. They also hamper
technical progress because, by their very nature, preclude the
possibility of independent discovery. Also, of course, some companies
own a patent explicitly not to use it but simply to prevent someone else
from so doing.

As Noam Chomsky notes, today trade agreements like GATT and NAFTA
*"impose a mixture of liberalisation and protection, going far beyond
trade, designed to keep wealth and power firmly in the hands of the
masters."* Thus *"investor rights are to be protected and enhanced"* and
a key demand *"is increased protection for 'intellectual property,'
including software and patents, with patent rights extending to process
as well as product"* in order to *"ensure that US-based corporations
control the technology of the future"* and so *"locking the poor
majority into dependence on high-priced products of Western
agribusiness, biotechnology, the pharmaceutical industry and so on."*
[**World Orders, Old and New**, p. 183, p. 181 and pp. 182-3] This means
that if a company discovers a new, more efficient, way of producing a
drug then the *"ideas monopoly"* will stop them and so *"these are not
only highly protectionist measures . . . they're a blow **against**
economic efficiency and technological process -- that just shows you how
much 'free trade' really is involved in all of this."* [Chomsky,
**Understanding Power**, p. 282]

All of which means that the corporations (and their governments) in the
developed world are trying to prevent emergence of competition by
controlling the flow of technology to others. The "free trade"
agreements are being used to create monopolies for their products and
this will either block or slow down the rise of competition. While
corporate propagandists piously denounce "anti-globalisation" activists
as enemies of the developing world, seeking to use trade barriers to
maintain their (Western) lifestyles at the expense of the poor nations,
the reality is different. The *"ideas monopoly"* is being aggressively
used to either suppress or control the developing world's economic
activity in order to keep the South as, effectively, one big sweatshop.
As well as reaping monopoly profits directly, the threat of "low-wage"
competition from the developing world can be used to keep the wage
slaves of the developed world in check and so maintain profit levels at
home.

This is not all. Like other forms of private property, the usury
produced by it helps ensure it becomes self-perpetuating. By creating
"legal" absolute monopolies and reaping the excess profits these create,
capitalists not only enrich themselves at the expense of others, they
also ensure their dominance in the market. Some of the excess profits
reaped due to patents and copyrights are invested back into the company,
securing advantages by creating various "natural" barriers to entry for
potential competitors. Thus patents impact on business structure,
encouraging the formation and dominance of big business.

Looking at the end of the nineteenth century, the ideas monopoly played
a key role in promoting cartels and, as a result, laid the foundation
for what was to become corporate capitalism in the twentieth century.
Patents were used on a massive scale to promote concentration of
capital, erect barriers to entry, and maintain a monopoly of advanced
technology in the hands of western corporations. The exchange or pooling
of patents between competitors, historically, has been a key method for
the creation of cartels in industry. This was true especially of the
electrical appliance, communications, and chemical industries. For
example, by the 1890s, two large companies, General Electric and
Westinghouse, *"monopolised a substantial part of the American
electrical manufacturing industry, and their success had been in large
measure the result of patent control."* The two competitors simply
pooled their patents and *"yet another means of patent and market
control had developed: corporate patent-pooling agreements. Designed to
minimise the expense and uncertainties of conflict between the giants,
they greatly reinforced the position of each vis--vis lesser
competitors and new entrants into the field."* [David Noble, **American
By Design**, p. 10]

While the patent system is, in theory, promoted to defend the small
scale inventor, in reality it is corporate interests that benefit. As
David Noble points out, the *"inventor, the original focus of the patent
system, tended to increasingly to 'abandon' his patent in exchange for
corporate security; he either sold or licensed his patent rights to
industrial corporations or assigned them to the company of which he
became an employee, bartering his genius for a salary. In addition, by
means of patent control gained through purchase, consolidation, patent
pools, and cross-licensing agreements, as well as by regulated patent
production through systematic industrial research, the corporations
steadily expanded their 'monopoly of monopolies.'"* As well as this,
corporations used *"patents to circumvent anti-trust laws."* This
reaping of monopoly profits at the expense of the customer made such
*"tremendous strides"* between 1900 and 1929 and *"were of such
proportions as to render subsequent judicial and legislative effects to
check corporate monopoly through patent control too little too late."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 87, p. 84 and p. 88]

Things have changed little since Edwin Prindle, a corporate patent
lawyer, wrote in 1906 that:

> *"Patents are the best and most effective means of controlling
> competition. They occasionally give absolute command of the market,
> enabling their owner to name the price without regard to the cost of
> production. . . Patents are the only legal form of absolute monopoly .
> . . The power which a patentee has to dictate the conditions under
> which his monopoly may be exercised had been used to form trade
> agreements throughout practically entire industries."* [quoted by
> Noble, **Op. Cit.**, p. 89]

Thus, the ruling class, by means of the state, is continually trying to
develop new forms of private property by creating artificial scarcities
and monopolies, e.g. by requiring expensive licenses to engage in
particular types of activities, such as broadcasting or producing
certain kinds of medicines or products. In the *"Information Age,"*
usury (use fees) from intellectual property are becoming a much more
important source of income for elites, as reflected in the attention
paid to strengthening mechanisms for enforcing copyright and patents in
the recent GATT agreements, or in US pressure on foreign countries (like
China) to respect such laws.

This allows corporations to destroy potential competitors and ensure
that their prices can be set as high as possible (and monopoly profits
maintained indefinitely). It also allows them to enclose ever more of
the common inheritance of humanity, place it under private ownership and
charge the previous users money to gain access to it. As Chomsky notes,
*"U.S. corporations must control seeds, plant varieties, drugs, and the
means of life generally."* [**World Orders, Old and New**, p. 183] This
has been termed *"bio-piracy"* (a better term may be the new enclosures)
and it is a process by which *"international companies [are] patenting
traditional medicines or foods."* They *"seek to make money from
'resources' and knowledge that rightfully belongs to the developing
countries"* and *"in so doing, they squelch domestic firms that have
long provided the products. While it is not clear whether these patents
would hold up in court if they were effectively challenged, it is clear
that the less developed countries many not have the legal and financial
resources required to challenge the patent."* [Joseph Stiglitz, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 246] They may also not withstand the economic pressures they
may experience if the international markets conclude that such acts
indicate a regime that is less that business friendly. That the people
who were dependent on the generic drugs or plants can no longer afford
them is as irrelevant as the impediments to scientific and technological
advance they create.

In other words, capitalists desire to skew the *"free market"* in their
favour by ensuring that the law reflects and protects their interests,
namely their *"property rights."* By this process they ensure that
co-operative tendencies within society are crushed by state-supported
"market forces." As Noam Chomsky puts it, modern capitalism is *"state
protection and public subsidy for the rich, market discipline for the
poor."* [*"Rollback, Part I"*, **Z Magazine**] Self-proclaimed defenders
of "free market" capitalism are usually nothing of the kind, while the
few who actually support it only object to the *"public subsidy"* aspect
of modern capitalism and happily support state protection for property
rights.

All these monopolies seek to enrich the capitalist (and increase their
capital stock) at the expense of working people, to restrict their
ability to undermine the ruling elites power and wealth. All aim to
ensure that any option we have to work for ourselves (either
individually or collectively) is restricted by tilting the playing field
against us, making sure that we have little option but to sell our
labour on the *"free market"* and be exploited. In other words, the
various monopolies make sure that "natural" barriers to entry (see
[section C.4](secC4.html)) are created, leaving the heights of the
economy in the control of big business while alternatives to capitalism
are marginalised at its fringes.

So it is these kinds of property and the authoritarian social
relationships that they create which the state exists to protect. It
should be noted that converting private to state ownership (i.e.
nationalisation) does not fundamentally change the nature of property
relationships; it just removes private capitalists and replaces them
with bureaucrats (as we discuss in [section B.3.5](secB3.html#secb35)).

B.3.3 Why is property exploitative?
-----------------------------------

To answer this question, consider the monopoly of productive *"tools and
equipment."* This monopoly, obtained by the class of industrial
capitalists, allows this class in effect to charge workers a *"fee"* for
the privilege of using the monopolised tools and equipment.

This occurs because property, in Proudhon words, *"excommunicates"* the
working class. This means that private property creates a class of
people who have no choice but to work for a boss in order to pay the
landlord rent or buy the goods they, as a class, produce but do not own.
The state enforces property rights in land, workplaces and so on,
meaning that the owner can bar others from using them and enforce
**their** rules on those they do let use *"their"* property. So the boss
*"gives you a job; that is, permission to work in the factory or mill
which was not built by him but by other workers like yourself. And for
that permission you help to support him for . . . as long as you work
for him."* [Alexander Berkman, **What is Anarchism?**, p. 14] This is
called wage labour and is, for anarchists, the defining characteristic
of capitalism.

This class of people who are dependent on wages to survive was sometimes
called the *"proletariat"* by nineteenth century anarchists. Today most
anarchists usually call it the *"working class"* as most workers in
modern capitalist nations are wage workers rather than peasants or
artisans (i.e. self-employed workers who are also exploited by the
private property system, but in different ways). It should also be noted
that property used in this way (i.e. to employ and exploit other
people's labour) is also called ***"capital"*** by anarchists and other
socialists. Thus, for anarchists, private property generates a class
system, a regime in which the few, due to their ownership of wealth and
the means of producing it, rule over the many who own very little (see
[section B.7](secB7.html) for more discussion of classes).

This ensures that the few can profit from the work of others:

> "In the capitalist system the working man cannot [in general] work for
> himself . . . So . . . you must find an employer. You work for him . .
> . In the capitalist system the whole working class sells its labour
> power to the employing class. The workers build factories, make
> machinery and tools, and produce goods. The employers keep the
> factories, the machinery, the tools and the goods for themselves as
> **their profit.** The workers only get their wages . . . Though the
> workers, as a class, have built the factories, a slice of their daily
> labour is taken from them for the privilege of **using** those
> factories . . . Though the workers have made the tools and the
> machinery, another slice of their daily labour is taken from them for
> the privilege of **using** those tools and machinery . . .
> "Can you guess now why the wisdom of Proudhon said that **the
> possessions of the rich are stolen property**? Stolen from the
> producer, the worker." [Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 7-8]

Thus the daily theft/exploitation associated with capitalism is
dependent on the distribution of wealth and private property (i.e. the
initial theft of the means of life, the land, workplaces and housing by
the owning class). Due to the dispossession of the vast majority of the
population from the means of life, capitalists are in an ideal position
to charge a *"use-fee"* for the capital they own, but neither produced
nor use. Having little option, workers agree to contracts within which
they forfeit their autonomy during work and the product of that work.
This results in capitalists having access to a *"commodity"* (labour)
that can potentially produce more value than it gets paid for in wages.

For this situation to arise, for wage labour to exist, workers must not
own or control the means of production they use. As a consequence, are
controlled by those who do own the means of production they use during
work hours. As their labour is owned by their boss and as labour cannot
be separated from the person who does it, the boss effectively owns the
worker for the duration of the working day and, as a consequence,
exploitation becomes possible. This is because during working hours, the
owner can dictate (within certain limits determined by worker resistance
and solidarity as well as objective conditions, such as the level of
unemployment within an industry or country) the organisation, level,
duration, conditions, pace and intensity of work, and so the amount of
output (which the owner has sole rights over even though they did not
produce it).

Thus the *"fee"* (or *"surplus value"*) is created by owners paying
workers less than the full value added by their labour to the products
or services they create for the firm. The capitalist's profit is thus
the difference between this *"surplus value,"* created by and
appropriated from labour, minus the firm's overhead and cost of raw
materials (See also section C.2 -- [*"Where do profits come
from?"*](secC2.html)).

So property is exploitative because it allows a surplus to be
monopolised by the owners. Property creates hierarchical relationships
within the workplace (the *"tools and equipment monopoly"* might better
be called the *"power monopoly"*) and as in any hierarchical system,
those with the power use it to protect and further their own interests
at the expense of others. Within the workplace there is resistance by
workers to this oppression and exploitation, which the *"hierarchical .
. . relations of the capitalist enterprise are designed to resolve this
conflict in favour of the representatives of capital."* [William
Lazonick, **Op. Cit.**, p. 184]

Needless to say, the state is always on hand to protect the rights of
property and management against the actions of the dispossessed. When it
boils down to it, it is the existence of the state as protector of the
*"power monopoly"* that allows it to exist at all.

So, capitalists are able to appropriate this surplus value from workers
solely because they own the means of production, not because they earn
it by doing productive work themselves. Of course some capitalists
**may** also contribute to production, in which case they are in
fairness entitled to the amount of value added to the firm's output by
their own labour; but owners typically pay themselves much more than
this, and are able to do so because the state guarantees them that right
as property owners (which is unsurprising, as they alone have knowledge
of the firms inputs and outputs and, like all people in unaccountable
positions, abuse that power -- which is partly why anarchists support
direct democracy as the essential counterpart of free agreement, for no
one in power can be trusted not to prefer their own interests over those
subject to their decisions). And of course many capitalists hire
managers to run their businesses for them, thus collecting income for
doing nothing except owning.

Capitalists' profits, then, are a form of state-supported exploitation.
This is equally true of the interest collected by bankers and rents
collected by landlords. Without some form of state, these forms of
exploitation would be impossible, as the monopolies on which they depend
could not be maintained. For instance, in the absence of state troops
and police, workers would simply take over and operate factories for
themselves, thus preventing capitalists from appropriating an unjust
share of the surplus they create.

B.3.4 Can private property be justified?
----------------------------------------

No. Even though a few supporters of capitalism recognise that private
property, particularly in land, was created by the use of force, most
maintain that private property is just. One common defence of private
property is found in the work of Robert Nozick (a supporter of *"free
market"* capitalism). For Nozick, the use of force makes acquisition
illegitimate and so any current title to the property is illegitimate
(in other words, theft and trading in stolen goods does not make
ownership of these goods legal). So, if the initial acquisition of land
was illegitimate then all current titles are also illegitimate. And
since private ownership of land is the basis of capitalism, capitalism
itself would be rendered illegal.

To get round this problem, Nozick utilises the work of Locke (*"The
Lockean Proviso"*) which can be summarised as:

However, there are numerous flaws in this theory. Most obvious is why
does the mixing of something you own (labour) with something owned by
all (or unowned) turn it in your property? Surely it would be as likely
to simply mean that you have lost the labour you have expended (for
example, few would argue that you owned a river simply because you swam
or fished in it). Even if we assume the validity of the argument and
acknowledge that by working on a piece of land creates ownership, why
assume that this ownership must be based on **capitalist** property
rights? Many cultures have recognised no such *"absolute"* forms of
property, admitted the right of property in what is produced but not the
land itself.

As such, the assumption that expending labour turns the soil into
private property does not automatically hold. You could equally argue
the opposite, namely that labour, while producing ownership of the goods
created, does not produce property in land, only possession. In the
words of Proudhon:

> "I maintain that the possessor is paid for his trouble and industry .
> . . but that he acquires no right to the land. 'Let the labourer have
> the fruits of his labour.' Very good; but I do not understand that
> property in products carries with it property in raw material. Does
> the skill of the fisherman, who on the same coast can catch more fish
> than his fellows, make him proprietor of the fishing-grounds? Can the
> expertness of a hunter ever be regarded as a property-title to a
> game-forest? The analogy is perfect, -- the industrious cultivator
> finds the reward of his industry in the abundancy and superiority of
> his crop. If he has made improvements in the soil, he has the
> possessor's right of preference. Never, under any circumstances, can
> he be allowed to claim a property-title to the soil which he
> cultivates, on the ground of his skill as a cultivator.
>
> "To change possession into property, something is needed besides
> labour, without which a man would cease to be proprietor as soon as he
> ceased to be a laborer. Now, the law bases property upon immemorial,
> unquestionable possession; that is, prescription. Labour is only the
> sensible sign, the physical act, by which occupation is manifested.
> If, then, the cultivator remains proprietor after he has ceased to
> labor and produce; if his possession, first conceded, then tolerated,
> finally becomes inalienable, -- it happens by permission of the civil
> law, and by virtue of the principle of occupancy. So true is this,
> that there is not a bill of sale, not a farm lease, not an annuity,
> but implies it . . .
>
> "Man has created every thing -- every thing save the material itself.
> Now, I maintain that this material he can only possess and use, on
> condition of permanent labor, -- granting, for the time being, his
> right of property in things which he has produced.
>
> "This, then, is the first point settled: property in product, if we
> grant so much, does not carry with it property in the means of
> production; that seems to me to need no further demonstration. There
> is no difference between the soldier who possesses his arms, the mason
> who possesses the materials committed to his care, the fisherman who
> possesses the water, the hunter who possesses the fields and forests,
> and the cultivator who possesses the lands: all, if you say so, are
> proprietors of their products -- not one is proprietor of the means of
> production. The right to product is exclusive --**jus in re**; the
> right to means is common -- **jus ad rem**." [**What is Property?**,
> pp. 120-1]

Proudhon's argument has far more historical validity than Nozick's.
Common ownership of land combined with personal use has been the
dominant form of property rights for tens of thousands of years while
Nozick's *"natural law"* theory dates back to Locke's work in the
seventh century (itself an attempt to defend the encroachment of
capitalist norms of ownership over previous common law ones). Nozick's
theory only appears valid because we live in a society where the
dominant form of property rights are capitalist. As such, Nozick is
begging the question -- he is assuming the thing he is trying to prove.

Ignoring these obvious issues, what of Nozick's actual argument?

The first thing to note is that it is a fairy tale, it is a myth. The
current property system and its distribution of resources and ownership
rights is a product of thousands of years of conflict, coercion and
violence. As such, given Nozick's arguments, it is illegitimate and the
current owners have no right to deprive others of access to them or to
object to taxation or expropriation. However, it is precisely this
conclusion which Nozick seeks to eliminate by means of his story. By
presenting an ahistoric thought experiment, he hopes to convince the
reader to ignore the actual history of property in order to defend the
current owners of property from redistribution. Nozick's theory is only
taken seriously because, firstly, it assumes the very thing it is trying
to justify (i.e. capitalist property rights) and, as such, has a
superficial coherence as a result and, secondly, it has obvious
political utility for the rich.

The second thing to note is that the argument itself is deeply flawed.
To see why, take (as an example) two individuals who share land in
common. Nozick allows for one individual to claim the land as their own
as long as the *"process normally giving rise to a permanent
bequeathable property right in a previously unowned thing will not do so
if the position of others no longer at liberty to use the thing is
therefore worsened."* [**Anarchy, State and Utopia**, p. 178] Given
this, one of our two land sharers can appropriate the land as long as
they can provide the other with a wage greater than what they were
originally producing. If this situation is achieved then, according to
Nozick, the initial appropriation was just and so are all subsequent
market exchanges. In this way, the unowned world becomes owned and a
market system based on capitalist property rights in productive
resources (the land) and labour develop.

Interestingly, for a ideology that calls itself "libertarian" Nozick's
theory defines *"worse off"* in terms purely of material welfare,
compared to the conditions that existed within the society based upon
common use. However, the fact is if one person appropriated the land
that the other cannot live off the remaining land then we have a
problem. The other person has no choice but to agree to become employed
by the landowner. The fact that the new land owner offers the other a
wage to work their land that exceeds what the new wage slave originally
produced may meet the *"Lockean Proviso"* misses the point. The
important issue is that the new wage slave has no option but to work for
another and, as a consequence, becomes subject to that person's
authority. In other words, being *"worse off"* in terms of liberty (i.e.
autonomy or self-government) is irrelevant for Nozick, a **very**
telling position to take.

Nozick claims to place emphasis on self-ownership in his ideology
because we are separate individuals, each with our own life to lead. It
is strange, therefore, to see that Nozick does not emphasise people's
ability to act on their own conception of themselves in his account of
appropriation. Indeed, there is no objection to an appropriation that
puts someone in an unnecessary and undesirable position of subordination
and dependence on the will of others.

Notice that the fact that individuals are now subject to the decisions
of other individuals is not considered by Nozick in assessing the
fairness of the appropriation. The fact that the creation of private
property results in the denial of important freedoms for wage slaves
(namely, the wage slave has no say over the status of the land they had
been utilising and no say over how their labour is used). Before the
creation of private property, all managed their own work, had
self-government in all aspects of their lives. After the appropriation,
the new wage slave has no such liberty and indeed must accept the
conditions of employment within which they relinquish control over how
they spend much of their time. That this is issue is irrelevant for the
Lockean Proviso shows how concerned about liberty capitalism actually
is.

Considering Nozick's many claims in favour of self-ownership and why it
is important, you would think that the autonomy of the newly
dispossessed wage slaves would be important to him. However, no such
concern is to be found -- the autonomy of wage slaves is treated as if
it were irrelevant. Nozick claims that a concern for people's freedom to
lead their own lives underlies his theory of unrestricted
property-rights, but, this apparently does not apply to wage slaves. His
justification for the creation of private property treats only the
autonomy of the land owner as relevant. However, as Proudhon rightly
argues:

> *"if the liberty of man is sacred, it is equally sacred in all
> individuals; that, if it needs property for its objective action, that
> is, for its life, the appropriation of material is equally necessary
> for all . . . Does it not follow that if one individual cannot prevent
> another . . . from appropriating an amount of material equal to his
> own, no more can he prevent individuals to come."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
> 84-85]

The implications of Nozick's argument become clear once we move beyond
the initial acts of appropriation to the situation of a developed
capitalist economy. In such a situation, **all** of the available useful
land has been appropriated. There is massive differences in who owns
what and these differences are passed on to the next generation. Thus we
have a (minority) class of people who own the world and a class of
people (the majority) who can only gain access to the means of life on
terms acceptable to the former. How can the majority really be said to
own themselves if they may do nothing without the permission of others
(the owning minority).

Under capitalism people are claimed to own themselves, but this is
purely formal as most people do not have independent access to
resources. And as they have to use other peoples' resources, they become
under the control of those who own the resources. In other words,
private property reduces the autonomy of the majority of the population
and creates a regime of authority which has many similarities to
enslavement. As John Stuart Mill put it:

> *"No longer enslaved or made dependent by force of law, the great
> majority are so by force of property; they are still chained to a
> place, to an occupation, and to conformity with the will of an
> employer, and debarred by the accident of birth to both the
> enjoyments, and from the mental and moral advantages, which others
> inherit without exertion and independently of desert. That this is an
> evil equal to almost any of those against which mankind have hitherto
> struggles, the poor are not wrong in believing."* [*"Chapters on
> Socialism"*, **Principles of Political Economy**, pp. 377-8]

Capitalism, even though claiming formal self-ownership, in fact not only
restricts the self-determination of working class people, it also makes
them a resource for others. Those who enter the market after others have
appropriated all the available property are limited to charity or
working for others. The latter, as we discuss in [section
C](secCcon.html), results in exploitation as the worker's labour is used
to enrich others. Working people are compelled to co-operate with the
current scheme of property and are forced to benefit others. This means
that self-determination requires resources as well as rights over one's
physical and mental being. Concern for self-determination (i.e.
meaningful self-ownership) leads us to common property plus workers'
control of production and so some form of libertarian socialism -
**not** private property and capitalism.

And, of course, the appropriation of the land requires a state to defend
it against the dispossessed as well as continuous interference in
people's lives. Left to their own devices, people would freely use the
resources around them which they considered unjustly appropriated by
others and it is only continuous state intervention that prevents then
from violating Nozick's principles of justice (to use Nozick's own
terminology, the *"Lockean Proviso"* is a patterned theory, his claims
otherwise not withstanding).

In addition, we should note that private ownership by one person
presupposes non-ownership by others (*"we who belong to the proletaire
class, property excommunicates us!"* [Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 105])
and so the *"free market"* restricts as well as creates liberties just
as any other economic system. Hence the claim that capitalism
constitutes *"economic liberty"* is obviously false. In fact, it is
**based** upon denying liberty for the vast majority during work hours
(as well as having serious impacts on liberty outwith work hours due to
the effects of concentrations of wealth upon society).

Perhaps Nozick can claim that the increased material benefits of private
property makes the acquisition justified. However, it seems strange that
a theory supporting "liberty" should consider well off slaves to be
better than poor free men and women. As Nozick claims that the wage
slaves consent is not required for the initial acquisition, so perhaps
he can claim that the gain in material welfare outweighs the loss of
autonomy and so allows the initial act as an act of paternalism. But as
Nozick opposes paternalism when it restricts private property rights he
can hardly invoke it when it is required to generate these rights. And
if we exclude paternalism and emphasise autonomy (as Nozick claims he
does elsewhere in his theory), then justifying the initial creation of
private property becomes much more difficult, if not impossible.

And if each owner's title to their property includes the historical
shadow of the Lockean Proviso on appropriation, then such titles are
invalid. Any title people have over unequal resources will be qualified
by the facts that *"property is theft"* and that *"property is
despotism."* The claim that private property is economic liberty is
obviously untrue, as is the claim that private property can be justified
in terms of anything except *"might is right."*

In summary, *"[i]f the right of life is equal, the right of labour is
equal, and so is the right of occupancy."* This means that *"those who
do not possess today are proprietors by the same title as those who do
possess; but instead of inferring therefrom that property should be
shared by all, I demand, in the name of general security, its entire
abolition."* [Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 77 and p. 66] Simply put, if it
is right for the initial appropriation of resources to be made then, by
that very same reason, it is right for others in the same and subsequent
generations to abolish private property in favour of a system which
respects the liberty of all rather than a few.

For more anarchist analysis on private property and why it cannot be
justified (be it by occupancy, labour, natural right, or whatever)
consult Proudhon's classic work What is Property?. For further
discussion on capitalist property rights see [section F.4](secF4.html).

B.3.5 Is state owned property different from private property?
--------------------------------------------------------------

No, far from it.

State ownership should not be confused with the common or public
ownership implied by the concept of *"use rights."* The state is a
hierarchical instrument of coercion and, as we discussed in [section
B.2](secB2.html), is marked by power being concentrated in a few hands.
As the general populate is, by design, excluded from decision making
within it this means that the state apparatus has control over the
property in question. As the general public and those who use a piece of
property are excluded from controlling it, state property is identical
to private property. Instead of capitalists owning it, the state
bureaucracy does.

This can easily be seen from the example of such so-called *"socialist"*
states as the Soviet Union or China. To show why, we need only quote a
market socialist who claims that China is not capitalist. According to
David Schweickart a society is capitalist if, *"[i]n order to gain
access to means of production (without which no one can work), most
people must contract with people who own (or represent the owners of)
such means. In exchange for a wage of a salary, they agree to supply the
owners with a certain quantity and quality of labour. **It is a crucial
characteristic of the institution of wage labour that the goods or
services produced do not belong to the workers who produce them but to
those who supply the workers with the means of production.**"*
Anarchists agree with Schweickart's definition of capitalism. As such,
he is right to argue that a *"society of small farmers and artisans . .
. is not a capitalist society, since wage labour is largely absent."* He
is, however, wrong to assert that a *"society in which most of [the]
means of production are owned by the central government or by local
communities -- contemporary China, for example -- is not a capitalist
society, since private ownership of the means of production is not
dominant."* [**After Capitalism**, p. 23]

The reason is apparent. As Emma Goldman said (pointing out the obvious),
if property is nationalised *"it belongs to the state; this is, the
government has control of it and can dispose of it according to its
wishes and views . . . Such a condition of affairs may be called state
capitalism, but it would be fantastic to consider it in any sense
Communistic"* (as that needs the *"socialisation of the land and of the
machinery of production and distribution"* which *"belong[s] to the
people, to be settled and used by individuals or groups according to
their needs"* based on *"free access"*). [**Red Emma Speaks**, pp.
406-7]

Thus, by Schweickart's own definition, a system based on state ownership
**is** capitalist as the workers clearly do not own the own means of
production they use, the state does. Neither do they own the goods or
services they produce, the state which supplies the workers with the
means of production does. The difference is that rather than being a
number of different capitalists there is only one, the state. It is, as
Kropotkin warned, the *"mere substitution . . . of the State as the
universal capitalist for the present capitalists."* [**Evolution and
Environment**, p. 106] This is why anarchists have tended to call such
regimes *"state capitalist"* as the state basically replaces the
capitalist as boss.

While this is most clear for regimes like China's which are
dictatorships, the logic also applies to democratic states. No matter if
a state is democratic, state ownership is a form of exclusive property
ownership which implies a social relationship which is totally different
from genuine forms of socialism. Common ownership and use rights produce
social relationships based on liberty and equality. State ownership,
however, presupposes the existence of a government machine, a
centralised bureaucracy, which stands above the members of society, both
as individuals and as a group, and has the power to coerce and dominate
them. In other words, when a state owns the means of life, the members
of society remain proletarians, non-owners, excluded from control. Both
legally and in reality, the means of life belong not to them, but to the
state. As the state is not an abstraction floating above society but
rather a social institution made up of a specific group of human beings,
this means that this group controls and so effectively owns the property
in question, not society as a whole nor those who actually use it. Just
as the owning class excludes the majority, so does the state bureaucracy
which means it owns the means of production, whether or not this is
formally and legally recognised.

This explains why libertarian socialists have consistently stressed
workers' self-management of production as the basis of any real form of
socialism. To concentrate on ownership, as both Leninism and social
democracy have done, misses the point. Needless to say, those regimes
which have replaced capitalist ownership with state property have shown
the validity the anarchist analysis in these matters (*"all-powerful,
centralised Government with State Capitalism as its economic
expression,"* to quote Emma Goldman's summation of Lenin's Russia [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 388]). State property is in no way fundamentally different
from private property -- all that changes is who exploits and oppresses
the workers.

For more discussion see section H.3.13 -- [*"Why is state socialism just
state capitalism?"*](secH3.html#sech313)
