B.1 Why are anarchists against authority and hierarchy?
=======================================================

First, it is necessary to indicate what kind of authority anarchism
challenges. While it is customary for some opponents of anarchism to
assert that anarchists oppose all kinds of authority, the reality of the
situation is more complex. While anarchists have, on occasion, stated
their opposition to "all authority" a closer reading quickly shows that
anarchists reject only one specific form of authority, what we tend to
call hierarchy (see [section H.4](secH4.html) for more details). This
can be seen when Bakunin stated that *"the principle of **authority**"*
was the *"eminently theological, metaphysical and political idea that
the masses, **always** incapable of governing themselves, must submit at
all times to the benevolent yoke of a wisdom and a justice, which in one
way or another, is imposed from above."* [**Marxism, Freedom and the
State**, p. 33]

Other forms of authority are more acceptable to anarchists, it depends
whether the authority in question becomes a source of **power** over
others or not. That is the key to understanding the anarchist position
on authority -- if it is ***hierarchical*** authority, then anarchists
are against it. . The reason is simple:

> *"[n]o one should be entrusted with power, inasmuch as anyone invested
> with authority must . . . became an oppressor and exploiter of
> society."* [Bakunin, **The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 249]

This distinction between forms of authority is important. As Erich Fromm
pointed out, *"authority"* is *"a broad term with two entirely different
meanings: it can be either 'rational' or 'irrational' authority.
Rational authority is based on competence, and it helps the person who
leans on it to grow. Irrational authority is based on power and serves
to exploit the person subjected to it."* [**To Have or To Be**, pp.
44-45] The same point was made by Bakunin over 100 years earlier when he
indicated the difference between authority and *"natural influence."*
For Bakunin, individual freedom *"results from th[e] great number of
material, intellectual, and moral influences which every individual
around him [or her] and which society . . . continually exercise . . .
To abolish this mutual influence would be to die."* Consequently, *"when
we reclaim the freedom of the masses, we hardly wish to abolish the
effect of any individual's or any group of individual's natural
influence upon the masses. What we wish is to abolish artificial,
privileged, legal, and official influences."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p.
140 and p. 141]

It is, in other words, the difference between taking part in a decision
and listening to alternative viewpoints and experts (*"natural
influence"*) before making your mind up and having a decision **made for
you** by a separate group of individuals (who may or may not be elected)
because that is their role in an organisation or society. In the former,
the individual exercises their judgement and freedom (i.e. is based on
rational authority). In the latter, they are subjected to the wills of
others, to hierarchical authority (i.e. is based on irrational
authority). This is because rational authority *"not only permits but
requires constant scrutiny and criticism . . . it is always temporary,
its acceptance depending on its performance."* The source of irrational
authority, on the other hand, *"is always power over people . . . Power
on the one side, fear on the other, are always the buttresses on which
irrational authority is built."* Thus former is based upon *"equality"*
while the latter *"is by its very nature based upon inequality."* [Erich
Fromm, **Man for Himself**, pp. 9-10]

This crucial point is expressed in the difference between **having**
authority and **being** an authority. Being an authority just means that
a given person is generally recognised as competent for a given task,
based on his or her individual skills and knowledge. Put differently, it
is socially acknowledged expertise. In contrast, having authority is a
social relationship based on status and power derived from a
hierarchical position, not on individual ability. Obviously this does
not mean that competence is not an element for obtaining a hierarchical
position; it just means that the real or alleged initial competence is
transferred to the title or position of the authority and so becomes
independent of individuals, i.e. institutionalised (or what Bakunin
termed *"official"*).

This difference is important because the way people behave is more a
product of the institutions in which we are raised than of any inherent
nature. In other words, social relationships **shape** the individuals
involved. This means that the various groups individuals create have
traits, behaviours and outcomes that cannot be understood by reducing
them to the individuals within them. That is, groups consist not only of
individuals, but also relationships between individuals and these
relationships will affect those subject to them. For example, obviously
*"the exercise of power by some disempowers others"* and so through a
*"combination of physical intimidation, economic domination and
dependency, and psychological limitations, social institutions and
practices affect the way everyone sees the world and her or his place in
it."* This, as we discuss in the [next section](secB1.html#secb11),
impacts on those involved in such authoritarian social relationships as
*"the exercise of power in any institutionalised form -- whether
economic, political or sexual -- brutalises both the wielder of power
and the one over whom it is exercised."* [Martha A. Ackelsberg, **Free
Women of Spain**, p. 41]

Authoritarian social relationships means dividing society into (the few)
order givers and (the many) order takers, impoverishing the individuals
involved (mentally, emotionally and physically) and society as a whole.
Human relationships, in all parts of life, are stamped by authority, not
liberty. And as freedom can only be created by freedom, authoritarian
social relationships (and the obedience they require) do not and cannot
educate a person in freedom -- only participation (self-management) in
all areas of life can do that. *"In a society based on exploitation and
servitude,"* in Kropotkin's words, *"human nature itself is degraded"*
and it is only *"as servitude disappears"* shall we *"regain our
rights."* [**Anarchism**, p. 104]

Of course, it will be pointed out that in any collective undertaking
there is a need for co-operation and co-ordination and this need to
"subordinate" the individual to group activities is a form of authority.
Therefore, it is claimed, a democratically managed group is just as
"authoritarian" as one based on hierarchical authority. Anarchists are
not impressed by such arguments. Yes, we reply, of course in any group
undertaking there is a need make and stick by agreements but anarchists
argue that to use the word "authority" to describe two fundamentally
different ways of making decisions is playing with words. It obscures
the fundamental difference between free association and hierarchical
imposition and confuses co-operation with command (as we note in
[section H.4](secH4.html), Marxists are particularly fond of this
fallacy). Simply put, there are two different ways of co-ordinating
individual activity within groups -- either by authoritarian means or by
libertarian means. Proudhon, in relation to workplaces, makes the
difference clear:

> "either the workman. . . will be simply the employee of the
> proprietor-capitalist-promoter; or he will participate. . . [and] have
> a voice in the council, in a word he will become an associate.
> "In the first case the workman is subordinated, exploited: his
> permanent condition is one of obedience. . . In the second case he
> resumes his dignity as a man and citizen. . . he forms part of the
> producing organisation, of which he was before but the slave; as, in
> the town, he forms part of the sovereign power, of which he was before
> but the subject . . . we need not hesitate, for we have no choice. . .
> it is necessary to form an ASSOCIATION among workers . . . because
> without that, they would remain related as subordinates and superiors,
> and there would ensue two . . . castes of masters and wage-workers,
> which is repugnant to a free and democratic society." [**General Idea
> of the Revolution**, pp. 215-216]

In other words, associations can be based upon a form of **rational**
authority, based upon **natural influence** and so reflect freedom, the
ability of individuals to think, act and feel and manage their own time
and activity. Otherwise, we include elements of slavery into our
relationships with others, elements that poison the whole and shape us
in negative ways (see [section B.1.1](secB1.html#secb11)). Only the
reorganisation of society in a libertarian way (and, we may add, the
mental transformation such a change requires and would create) will
allow the individual to *"achieve more or less complete blossoming,
whilst continuing to develop"* and banish *"that spirit of submission
that has been artificially thrust upon him [or her]"* [Nestor Makhno,
**The Struggle Against the State and Other Essays**, p. 62]

So, anarchists *"ask nothing better than to see [others]. . . exercise
over us a natural and legitimate influence, freely accepted, and never
imposed . . . We accept all natural authorities and all influences of
fact, but none of right."* [Bakunin, **The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, p. 255] Anarchist support for free association within
directly democratic groups is based upon such organisational forms
increasing influence and reducing irrational authority in our lives.
Members of such organisations can create and present their own ideas and
suggestions, critically evaluate the proposals and suggestions from
their fellows, accept those that they agree with or become convinced by
and have the option of leaving the association if they are unhappy with
its direction. Hence the influence of individuals and their free
interaction determine the nature of the decisions reached, and no one
has the right to impose their ideas on another. As Bakunin argued, in
such organisations *"no function remains fixed and it will not remain
permanently and irrevocably attached to one person. Hierarchical order
and promotion do not exist. . . In such a system, power, properly
speaking, no longer exists. Power is diffused to the collectivity and
becomes the true expression of the liberty of everyone."* [**Bakunin on
Anarchism**, p. 415]

Therefore, anarchists are opposed to **irrational** (e.g., illegitimate)
authority, in other words, hierarchy -- hierarchy being the
institutionalisation of authority within a society. Hierarchical social
institutions include the state (see [section B.2](secB2.html)), private
property and the class systems it produces (see [section
B.3](secB3.html)) and, therefore, capitalism (see [section
B.4](secB4.html)). Due to their hierarchical nature, anarchists oppose
these with passion. *"Every institution, social or civil,"* argued
Voltairine de Cleyre, *"that stands between man [or woman] and his [or
her] right; every tie that renders one a master, another a serf; every
law, every statue, every be-it-enacted that represents tyranny"*
anarchists seek to destroy. However, hierarchy exists beyond these
institutions. For example, hierarchical social relationships include
sexism, racism and homophobia (see [section B.1.4](secB1.html#secb14)),
and anarchists oppose, and fight, them all. Thus, as well as fighting
capitalism as being hierarchical (for workers *"slave in a factory,"*
albeit *"the slavery ends with the working hours"*) de Cleyre also
opposed patriarchal social relationships which produce a *"home that
rests on slavery"* because of a *"marriage that represents the sale and
transfer of the individuality of one of its parties to the other!"*
[**The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**, p. 72, p. 17 and p. 72]

Needless to say, while we discuss different forms of hierarchy in
different sections this does not imply that anarchists think they, and
their negative effects, are somehow independent or can be easily
compartmentalised. For example, the modern state and capitalism are
intimately interrelated and cannot be considered as independent of each
other. Similarly, social hierarchies like sexism and racism are used by
other hierarchies to maintain themselves (for example, bosses will use
racism to divide and so rule their workers). From this it follows that
abolishing one or some of these hierarchies, while desirable, would not
be sufficient. Abolishing capitalism while maintaining the state would
not lead to a free society (and vice versa) -- if it were possible. As
Murray Bookchin notes:

> *"there can be a decidedly classless, even a non-exploitative society
> in the **economic** sense that still preserves hierarchical rule and
> domination in the **social** sense -- whether they take the form of
> the patriarchal family, domination by age and ethnic groups,
> bureaucratic institutions, ideological manipulation or a pyramidal
> division of labour . . . classless or not, society would be riddles by
> domination and, with domination, a general condition of command and
> obedience, of unfreedom and humiliation, and perhaps most decisively,
> an abortion of each individual's potentiality for consciousness,
> reason, selfhood, creativity, and the right to assert full control
> over her or his daily live."* [**Toward an Ecological Society**, pp.
> 14-5]

This clearly implies that anarchists *"challenge not only class
formations but hierarchies, not only material exploitation but
domination in every form."* [Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 15] Hence the
anarchist stress on opposing hierarchy rather than just, say, the state
(as some falsely assert) or simply economic class and exploitation (as,
say, many Marxists do). As noted earlier (in [section
A.2.8](secA2.html#seca28)), anarchists consider all hierarchies to be
not only harmful but unnecessary, and think that there are alternative,
more egalitarian ways to organise social life. In fact, we argue that
hierarchical authority creates the conditions it is presumably designed
to combat, and thus tends to be self-perpetuating. Thus hierarchical
organisations erode the ability of those at the bottom to manage their
own affairs directly so requiring hierarchy and some people in positions
to give orders and the rest to follow them. Rather than prevent
disorder, governments are among its primary causes while its
bureaucracies ostensibly set up to fight poverty wind up perpetuating
it, because without poverty, the high-salaried top administrators would
be out of work. The same applies to agencies intended to eliminate drug
abuse, fight crime, etc. In other words, the power and privileges
deriving from top hierarchical positions constitute a strong incentive
for those who hold them **not** to solve the problems they are supposed
to solve. (For further discussion see Marilyn French, **Beyond Power: On
Women, Men, and Morals**, Summit Books, 1985).

B.1.1 What are the effects of authoritarian social relationships?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Hierarchical authority is inextricably connected with the
marginalisation and disempowerment of those without authority. This has
negative effects on those over whom authority is exercised, since
*"[t]hose who have these symbols of authority and those who benefit from
them must dull their subject people's realistic, i.e. critical, thinking
and make them believe the fiction [that irrational authority is rational
and necessary], . . . [so] the mind is lulled into submission by cliches
. . . [and] people are made dumb because they become dependent and lose
their capacity to trust their eyes and judgement."* [Erich Fromm, **To
Have or To Be?**, p. 47]

Or, in the words of Bakunin, *"the principle of authority, applied to
men who have surpassed or attained their majority, becomes a
monstrosity, a source of slavery and intellectual and moral depravity."*
[**God and the State**, p. 41]

This is echoed by the syndicalist miners who wrote the classic **The
Miners' Next Step** when they indicate the nature of authoritarian
organisations and their effect on those involved. Leadership (i.e.
hierarchical authority) *"implies power held by the leader. Without
power the leader is inept. The possession of power inevitably leads to
corruption. . . in spite of. . . good intentions . . . [Leadership
means] power of initiative, this sense of responsibility, the
self-respect which comes from expressed manhood [sic!], is taken from
the men, and consolidated in the leader. The sum of their initiative,
their responsibility, their self-respect becomes his . . . [and the]
order and system he maintains is based upon the suppression of the men,
from being independent thinkers into being 'the men' . . . In a word, he
is compelled to become an autocrat and a foe to democracy."* Indeed, for
the *"leader,"* such marginalisation can be beneficial, for a leader
*"sees no need for any high level of intelligence in the rank and file,
except to applaud his actions. Indeed such intelligence from his point
of view, by breeding criticism and opposition, is an obstacle and causes
confusion."* [**The Miners' Next Step**, pp. 16-17 and p. 15]

Anarchists argue that hierarchical social relationships will have a
negative effect on those subject to them, who can no longer exercise
their critical, creative and mental abilities **freely**. As Colin Ward
argues, people *"do go from womb to tomb without realising their human
potential, precisely because the power to initiate, to participate in
innovating, choosing, judging, and deciding is reserved for the top
men"* (and it usually **is** men!) [**Anarchy in Action**, p, 42].
Anarchism is based on the insight that there is an interrelationship
between the authority structures of institutions and the psychological
qualities and attitudes of individuals. Following orders all day hardly
builds an independent, empowered, creative personality (*"authority and
servility walk ever hand in hand."* [Peter Kropotkin, **Anarchism**, p.
81]). As Emma Goldman made clear, if a person's *"inclination and
judgement are subordinated to the will of a master"* (such as a boss, as
most people have to sell their labour under capitalism) then little
wonder such an authoritarian relationship *"condemns millions of people
to be mere nonentities."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 50]

As the human brain is a bodily organ, it needs to be used regularly in
order to be at its fittest. Authority concentrates decision-making in
the hands of those at the top, meaning that most people are turned into
executants, following the orders of others. If muscle is not used, it
turns to fat; if the brain is not used, creativity, critical thought and
mental abilities become blunted and side-tracked onto marginal issues,
like sports and fashion. This can only have a negative impact:

> *"Hierarchical institutions foster alienated and exploitative
> relationships among those who participate in them, disempowering
> people and distancing them from their own reality. Hierarchies make
> some people dependent on others, blame the dependent for their
> dependency, and then use that dependency as a justification for
> further exercise of authority. . . . Those in positions of relative
> dominance tend to define the very characteristics of those subordinate
> to them . . . Anarchists argue that to be always in a position of
> being acted upon and never to be allowed to act is to be doomed to a
> state of dependence and resignation. Those who are constantly ordered
> about and prevented from thinking for themselves soon come to doubt
> their own capacities . . . [and have] difficulty acting on [their]
> sense of self in opposition to societal norms, standards and
> expectations."* [Martha Ackelsberg, **Free Women of Spain**, pp. 40-1]

And so, in the words of Colin Ward, the *"system makes its morons, then
despises them for their ineptitude, and rewards its 'gifted few' for
their rarity."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 43]

This negative impact of hierarchy is, of course, not limited to those
subject to it. Those in power are affected by it, but in different ways.
As we noted in [section A.2.15](secA2.html#seca215), power corrupts
those who have it as well as those subjected to it. The Spanish
Libertarian Youth put it this way in the 1930s:

> *"Against the principle of authority because this implies erosion of
> the human personality when some men submit to the will of others,
> arousing in these instincts which predispose them to cruelty and
> indifference in the face of the suffering of their fellows."* [quoted
> by Jose Peirats, **The CNT in the Spanish Revolution**, vol. 2, p. 76]

Hierarchy impoverishes the human spirit. *"A hierarchical mentality,"*
notes Bookchin, *"fosters the renunciation of the pleasures of life. It
justifies toil, guilt, and sacrifice by the 'inferiors,' and pleasure
and the indulgent gratification of virtually every caprice by their
'superiors.' The objective history of the social structure becomes
internalised as a subjective history of the psychic structure."* In
other words, being subject to hierarchy fosters the internalisation of
oppression -- and the denial of individuality necessary to accept it.
*"Hierarchy, class, and ultimately the State,"* he stresses, *"penetrate
the very integument of the human psyche and establish within it
unreflective internal powers of coercion and constraint . . . By using
guilt and self-blame, the inner State can control behaviour long before
fear of the coercive powers of the State have to be invoked."* [**The
Ecology of Freedom**, p. 72 and p. 189]

In a nutshell, *"[h]ierarchies, classes, and states warp the creative
powers of humanity."* However, that is not all. Hierarchy, anarchists
argue, also twists our relationships with the environment. Indeed, *"all
our notions of dominating nature stem from the very real domination of
human by human . . . And it is not until we eliminate domination in all
its forms . . . that we will really create a rational, ecological
society."* For *"the conflicts within a divided humanity, structured
around domination, inevitably leads to conflicts with nature. The
ecological crisis with its embattled division between humanity and
nature stems, above all, from divisions between human and human."* While
the *"rise of capitalism, with a law of life based on competition,
capital accumulation, and limitless growth, brought these problems --
ecological and social -- to an acute point,"* anarchists *"emphasise
that major ecological problems have their roots in social problems --
problems that go back to the very beginnings of patricentric culture
itself."* [Murray Bookchin, **Remaking Society**, p. 72, p. 44, p. 72
and pp. 154-5]

Thus, anarchists argue, hierarchy impacts not only on us but also our
surroundings. The environmental crisis we face is a result of the
hierarchical power structures at the heart of our society, structures
which damage the planet's ecology at least as much as they damage
humans. The problems within society, the economic, ethnic, cultural, and
gender conflicts, among many others, lie at the core of the most serious
ecological dislocations we face. The way human beings deal with each
other as social beings is crucial to addressing the ecological crisis.
Ultimately, ecological destruction is rooted in the organisation of our
society for a degraded humanity can only yield a degraded nature (as
capitalism and our hierarchical history have sadly shown).

This is unsurprising as we, as a species, shape our environment and,
consequently, whatever shapes us will impact how we do so. This means
that the individuals produced by the hierarchy (and the authoritarian
mentality it produces) will shape the planet in specific, harmful, ways.
This is to be expected as humans act upon their environment
deliberately, creating what is most suitable for their mode of
existence. If that mode of living is riddled with hierarchies, classes,
states and the oppression, exploitation and domination they create then
our relations with the natural world will hardly be any better. In other
words, social hierarchy and class legitimises our domination of the
environment, planting the seeds for the believe that nature exists, like
other people, to be dominated and used as required.

Which brings us to another key reason why anarchists reject hierarchy.
In addition to these negative psychological effects from the denial of
liberty, authoritarian social relationships also produce social
inequality. This is because an individual subject to the authority of
another has to obey the orders of those above them in the social
hierarchy. In capitalism this means that workers have to follow the
orders of their boss (see [next section](secB1.html#secb12)), orders
that are designed to make the boss richer. And richer they have become,
with the Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) of big firms earning 212 times
what the average US worker did in 1995 (up from a mere 44 times 30 years
earlier). Indeed, from 1994 to 1995 alone, CEO compensation in the USA
rose 16 percent, compared to 2.8 percent for workers, which did not even
keep pace with inflation, and whose stagnating wages cannot be blamed on
corporate profits, which rose a healthy 14.8 percent for that year.

Needless to say, inequality in terms of power will translate itself into
inequality in terms of wealth (and vice versa). The effects of such
social inequality are wide-reaching. For example, health is affected
significantly by inequality. Poor people are more likely to be sick and
die at an earlier age, compared to rich people. Simply put, *"the lower
the class, the worse the health. Going beyond such static measures, even
interruptions in income of the sort caused by unemployment have adverse
health effects."* Indeed, the sustained economic hardship associated
with a low place in the social hierarchy leads to poorer physical,
psychological and cognitive functioning (*"with consequences that last a
decade or more"*). *"Low incomes, unpleasant occupations and sustained
discrimination,"* notes Doug Henwood, *"may result in apparently
physical symptoms that confuse even sophisticated biomedical scientists
. . . Higher incomes are also associated with lower frequency of
psychiatric disorders, as are higher levels of asset ownership."*
[**After the New Economy**, pp. 81-2]

Moreover, the ***degree*** of inequality is important (i.e. the size of
the gap between rich and poor). According to an editorial in the
**British Medical Journal** *"what matters in determining mortality and
health in a society is less the overall wealth of that society and more
how evenly wealth is distributed. The more equally wealth is distributed
the better the health of that society."* [vol. 312, April 20, 1996, p.
985]

Research in the USA found overwhelming evidence of this. George Kaplan
and his colleagues measured inequality in the 50 US states and compared
it to the age-adjusted death rate for all causes of death, and a pattern
emerged: the more unequal the distribution of income, the greater the
death rate. In other words, it is the gap between rich and poor, and not
the average income in each state, that best predicts the death rate in
each state. [*"Inequality in income and mortality in the United States:
analysis of mortality and potential pathways,"* **British Medical
Journal**, vol. 312, April 20, 1996, pp. 999-1003]

This measure of income inequality was also tested against other social
conditions besides health. States with greater inequality in the
distribution of income also had higher rates of unemployment, higher
rates of incarceration, a higher percentage of people receiving income
assistance and food stamps, a greater percentage of people without
medical insurance, greater proportion of babies born with low birth
weight, higher murder rates, higher rates of violent crime, higher costs
per-person for medical care, and higher costs per person for police
protection. Moreover states with greater inequality of income
distribution also spent less per person on education, had fewer books
per person in the schools, and had poorer educational performance,
including worse reading skills, worse mathematics skills, and lower
rates of completion of high school.

As the gap grows between rich and poor (indicating an increase in social
hierarchy within and outwith of workplaces) the health of a people
deteriorates and the social fabric unravels. The psychological hardship
of being low down on the social ladder has detrimental effects on
people, beyond whatever effects are produced by the substandard housing,
nutrition, air quality, recreational opportunities, and medical care
enjoyed by the poor (see George Davey Smith, *"Income inequality and
mortality: why are they related?"* **British Medical Journal**, Vol.
312, April 20, 1996, pp. 987-988).

So wealth does not determine health. What does is the gap between the
rich and the poor. The larger the gap, the sicker the society. Countries
with a greater degree of socioeconomic inequality show greater
inequality in health status; also, that middle-income groups in
relatively unequal societies have worse health than comparable, or even
poorer, groups in more equal societies. Unsurprisingly, this is also
reflected over time. The widening income differentials in both the USA
and the UK since 1980 have coincided with a slowing down of improvements
in life-expectancy, for example.

Inequality, in short, is bad for our health: the health of a population
depends not just on the size of the economic pie, but on how the pie is
shared.

This is not all. As well as inequalities in wealth, inequalities in
freedom also play a large role in overall human well-being. According to
Michael Marmot's **The Status Syndrome: How Social Standing Affects Our
Health and Longevity**, as you move up any kind of hierarchy your health
status improves. Autonomy and position in a hierarchy are related (i.e.
the higher you are in a hierarchy, the more autonomy you have). Thus the
implication of this empirical work is that autonomy is a source of good
health, that the more control you have over your work environment and
your life in general, the less likely you are to suffer the classic
stress-related illnesses, such as heart disease. As public-Health
scholars Jeffrey Johnson and Ellen Hall have noted, the *"potential to
control one's own environment is differentially distributed along class
lines."* [quoted by Robert Kuttner, **Everything for Sale**, p. 153]

As would be expected from the very nature of hierarchy, to *"be in a
life situation where one experiences relentless demands by others, over
which one has relatively little control, is to be at risk of poor
health, physically as well as mentally."* Looking at heart disease, the
people with greatest risk *"tended to be in occupations with high
demands, low control, and low social support. People in demanding
positions but with great autonomy were at lower risk."* Under
capitalism, *"a relatively small elite demands and gets empowerment,
self-actualisation, autonomy, and other work satisfaction that partially
compensate for long hours"* while *"epidemiological data confirm that
lower-paid, lower-status workers are more likely to experience the most
clinically damaging forms of stress, in part because they have less
control over their work."* [Kuttner, **Op. Cit.**, p. 153 and p. 154]

In other words, the inequality of autonomy and social participation
produced by hierarchy is itself a cause of poor health. There would be
positive feedback on the total amount of health -- and thus of social
welfare -- if social inequality was reduced, not only in terms of wealth
but also, crucially, in power. This is strong evidence in support of
anarchist visions of egalitarianism. Some social structures give more
people more autonomy than others and acting to promote social justice
along these lines is a key step toward improving our health. This means
that promoting libertarian, i.e. self-managed, social organisations
would increase not only liberty but also people's health and well-being,
both physical and mental. Which is, as we argued above, to be expected
as hierarchy, by its very nature, impacts negatively on those subject to
it.

This dovetails into anarchist support for workers' control. Industrial
psychologists have found that satisfaction in work depends on the "span
of autonomy" works have. Unsurprisingly, those workers who are
continually making decisions for themselves are happier and live longer.
It is the power to control all aspects of your life -- work particularly
-- that wealth and status tend to confer that is the key determinant of
health. Men who have low job control face a 50% higher risk of new
illness: heart attacks, stroke, diabetes or merely ordinary infections.
Women are at slightly lower risk but low job control was still a factor
in whether they fell ill or not.

So it is the fact that the boss is a boss that makes the employment
relationship so troublesome for health issues (and genuine
libertarians). The more bossy the boss, the worse, as a rule is the job.
So part of autonomy is not being bossed around, but that is only part of
the story. And, of course, hierarchy (inequality of power) and
exploitation (the source of material inequality) are related. As we
indicate in the [next section](secB1.html#secb12), capitalism is based
on wage labour. The worker sell their liberty to the boss for a given
period of time, i.e. they loose their autonomy. This allows the
possibility of exploitation, as the worker can produce more wealth than
they receive back in wages. As the boss pockets the difference, lack of
autonomy produces increases in social inequality which, in turn, impacts
negatively on your well-being.

Then there is the waste associated with hierarchy. While the proponents
of authority like to stress its "efficiency," the reality is different.
As Colin Ward points out, being in authority *"derives from your rank in
some chain of command . . . But knowledge and wisdom are not distributed
in order of rank, and they are no one person's monopoly in any
undertaking. The fantastic inefficiency of any hierarchical organisation
-- any factory, office, university, warehouse or hospital -- is the
outcome of two almost invariable characteristics. One is that the
knowledge and wisdom of the people at the bottom of the pyramid finds no
place in the decision-making leadership hierarchy of the institution.
Frequently it is devoted to making the institution work in spite of the
formal leadership structure, or alternatively to sabotaging the
ostensible function of the institution, because it is none of their
choosing. The other is that they would rather not be there anyway: they
are there through economic necessity rather than through identification
with a common task which throws up its own shifting and functional
leadership."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 41]

Hierarchy, in other words, blocks the flow of information and knowledge.
Rulers, as Malatesta argued, *"can only make use of the forces that
exist in society -- except for those great forces"* their action
*"paralyses and destroys, and those rebel forces, and all that is wasted
through conflicts; inevitable tremendous losses in such an artificial
system."* And so as well as individuals being prevented from developing
to their fullest, wasting their unfulfilled potentialities, hierarchy
also harms society as a whole by reducing efficiency and creativity.
This is because input into decisions are limited *"only to those
individuals who form the government [of a hierarchical organisation] or
who by reason of their position can influence the[ir] policy."*
Obviously this means *"that far from resulting in an increase in the
productive, organising and protective forces in society,"* hierarchy
*"greatly reduce[s] them, limiting initiative to a few, and giving them
the right to do everything without, of course, being able to provide
them with the gift of being all-knowing."* [**Anarchy**, p. 38 and p.
39]

Large scale hierarchical organisations, like the state, are also marked
by bureaucracy. This becomes a necessity in order to gather the
necessary information it needs to make decisions (and, obviously, to
control those under it). However, soon this bureaucracy becomes the real
source of power due to its permanence and control of information and
resources. Thus hierarchy cannot *"survive without creating around
itself a new privileged class"* as well as being a *"privileged class
and cut off from the people"* itself. [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 37
and p. 36] This means that those at the top of an institution rarely
know the facts on the ground, making decisions in relative ignorance of
their impact or the actual needs of the situation or people involved. As
economist Joseph Stiglitz concluded from his own experiences in the
World Bank, *"immense time and effort are required to effect change even
from the inside, in an international bureaucracy. Such organisations are
opaque rather than transparent, and not only does far too little
information radiate from inside to the outside world, perhaps even less
information from outside is able to penetrate the organisation. The
opaqueness also means that it is hard for information from the bottom of
the organisation to percolate to the top."* [**Globalisation and its
Discontents**, p. 33] The same can be said of any hierarchical
organisation, whether a nation state or capitalist business.

Moreover, as Ward and Malatesta indicate, hierarchy provokes a struggle
between those at the bottom and at the top. This struggle is also a
source of waste as it diverts resources and energy from more fruitful
activity into fighting it. Ironically, as we discuss in [section
H.4.4](secH4.html#sech44), one weapon forged in that struggle is the
***"work to rule,"*** namely workers bringing their workplace to a
grinding halt by following the dictates of the boss to the letter. This
is clear evidence that a workplace only operates because workers
exercise their autonomy during working hours, an autonomy which
authoritarian structures stifle and waste. A participatory workplace,
therefore, would be more efficient and less wasteful than the
hierarchical one associated with capitalism. As we discuss in [section
J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512), hierarchy and the struggle it creates
always acts as a barrier stopping the increased efficiency associated
with workers' participation undermining the autocratic workplace of
capitalism.

All this is not to suggest that those at the bottom of hierarchies are
victims nor that those at the top of hierarchies only gain benefits --
far from it. As Ward and Malatesta indicated, hierarchy by its very
nature creates resistance to it from those subjected to it and, in the
process, the potential for ending it (see [section
B.1.6](secB1.html#secb16) for more discussion). Conversely, at the
summit of the pyramid, we also see the evils of hierarchy.

If we look at those at the top of the system, yes, indeed they often do
**very** well in terms of material goods and access to education,
leisure, health and so on but they lose their humanity and
individuality. As Bakunin pointed out, *"power and authority corrupt
those who exercise them as much as those who are compelled to submit to
them."* [**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 249] Power operates
destructively, even on those who have it, reducing their individuality
as it *"renders them stupid and brutal, even when they were originally
endowed with the best of talents. One who is constantly striving to
force everything into a mechanical order at last becomes a machine
himself and loses all human feeling."* [Rudolf Rocker,
**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, pp. 17-8]

When it boils down to it, hierarchy is self-defeating, for if *"wealth
is other people,"* then by treating others as less than yourself,
restricting their growth, you lose all the potential insights and
abilities these individuals have, so impoverishing your own life and
**restricting your own growth.** Unfortunately in these days material
wealth (a particularly narrow form of "self-interest") has replaced
concern for developing the whole person and leading a fulfilling and
creative life (a broad self-interest, which places the individual
**within** society, one that recognises that relationships with others
shape and develop all individuals). In a hierarchical, class based
society everyone loses to some degree, even those at the "top."

Looking at the environment, the self-defeating nature of hierarchy also
becomes clear. The destiny of human life goes hand-in-hand with the
destiny of the non-human world. While being rich and powerful may
mitigate the impact of the ecological destruction produced by
hierarchies and capitalism, it will not stop them and will, eventually,
impact on the elite as well as the many.

Little wonder, then, that *"anarchism . . . works to destroy authority
in all its aspects . . . [and] refuses all hierarchical organisation."*
[Kropotkin, **Anarchism**, p. 137]

B.1.2 Is capitalism hierarchical?
---------------------------------

Yes. Under capitalism workers do not exchange the products of their
labour they exchange the labour itself for money. They sell themselves
for a given period of time, and in return for wages, promise to obey
their paymasters. Those who pay and give the orders -- owners and
managers -- are at the top of the hierarchy, those who obey at the
bottom. This means that capitalism, by its very nature, is hierarchical.

As Carole Pateman argues:

> *"Capacities or labour power cannot be used without the worker using
> his will, his understanding and experience, to put them into effect.
> The use of labour power requires the presence of its 'owner,' and it
> remains mere potential until he acts in the manner necessary to put it
> into use, or agrees or is compelled so to act; that is, the worker
> must labour. To contract for the use of labour power is a waste of
> resources unless it can be used in the way in which the new owner
> requires. The fiction 'labour power' cannot be used; what is required
> is that the worker labours as demanded. The employment contract must,
> therefore, create a relationship of command and obedience between
> employer and worker . . . In short, the contract in which the worker
> allegedly sells his labour power is a contract in which, since he
> cannot be separated from his capacities, he sells command over the use
> of his body and himself. To obtain the right to use another is to be a
> (civil) master."* [**The Sexual Contract**, pp. 150-1]

You need only compare this to Proudhon's comments quoted in [section
B.1](secB1.html) to see that anarchists have long recognised that
capitalism is, by its very nature, hierarchical. The worker is subjected
to the authority of the boss during working hours (sometimes outside
work too). As Noam Chomsky summarises, *"a corporation, factory of
business is the economic equivalent of fascism: decisions and control
are strictly top-down."* [**Letters from Lexington**, p. 127] The
worker's choices are extremely limited, for most people it amount to
renting themselves out to a series of different masters (for a lucky
few, the option of being a master is available). And master is the right
word for, as David Ellerman reminds us, *"[s]ociety seems to have
'covered up' in the popular consciousness the fact that the traditional
name [for employer and employee] is '**master and servant.'**"*
[**Property and Contract in Economics**, p. 103]

This hierarchical control of wage labour has the effect of alienating
workers from their own work, and so from themselves. Workers no longer
govern themselves during work hours and so are no longer free. And so,
due to capitalism, there is *"an oppression in the land,"* a *"form of
slavery"* rooted in current *"property institutions"* which produces *"a
social war, inevitable so long as present legal-social conditions
endure."* [Voltairine de Cleyre, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 54-5]

Some defenders of capitalism are aware of the contradiction between the
rhetoric of the system and its reality for those subject to it. Most
utilise the argument that workers consent to this form of hierarchy.
Ignoring the economic conditions which force people to sell their
liberty on the labour market (see [section B.4.3](secB4.html#secb43)),
the issue instantly arises of whether consent is enough in itself to
justify the alienation/selling of a person's liberty. For example, there
have been arguments for slavery and monarchy (i.e. dictatorship) rooted
in consent. Do we really want to say that the only thing wrong with
fascism or slavery is that people do not consent to it? Sadly, some
right-wing "libertarians" come to that conclusion (see [section
B.4](secB4.html)).

Some try to redefine the reality of the command-and-obey of wage labour.
*"To speak of managing, directing, or assigning workers to various tasks
is a deceptive way of noting that the employer continually is involved
in re-negotiation of contracts on terms that must be acceptable to both
parties,"* argue two right-wing economists. [Arman Alchian and Harold
Demsetz, quoted by Ellerman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 170] So the
employer-employee (or, to use the old, more correct, terminology,
master-servant) contract is thus a series of unspoken contracts.

However, if an oral contract is not worth the paper it is written on,
how valuable is an unspoken one? And what does this *"re-negotiation of
contracts"* amount to? The employee decides whether to obey the command
or leave and the boss decides whether the employee is obedient and
productive enough to remain in under his or her control. Hardly a
relationship based on freedom between equal partners! As such, this
capitalist defence of wage labour *"is a deceptive way of noting"* that
the employee is paid to obey. The contract between them is simply that
of obedience on one side and power on the other. That both sides may
break the contract does not alter this fact. Thus the capitalist
workplace *"is not democratic in spite of the 'consent of the governed'
to the employment contract . . . In the employment contract, the workers
alienate and transfer their legal rights to the employer to govern their
activities 'within the scope of the employment' to the employer."*
[David Ellerman, **The Democratic Worker-Owned Firm**, p. 50]

Ultimately, there is ***one*** right that cannot be ceded or abandoned,
namely the right to personality. If a person gave up their personality
they would cease to be a person yet this is what the employment contract
imposes. To maintain and develop their personality is a basic right of
humanity and it cannot be transferred to another, permanently or
temporarily. To argue otherwise would be to admit that under certain
circumstances and for certain periods of time a person is not a person
but rather a thing to be used by others. Yet this is precisely what
capitalism does due to its hierarchical nature.

This is not all. Capitalism, by treating labour as analogous to all
other commodities denies the key distinction between labour and other
"resources" - that is to say its inseparability from its bearer -
labour, unlike other "property," is endowed with will and agency. Thus
when one speaks of selling labour there is a necessary subjugation of
will (hierarchy). As Karl Polanyi writes:

> *"Labour is only another name for human activity which goes with life
> itself, which is in turn not produced for sale but for entirely
> different reasons, nor can that activity be detached from the rest of
> life itself, be stored or mobilised . . . To allow the market
> mechanism to be sole director of the fate of human beings and their
> natural environment . . . would result in the demolition of society.
> For the alleged commodity 'labour power' cannot be shoved about, used
> indiscriminately, or even left unused, without affecting also the
> human individual who happens to be the bearer of this peculiar
> commodity. In disposing of a man's labour power the system would,
> incidentally, dispose of the physical, psychological, and moral entity
> 'man' attached to that tag."* [**The Great Transformation**, p. 72]

In other words, labour is much more than the commodity to which
capitalism tries to reduce it. Creative, self-managed work is a source
of pride and joy and part of what it means to be fully human. Wrenching
control of work from the hands of the worker profoundly harms his or her
mental and physical health. Indeed, Proudhon went so far as to argue
that capitalist companies *"plunder the bodies and souls of the
wage-workers"* and were an *"outrage upon human dignity and
personality."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 219] This is because wage labour turns
productive activity and the person who does it into a commodity. People
*"are not human **beings** so much as human **resources**. To the
morally blind corporation, they are tool to generate as much profit as
possible. And 'the tool can be treated just like a piece of metal -- you
use it if you want, you throw it away if you don't want it,' says Noam
Chomsky. 'If you can get human beings to become tool like that, it's
more efficient by some measure of efficiency . . . a measure which is
based on dehumanisation. You have to dehumanise it. That's part of the
system.'"* [Joel Bakan, **The Corporation**, p. 69]

Separating labour from other activities of life and subjecting it to the
laws of the market means to annihilate its natural, organic form of
existence -- a form that evolved with the human race through tens of
thousands of years of co-operative economic activity based on sharing
and mutual aid -- and replacing it with an atomistic and individualistic
one based on contract and competition. Unsurprisingly, this relationship
is a very recent development and, moreover, the product of substantial
state action and coercion (see [section F.8](secF8.html) for some
discussion of this). Simply put, *"the early labourer . . . abhorred the
factory, where he [or she] felt degraded and tortured."* While the state
ensured a steady pool of landless workers by enforcing private property
rights, the early manufacturers also utilised the state to ensure low
wages, primarily for social reasons -- only an overworked and
downtrodden labourer with no other options would agree to do whatever
their master required of them. *"Legal compulsion and parish serfdom as
in England,"* noted Polanyi, *"the rigors of an absolutist labour police
as on the Continent, indented labour as in the early Americas were the
prerequisites of the 'willing worker.'"* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 164-5]

Ignoring its origins in state action, the social relationship of wage
labour is then claimed by capitalists to be a source of "freedom,"
whereas in fact it is a form of (in)voluntary servitude (see sections
[B.4](secB4.html) and [A.2.14](secA2.html#seca14) for more discussion).
Therefore a libertarian who did not support economic liberty (i.e.
self-government in industry, libertarian socialism) would be no
libertarian at all, and no believer in liberty. Capitalism is based upon
hierarchy and the denial of liberty. To present it otherwise denies the
nature of wage labour. However, supporters of capitalism try to but --
as Karl Polanyi points out -- the idea that wage labour is based upon
some kind of "natural" liberty is false:

> *"To represent this principle [wage labour] as one of non-interference
> [with freedom], as economic liberals were wont to do, was merely the
> expression of an ingrained prejudice in favour of a definite kind of
> interference, namely, such as would destroy non-contractual relations
> between individuals and prevent their spontaneous re-formation."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p.163]

As noted above, capitalism itself was created by state violence and the
destruction of traditional ways of life and social interaction was part
of that task. From the start, bosses spent considerable time and energy
combating attempts of working people to join together to resist the
hierarchy they were subjected to and reassert human values. Such forms
of free association between equals (such as trade unions) were combated,
just as attempts to regulate the worse excesses of the system by
democratic governments. Indeed, capitalists prefer centralised, elitist
and/or authoritarian regimes precisely because they are sure to be
outside of popular control (see [section B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25)).
They are the only way that contractual relations based on market power
could be enforced on an unwilling population. Capitalism was born under
such states and as well as backing fascist movements, they made high
profits in Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. Today many corporations
*"regularly do business with totalitarian and authoritarian regimes --
again, because it is profitable to do so."* Indeed, there is a *"trend
by US corporations to invest in"* such countries. [Joel Bakan, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 89 and p. 185] Perhaps unsurprisingly, as such regimes are
best able to enforce the necessary conditions to commodify labour fully.

B.1.3 What kind of hierarchy of values does capitalism create?
--------------------------------------------------------------

Anarchists argue that capitalism can only have a negative impact on
ethical behaviour. This flows from its hierarchical nature. We think
that hierarchy must, by its very nature, always impact negatively on
morality.

As we argued in [section A.2.19](secA2.html#seca219), ethics is
dependent on both individual liberty and equality between individuals.
Hierarchy violates both and so the *"great sources of moral depravity"*
are *"capitalism, religion, justice, government."* In *"the domain of
economy, coercion has lead us to industrial servitude; in the domain of
politics to the State . . . [where] the nation . . . becomes nothing but
a mass of obedient **subjects** to a central authority."* This has
*"contributed and powerfully aided to create all the present economic,
political, and social evils"* and *"has given proof of its absolute
impotence to raise the moral level of societies; it has not even been
able to maintain it at the level it had already reached."* This is
unsurprising, as society developed *"authoritarian prejudices"* and
*"men become more and more divided into governors and governed,
exploiters and exploited, the moral level fell . . . and the spirit of
the age declined."* By violating equality, by rejecting social
co-operation between equals in favour of top-down, authoritarian, social
relationships which turn some into the tools of others, capitalism, like
the state, could not help but erode ethical standards as the *"moral
level"* of society is *"debased by the practice of authority."*
[Kropotkin, **Anarchism**, pp. 137-8, p. 106 and p. 139]

However, as we as promoting general unethical behaviour, capitalism
produces a specific perverted hierarchy of values -- one that places
humanity below property. As Erich Fromm argues:

> *"The use [i.e. exploitation] of man by man is expressive of the
> **system of values** underlying the capitalistic system. **Capital,
> the dead past, employs labour -- the living vitality and power of the
> present.** In the capitalistic hierarchy of values, capital stands
> higher than labour, amassed things higher than the manifestations of
> life. Capital employs labour, and not labour capital. The person who
> owns capital commands the person who 'only' owns his life, human
> skill, vitality and creative productivity. 'Things' are higher than
> man. The conflict between capital and labour is much more than the
> conflict between two classes, more than their fight for a greater
> share of the social product. It is the conflict between two principles
> of value: **that between the world of things, and their amassment, and
> the world of life and its productivity**."* [**The Sane Society**, pp.
> 94-95]

Capitalism only values a person as representing a certain amount of the
commodity called "labour power," in other words, as a **thing**. Instead
of being valued as an individual -- a unique human being with intrinsic
moral and spiritual worth -- only one's price tag counts. This
replacement of human relationships by economic ones soon results in the
replacement of human values by economic ones, giving us an "ethics" of
the account book, in which people are valued by how much they earn. It
also leads, as Murray Bookchin argues, to a debasement of human values:

> *"So deeply rooted is the market economy in our minds that its grubby
> language has replaced our most hallowed moral and spiritual
> expressions. We now 'invest' in our children, marriages, and personal
> relationships, a term that is equated with words like 'love' and
> 'care.' We live in a world of 'trade-offs' and we ask for the 'bottom
> line' of any emotional 'transaction.' We use the terminology of
> contracts rather than that of loyalties and spiritual affinities."*
> [**The Modern Crisis**, p. 79]

With human values replaced by the ethics of calculation, and with only
the laws of market and state "binding" people together, social breakdown
is inevitable. Little wonder modern capitalism has seen a massive
increase in crime and dehumanisation under the freer markets established
by "conservative" governments, such as those of Thatcher and Reagan and
their transnational corporate masters. We now live in a society where
people live in self-constructed fortresses, "free" behind their walls
and defences (both emotional and physical).

Of course, some people **like** the "ethics" of mathematics. But this is
mostly because -- like all gods -- it gives the worshipper an easy rule
book to follow. "Five is greater than four, therefore five is better" is
pretty simple to understand. John Steinbeck noticed this when he wrote:

> *"Some of them [the owners] hated the mathematics that drove them [to
> kick the farmers off their land], and some were afraid, and some
> worshipped the mathematics because it provided a refuge from thought
> and from feeling."* [**The Grapes of Wrath**, p. 34]

The debasement of the individual in the workplace, where so much time is
spent, necessarily affects a person's self-image, which in turn carries
over into the way he or she acts in other areas of life. If one is
regarded as a commodity at work, one comes to regard oneself and others
in that way also. Thus all social relationships -- and so, ultimately,
**all** individuals -- are commodified. In capitalism, literally nothing
is sacred -- "everything has its price" -- be it dignity, self-worth,
pride, honour -- all become commodities up for grabs. Such debasement
produces a number of social pathologies. "Consumerism" is one example
which can be traced directly to the commodification of the individual
under capitalism. To quote Fromm again, *"**Things** have no self, and
men who have become things [i.e. commodities on the labour market] can
have no self."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 143]

However, people still feel the **need** for selfhood, and so try to fill
the emptiness by consuming. The illusion of happiness, that one's life
will be complete if one gets a new commodity, drives people to consume.
Unfortunately, since commodities are yet more things, they provide no
substitute for selfhood, and so the consuming must begin anew. This
process is, of course, encouraged by the advertising industry, which
tries to convince us to buy what we don't need because it will make us
popular/sexy/happy/free/etc. (delete as appropriate!). But consuming
cannot really satisfy the needs that the commodities are bought to
satisfy. Those needs can only be satisfied by social interaction based
on truly human values and by creative, self-directed work.

This does not mean, of course, that anarchists are against higher living
standards or material goods. To the contrary, they recognise that
liberty and a good life are only possible when one does not have to
worry about having enough food, decent housing, and so forth. Freedom
and 16 hours of work a day do not go together, nor do equality and
poverty or solidarity and hunger. However, anarchists consider
consumerism to be a distortion of consumption caused by the alienating
and inhuman "account book" ethics of capitalism, which crushes the
individual and his or her sense of identity, dignity and selfhood.

B.1.4 Why do racism, sexism and homophobia exist?
-------------------------------------------------

Since racism, sexism and homophobia (hatred/fear of homosexuals) are
institutionalised throughout society, sexual, racial and gay oppression
are commonplace. The primary cause of these three evil attitudes is the
need for ideologies that justify domination and exploitation, which are
inherent in hierarchy -- in other words, "theories" that "justify" and
"explain" oppression and injustice. As Tacitus said, *"We hate those
whom we injure."* Those who oppress others always find reasons to regard
their victims as "inferior" and hence deserving of their fate. Elites
need some way to justify their superior social and economic positions.
Since the social system is obviously unfair and elitist, attention must
be distracted to other, less inconvenient, "facts," such as alleged
superiority based on biology or "nature." Therefore, doctrines of
sexual, racial, and ethnic superiority are inevitable in hierarchical,
class-stratified societies.

We will take each form of bigotry in turn.

From an economic standpoint, racism is associated with the exploitation
of cheap labour at home and imperialism abroad. Indeed, early capitalist
development in both America and Europe was strengthened by the bondage
of people, particularly those of African descent. In the Americas,
Australia and other parts of the world the slaughter of the original
inhabitants and the expropriation of their land was also a key aspect in
the growth of capitalism. As the subordination of foreign nations
proceeds by force, it appears to the dominant nation that it owes its
mastery to its special natural qualities, in other words to its "racial"
characteristics. Thus imperialists have frequently appealed to the
Darwinian doctrine of "Survival of the Fittest" to give their racism a
basis in "nature."

In Europe, one of the first theories of racial superiority was proposed
by Gobineau in the 1850s to establish the natural right of the
aristocracy to rule over France. He argued that the French aristocracy
was originally of Germanic origin while the "masses" were Gallic or
Celtic, and that since the Germanic race was "superior", the aristocracy
had a natural right to rule. Although the French "masses" didn't find
this theory particularly persuasive, it was later taken up by proponents
of German expansion and became the origin of German racial ideology,
used to justify Nazi oppression of Jews and other "non-Aryan" types.
Notions of the "white man's burden" and "Manifest Destiny" developed at
about the same time in England and to a lesser extent in America, and
were used to rationalise Anglo-Saxon conquest and world domination on a
"humanitarian" basis.

Racism and authoritarianism at home and abroad has gone hand in hand. As
Rudolf Rocker argued, *"[a]ll advocates of the race doctrine have been
and are the associates and defenders of every political and social
reaction, advocates of the power principle in its most brutal form . . .
He who thinks that he sees in all political and social antagonisms
merely blood-determined manifestations of race, denies all conciliatory
influence of ideas, all community of ethical feeling, and must at every
crisis take refuge in brute force. In fact, race theory is only the cult
of power."* Racism aids the consolidation of elite power for by
attacking *"all the achievements . . . in the direction of personal
freedom"* and the idea of equality *"[n]o better moral justification
could be produced for the industrial bondage which our holders of
industrial power keep before them as a picture of the future."*
[**Nationalism and Culture**, pp. 337-8]

The idea of racial superiority was also found to have great domestic
utility. As Paul Sweezy points out, *"[t]he intensification of social
conflict within the advanced capitalist countries. . . has to be
directed as far as possible into innocuous channels -- innocuous, that
is to say, from the standpoint of capitalist class rule. The stirring up
of antagonisms along racial lines is a convenient method of directing
attention away from class struggle,"* which of course is dangerous to
ruling-class interests. [**Theory of Capitalist Development**, p. 311]
Indeed, employers have often deliberately fostered divisions among
workers on racial lines as part of a strategy of "divide and rule" (in
other contexts, like Northern Ireland or Scotland, the employers have
used religion in the same way instead).

Employers and politicians have often deliberately fostered divisions
among workers on racial lines as part of a strategy of "divide and
rule." In other contexts, like Tzarist Russia, Northern Ireland or
Scotland, the employers have used religion in the same way. In others,
immigrants and native born is the dividing line. The net effect is the
same, social oppressions which range from the extreme violence
anarchists like Emma Goldman denounced in the American South (*"the
atrocities rampant in the South, of negroes lynched, tortured and burned
by infuriated crowds without a hand being raised or a word said for
their protection"* [**Emma Goldman: A Documentary History of the
American Years**, vol. 1, p. 386]) or the pogroms against Jews in
Tsarist Russia to discrimination in where people can live, what jobs
people can get, less pay and so on.

For those in power, this makes perfect sense as racism (like other forms
of bigotry) can be used to split and divide the working class by getting
people to blame others of their class for the conditions they all
suffer. In this way, the anger people feel about the problems they face
are turned away from their real causes onto scapegoats. Thus white
workers are subtly (and sometimes not so subtly) encouraged, for
example, to blame unemployment, poverty and crime on blacks or Hispanics
instead of capitalism and the (white, male) elites who run it and who
directly benefit from low wages and high profits. Discrimination against
racial minorities and women makes sense for capitalism, for in this way
profits are enlarged directly and indirectly. As jobs and investment
opportunities are denied to the disadvantaged groups, their wages can be
depressed below prevailing levels and profits, correspondingly,
increased. Indirectly, discrimination adds capitalist profits and power
by increasing unemployment and setting workers against each other. Such
factors ensure that capitalism will never "compete" discrimination way
as some free-market capitalist economists argue.

In other words, capitalism has benefited and will continue to benefit
from its racist heritage. Racism has provided pools of cheap labour for
capitalists to draw upon and permitted a section of the population to be
subjected to worse treatment, so increasing profits by reducing working
conditions and other non-pay related costs. In America, blacks still get
paid less than whites for the same work (around 10% less than white
workers with the same education, work experience, occupation and other
relevent demographic variables). This is transferred into wealth
inequalities. In 1998, black incomes were 54% of white incomes while
black net worth (including residential) was 12% and nonresidential net
worth just 3% of white. For Hispanics, the picture was similar with
incomes just 62% of whites, net worth, 4% and nonresidential net worth
0%. While just under 15% of white households had zero or negative net
worth, 27% of black households and 36% Hispanic were in the same
situation. Even at similar levels of income, black households were
significantly less wealthy than white ones. [Doug Henwood, **After the
New Economy**, p. 99 and pp. 125-6]

All this means that racial minorities are *"subjected to oppression and
exploitation on the dual grounds of race and class, and thus have to
fight the extra battles against racism and discrimination."* [Lorenzo
Kom'boa Ervin, **Anarchism and the Black Revolution**, p. 126]

Sexism only required a "justification" once women started to act for
themselves and demand equal rights. Before that point, sexual oppression
did not need to be "justified" -- it was "natural" (saying that, of
course, equality between the sexes was stronger before the rise of
Christianity as a state religion and capitalism so the "place" of women
in society has fallen over the last few hundred years before rising
again thanks to the women's movement).

The nature of sexual oppression can be seen from marriage. Emma Goldman
pointed out that marriage *"stands for the sovereignty of the man over
the women,"* with her *"complete submission"* to the husbands *"whims
and commands."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 164] As Carole Pateman notes,
until *"the late nineteenth century the legal and civil position of a
wife resembled that of a slave. . . A slave had no independent legal
existence apart from his master, and husband and wife became 'one
person,' the person of the husband."* Indeed, the law *"was based on the
assumption that a wife was (like) property"* and only the marriage
contract *"includes the explicit commitment to obey."* [**The Sexual
Contract**, p. 119, p. 122 and p. 181]

However, when women started to question the assumptions of male
domination, numerous theories were developed to explain why women's
oppression and domination by men was "natural." Because men enforced
their rule over women by force, men's "superiority" was argued to be a
"natural" product of their gender, which is associated with greater
physical strength (on the premise that "might makes right"). In the 17th
century, it was argued that women were more like animals than men, thus
"proving" that women had as much right to equality with men as sheep
did. More recently, elites have embraced socio-biology in response to
the growing women's movement. By "explaining" women's oppression on
biological grounds, a social system run by men and for men could be
ignored.

Women's subservient role also has economic value for capitalism (we
should note that Goldman considered capitalism to be another *"paternal
arrangement"* like marriage, both of which robbed people of their
*"birthright,"* *"stunts"* their growth, *"poisons"* their bodies and
keeps people in *"ignorance, in poverty and dependence."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 210]). Women often provide necessary (and unpaid) labour which keeps
the (usually) male worker in good condition; and it is primarily women
who raise the next generation of wage-slaves (again without pay) for
capitalist owners to exploit. Moreover, women's subordination gives
working-class men someone to look down upon and, sometimes, a convenient
target on whom they can take out their frustrations (instead of stirring
up trouble at work). As Lucy Parsons pointed out, a working class woman
is *"a slave to a slave."*

Sexism, like all forms of bigotry, is reflected in relative incomes and
wealth levels. In the US women, on average, were being paid 57% the
amount men were in 2001 (an improvement than the 39% 20 years earlier).
Part of this is due to fewer women working than men, but for those who
do work outside the home their incomes were 66% than of men's (up from
47% in 1980 and 38% in 1970). Those who work full time, their incomes
76% of men's, up from the 60% average through most of the 1970s.
However, as with the black-white gap, this is due in part to the
stagnant income of male workers (in 1998 men's real incomes were just 1%
above 1989 levels while women's were 14% above). So rather than the
increase in income being purely the result of women entering high-paying
and largely male occupations and them closing the gender gap, it has
also been the result of the intense attacks on the working class since
the 1980s which has de-unionised and de-industrialised America. This has
resulted in a lot of high-paying male jobs have been lost and more and
more women have entered the job market to make sure their families make
ends. [Henwood, **Op. Cit.**, p. 91-2]

Turning away from averages, we discover that sexism results in women
being paid about 12% less than men during the same job, with the same
relative variables (like work experience, education and so forth).
Needless to say, as with racism, such "relevant variables" are
themselves shaped by discrimination. Women, like blacks, are less likely
to get job interviews and jobs. Sexism even affects types of jobs, for
example, "caring" professions pay less than non-caring ones because they
are seen as feminine and involve the kinds of tasks which women do at
home without pay. In general, female dominated industries pay less. In
1998, occupations that were over 90% male had a median wage almost 10%
above average while those over 90% female, almost 25% below. One study
found that a 30% increase in women in an occupation translated into a
10% decline in average pay. Needless to say, having children is bad
economic news for most women (women with children earn 10 to 15% less
than women without children while for men the opposite is the case).
Having maternity level, incidentally, have a far smaller motherhood
penalty. [Henwood, **Op. Cit.**, p. 95-7]

The oppression of lesbians, gays and bisexuals is inextricably linked
with sexism. A patriarchal, capitalist society cannot see homosexual
practices as the normal human variations they are because they blur that
society's rigid gender roles and sexist stereotypes. Most young gay
people keep their sexuality to themselves for fear of being kicked out
of home and all gays have the fear that some "straights" will try to
kick their sexuality out of them if they express their sexuality freely.
As with those subject to other forms of bigotry, gays are also
discriminated against economically (gay men earning about 4-7% less than
the average straight man [Henwood, **Op. Cit.**, p. 100]). Thus the
social oppression which result in having an alternative sexuality are
experienced on many different levels, from extreme violence to less pay
for doing the same work.

Gays are not oppressed on a whim but because of the specific need of
capitalism for the nuclear family. The nuclear family, as the primary -
and inexpensive - creator of submissive people (growing up within the
authoritarian family gets children used to, and "respectful" of,
hierarchy and subordination - see [section B.1.5](secB1.html#secb15)) as
well as provider and carer for the workforce fulfils an important need
for capitalism. Alternative sexualities represent a threat to the family
model because they provide a different role model for people. This means
that gays are going to be in the front line of attack whenever
capitalism wants to reinforce "family values" (i.e. submission to
authority, "tradition", "morality" and so on). The introduction of
Clause 28 in Britain is a good example of this, with the government
making it illegal for public bodies to promote gay sexuality (i.e. to
present it as anything other than a perversion). In American, the right
is also seeking to demonise homosexuality as part of their campaign to
reinforce the values of the patriarchal family unit and submission to
"traditional" authority. Therefore, the oppression of people based on
their sexuality is unlikely to end until sexism is eliminated.

This is not all. As well as adversely affecting those subject to them,
sexism, racism and homophobia are harmful to those who practice them
(and in some way benefit from them) within the working class itself. Why
this should be the case is obvious, once you think about it. All three
divide the working class, which means that whites, males and
heterosexuals hurt themselves by maintaining a pool of low-paid
competing labour, ensuring low wages for their own wives, daughters,
mothers, relatives and friends. Such divisions create inferior
conditions and wages for all as capitalists gain a competitive advantage
using this pool of cheap labour, forcing all capitalists to cut
conditions and wages to survive in the market (in addition, such social
hierarchies, by undermining solidarity against the employer on the job
and the state possibly create a group of excluded workers who could
become scabs during strikes). Also, "privileged" sections of the working
class lose out because their wages and conditions are less than those
which unity could have won them. Only the boss really wins.

This can be seen from research into this subject. The researcher Al
Szymanski sought to systematically and scientifically test the
proposition that white workers gain from racism [*"Racial Discrimination
and White Gain"*, in **American Sociological Review**, vol. 41, no. 3,
June 1976, pp. 403-414]. He compared the situation of "white" and
"non-white" (i.e. black, Native American, Asian and Hispanic) workers in
United States and found several key things:

So overall, these white workers receive some apparent privileges from
racism, but are in fact screwed by it. Thus racism and other forms of
hierarchy actually works against the interests of those working class
people who practice it -- and, by weakening workplace and social unity,
benefits the ruling class:

> *"As long as discrimination exists and racial or ethnic minorities are
> oppressed, the entire working class is weakened. This is so because
> the Capitalist class is able to use racism to drive down the wages of
> individual segments of the working class by inciting racial antagonism
> and forcing a fight for jobs and services. This division is a
> development that ultimately undercuts the living standards of all
> workers. Moreover, by pitting Whites against Blacks and other
> oppressed nationalities, the Capitalist class is able to prevent
> workers from uniting against their common enemy. As long as workers
> are fighting each other, the Capitalist class is secure."* [Lorenzo
> Kom'boa Ervin, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 12-3]

In addition, a wealth of alternative viewpoints, insights, experiences,
cultures, thoughts and so on are denied the racist, sexist or homophobe.
Their minds are trapped in a cage, stagnating within a mono-culture --
and stagnation is death for the personality. Such forms of oppression
are dehumanising for those who practice them, for the oppressor lives as
a **role**, not as a person, and so are restricted by it and cannot
express their individuality **freely** (and so do so in very limited
ways). This warps the personality of the oppressor and impoverishes
their own life and personality. Homophobia and sexism also limits the
flexibility of all people, gay or straight, to choose the sexual
expressions and relationships that are right for them. The sexual
repression of the sexist and homophobe will hardly be good for their
mental health, their relationships or general development.

From the anarchist standpoint, oppression based on race, sex or
sexuality will remain forever intractable under capitalism or, indeed,
under any economic or political system based on domination and
exploitation. While individual members of "minorities" may prosper,
racism as a justification for inequality is too useful a tool for elites
to discard. By using the results of racism (e.g. poverty) as a
justification for racist ideology, criticism of the status quo can, yet
again, be replaced by nonsense about "nature" and "biology." Similarly
with sexism or discrimination against gays.

The long-term solution is obvious: dismantle capitalism and the
hierarchical, economically class-stratified society with which it is
bound up. By getting rid of capitalist oppression and exploitation and
its consequent imperialism and poverty, we will also eliminate the need
for ideologies of racial or sexual superiority used to justify the
oppression of one group by another or to divide and weaken the working
class. However, struggles against bigotry cannot be left until after a
revolution. If they were two things are likely: one, such a revolution
would be unlikely to happen and, two, if it were then these problems
would more than likely remain in the new society created by it.
Therefore the negative impacts of inequality can and must be fought in
the here and now, like any form of hierarchy. Indeed, as we discuss in
more detail [section B.1.6](secB1.html#secb16) by doing so we make life
a bit better in the here and now as well as bringing the time when such
inequalities are finally ended nearer. Only this can ensure that we can
all live as free and equal individuals in a world without the blights of
sexism, racism, homophobia or religious hatred.

Needless to say, anarchists totally reject the kind of "equality" that
accepts other kinds of hierarchy, that accepts the dominant priorities
of capitalism and the state and accedes to the devaluation of
relationships and individuality in name of power and wealth. There is a
kind of "equality" in having "equal opportunities," in having black, gay
or women bosses and politicians, but one that misses the point. Saying
"Me too!" instead of "What a mess!" does not suggest real liberation,
just different bosses and new forms of oppression. We need to look at
the way society is organised, not at the sex, colour, nationality or
sexuality of who is giving the orders!

B.1.5 How is the mass-psychological basis for authoritarian civilisation created?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We noted in [section A.3.6](secA3.html#seca36) that hierarchical,
authoritarian institutions tend to be self-perpetuating, because growing
up under their influence creates submissive/authoritarian personalities
-- people who both "respect" authority (based on fear of punishment) and
desire to exercise it themselves on subordinates. Individuals with such
a character structure do not really want to dismantle hierarchies,
because they are afraid of the responsibility entailed by genuine
freedom. It seems "natural" and "right" to them that society's
institutions, from the authoritarian factory to the patriarchal family,
should be pyramidal, with an elite at the top giving orders while those
below them merely obey. Thus we have the spectacle of so-called
"Libertarians" and "anarcho" capitalists bleating about "liberty" while
at the same time advocating factory fascism and privatised states. In
short, authoritarian civilisation reproduces itself with each generation
because, through an intricate system of conditioning that permeates
every aspect of society, it creates masses of people who support the
status quo.

Wilhelm Reich has given one of the most thorough analyses of the
psychological processes involved in the reproduction of authoritarian
civilisation. Reich based his analysis on four of Freud's most solidly
grounded discoveries, namely, (1) that there exists an unconscious part
of the mind which has a powerful though irrational influence on
behaviour; (2) that even the small child develops a lively "genital"
sexuality, i.e. a desire for sexual pleasure which has nothing to do
with procreation; (3) that childhood sexuality along with the Oedipal
conflicts that arise in parent-child relations under monogamy and
patriarchy are usually repressed through fear of punishment or
disapproval for sexual acts and thoughts; (4) that this blocking of the
child's natural sexual activity and extinguishing it from memory does
not weaken its force in the unconscious, but actually intensifies it and
enables it to manifest itself in various pathological disturbances and
anti-social drives; and (5) that, far from being of divine origin, human
moral codes are derived from the educational measures used by the
parents and parental surrogates in earliest childhood, the most
effective of these being the ones opposed to childhood sexuality.

By studying Bronislaw Malinowsli's research on the Trobriand Islanders,
a woman-centred (matricentric) society in which children's sexual
behaviour was not repressed and in which neuroses and perversions as
well as authoritarian institutions and values were almost non-existent,
Reich came to the conclusion that patriarchy and authoritarianism
originally developed when tribal chieftains began to get economic
advantages from a certain type of marriage ("cross-cousin marriages")
entered into by their sons. In such marriages, the brothers of the son's
wife were obliged to pay a dowry to her in the form of continuous
tribute, thus enriching her husband's clan (i.e. the chief's). By
arranging many such marriages for his sons (which were usually numerous
due to the chief's privilege of polygamy), the chief's clan could
accumulate wealth. Thus society began to be stratified into ruling and
subordinate clans based on wealth.

To secure the permanence of these "good" marriages, strict monogamy was
required. However, it was found that monogamy was impossible to maintain
without the repression of childhood sexuality, since, as statistics
show, children who are allowed free expression of sexuality often do not
adapt successfully to life-long monogamy. Therefore, along with class
stratification and private property, authoritarian child-rearing methods
were developed to inculcate the repressive sexual morality on which the
new patriarchal system depended for its reproduction. Thus there is a
historical correlation between, on the one hand, pre-patriarchal
society, primitive libertarian communism (or *"work democracy,"* to use
Reich's expression), economic equality, and sexual freedom, and on the
other, patriarchal society, a private-property economy, economic class
stratification, and sexual repression. As Reich puts it:

> "Every tribe that developed from a [matricentric] to a patriarchal
> organisation had to change the sexual structure of its members to
> produce a sexuality in keeping with its new form of life. This was a
> necessary change because the shifting of power and of wealth from the
> democratic gens [maternal clans] to the authoritarian family of the
> chief was mainly implemented with the help of the suppression of the
> sexual strivings of the people. It was in this way that sexual
> suppression became an essential factor in the division of society into
> classes.
> "Marriage, and the lawful dowry it entailed, became the axis of the
> transformation of the one organisation into the other. In view of the
> fact that the marriage tribute of the wife's gens to the man's family
> strengthened the male's, especially the chief's, position of power,
> the male members of the higher ranking gens and families developed a
> keen interest in making the nuptial ties permanent. At this stage, in
> other words, only the man had an interest in marriage. In this way
> natural work-democracy's simple alliance, which could be easily
> dissolved at any time, was transformed into the permanent and
> monogamous marital relationship of patriarchy. The permanent
> monogamous marriage became the basic institution of patriarchal
> society -- which it still is today. To safeguard these marriages,
> however, it was necessary to impose greater and greater restrictions
> upon and to depreciate natural genital strivings." [**The Mass
> Psychology of Fascism**, p. 90]

The suppression of natural sexuality involved in this transformation
from matricentric to patriarchal society created various anti-social
drives (sadism, destructive impulses, rape fantasies, etc.), which then
also had to be suppressed through the imposition of a compulsive
morality, which took the place the natural self-regulation that one
finds in pre-patriarchal societies. In this way, sex began to be
regarded as "dirty," "diabolical," "wicked," etc. -- which it had indeed
become through the creation of secondary drives. Thus:

> *"The patriarchal- authoritarian sexual order that resulted from the
> revolutionary processes of latter-day [matricentrism] (economic
> independence of the chief's family from the maternal gens, a growing
> exchange of goods between the tribes, development of the means of
> production, etc.) becomes the primary basis of authoritarian ideology
> by depriving the women, children, and adolescents of their sexual
> freedom, making a commodity of sex and placing sexual interests in the
> service of economic subjugation. From now on, sexuality is indeed
> distorted; it becomes diabolical and demonic and has to be curbed."*
> [Reich, **Op. Cit.**, p. 88]

Once the beginnings of patriarchy are in place, the creation of a fully
authoritarian society based on the psychological crippling of its
members through sexual suppression follows:

> *"The moral inhibition of the child's natural sexuality, the last
> stage of which is the severe impairment of the child's **genital**
> sexuality, makes the child afraid, shy, fearful of authority,
> obedient, 'good,' and 'docile' in the authoritarian sense of the
> words. It has a crippling effect on man's rebellious forces because
> every vital life-impulse is now burdened with severe fear; and since
> sex is a forbidden subject, thought in general and man's critical
> faculty also become inhibited. In short, morality's aim is to produce
> acquiescent subjects who, despite distress and humiliation, are
> adjusted to the authoritarian order. Thus, the family is the
> authoritarian state in miniature, to which the child must learn to
> adapt himself as a preparation for the general social adjustment
> required of him later. Man's authoritarian structure -- this must be
> clearly established -- is basically produced by the embedding of
> sexual inhibitions and fear."* [Reich, **Op. Cit.**, p. 30]

In this way, by damaging the individual's power to rebel and think for
him/herself, the inhibition of childhood sexuality -- and indeed other
forms of free, natural expression of bioenergy (e.g. shouting, crying,
running, jumping, etc.) -- becomes the most important weapon in creating
reactionary personalities. This is why every reactionary politician puts
such an emphasis on "strengthening the family" and promoting "family
values" (i.e. patriarchy, compulsive monogamy, premarital chastity,
corporal punishment, etc.). In the words of Reich:

> *"Since authoritarian society reproduces itself in the individual
> structures of the masses with the help of the authoritarian family, it
> follows that political reaction has to regard and defend the
> authoritarian family as **the** basis of the 'state, culture, and
> civilisation. . . .' [It is] **political reaction's germ cell**, the
> most important centre for the production of reactionary men and women.
> Originating and developing from definite social processes, it becomes
> the most essential institution for the preservation of the
> authoritarian system that shapes it."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 104-105]

The family is the most essential institution for this purpose because
children are most vulnerable to psychological maiming in their first few
years, from the time of birth to about six years of age, during which
time they are mostly in the charge of their parents. The schools and
churches then continue the process of conditioning once the children are
old enough to be away from their parents, but they are generally
unsuccessful if the proper foundation has not been laid very early in
life by the parents. Thus A.S. Neill observes that *"the nursery
training is very like the kennel training. The whipped child, like the
whipped puppy, grows into an obedient, inferior adult. And as we train
our dogs to suit our own purposes, so we train our children. In that
kennel, the nursery, the human dogs must be clean; they must feed when
we think it convenient for them to feed. I saw a hundred thousand
obedient, fawning dogs wag their tails in the Templehof, Berlin, when in
1935, the great trainer Hitler whistled his commands."* [**Summerhill: a
Radical Approach to Child Rearing**, p. 100]

The family is also the main agency of repression during adolescence,
when sexual energy reaches its peak. This is because the vast majority
of parents provide no private space for adolescents to pursue
undisturbed sexual relationships with their partners, but in fact
actively discourage such behaviour, often (as in fundamentalist
Christian families) demanding complete abstinence -- at the very time
when abstinence is most impossible! Moreover, since teenagers are
economically dependent on their parents under capitalism, with no
societal provision of housing or dormitories allowing for sexual
freedom, young people have no alternative but to submit to irrational
parental demands for abstention from premarital sex. This in turn forces
them to engage in furtive sex in the back seats of cars or other
out-of-the-way places where they cannot relax or obtain full sexual
satisfaction. As Reich found, when sexuality is repressed and laden with
anxiety, the result is always some degree of what he terms *"orgastic
impotence"*: the inability to fully surrender to the flow of energy
discharged during orgasm. Hence there is an incomplete release of sexual
tension, which results in a state of chronic bioenergetic stasis. Such a
condition, Reich found, is the breeding ground for neuroses and
reactionary attitudes. (For further details see the [section
J.6](secJ6.html)).

In this connection it is interesting to note that "primitive" societies,
such as the Trobriand Islanders, prior to their developing
patriarchal-authoritarian institutions, provided special community
houses where teenagers could go with their partners to enjoy undisturbed
sexual relationships -- and this with society's full approval. Such an
institution would be taken for granted in an anarchist society, as it is
implied by the concept of freedom. (For more on adolescent sexual
liberation, see [section J.6.8.](secJ6.html#secj68))

Nationalistic feelings can also be traced to the authoritarian family. A
child's attachment to its mother is, of course, natural and is the basis
of all family ties. Subjectively, the emotional core of the concepts of
homeland and nation are mother and family, since the mother is the
homeland of the child, just as the family is the "nation in miniature."
According to Reich, who carefully studied the mass appeal of Hitler's
"National Socialism," nationalistic sentiments are a direct continuation
of the family tie and are rooted in a **fixated** tie to the mother. As
Reich points out, although infantile attachment to the mother is
natural, **fixated** attachment is not, but is a social product. In
puberty, the tie to the mother would make room for other attachments,
i.e., natural sexual relations, **if** the unnatural sexual restrictions
imposed on adolescents did not cause it to be eternalised. It is in the
form of this socially conditioned externalisation that fixation on the
mother becomes the basis of nationalist feelings in the adult; and it is
only at this stage that it becomes a reactionary social force.

Later writers who have followed Reich in analysing the process of
creating reactionary character structures have broadened the scope of
his analysis to include other important inhibitions, besides sexual
ones, that are imposed on children and adolescents. Rianne Eisler, for
example, in her book **Sacred Pleasure**, stresses that it is not just a
sex-negative attitude but a **pleasure**-negative attitude that creates
the kinds of personalities in question. Denial of the value of
pleasurable sensations permeates our unconscious, as reflected, for
example, in the common idea that to enjoy the pleasures of the body is
the "animalistic" (and hence "bad") side of human nature, as contrasted
with the "higher" pleasures of the mind and "spirit." By such dualism,
which denies a spiritual aspect to the body, people are made to feel
guilty about enjoying any pleasurable sensations -- a conditioning that
does, however, prepare them for lives based on the sacrifice of pleasure
(or indeed, even of life itself) under capitalism and statism, with
their requirements of mass submission to alienated labour, exploitation,
military service to protect ruling-class interests, and so on. And at
the same time, authoritarian ideology emphasises the value of suffering,
as for example through the glorification of the tough, insensitive
warrior hero, who suffers (and inflicts "necessary" suffering on others
) for the sake of some pitiless ideal.

Eisler also points out that there is *"ample evidence that people who
grow up in families where rigid hierarchies and painful punishments are
the norm learn to suppress anger toward their parents. There is also
ample evidence that this anger is then often deflected against
traditionally disempowered groups (such as minorities, children, and
women)."* [**Sacred Pleasure**, p. 187] This repressed anger then
becomes fertile ground for reactionary politicians, whose mass appeal
usually rests in part on scapegoating minorities for society's problems.

As the psychologist Else Frenkel-Brunswick documents in **The
Authoritarian Personality**, people who have been conditioned through
childhood abuse to surrender their will to the requirements of feared
authoritarian parents, also tend to be very susceptible as adults to
surrender their will and minds to authoritarian leaders. *"In other
words,"* Frenkel-Brunswick summarises, *"at the same time that they
learn to deflect their repressed rage against those they perceive as
weak, they also learn to submit to autocratic or 'strong-man' rule.
Moreover, having been severely punished for any hint of rebellion (even
'talking back' about being treated unfairly), they gradually also learn
to deny to themselves that there was anything wrong with what was done
to them as children -- and to do it in turn to their own children."*
[**The Authoritarian Personality**, p. 187]

These are just some of the mechanisms that perpetuate the status quo by
creating the kinds of personalities who worship authority and fear
freedom. Consequently, anarchists are generally opposed to traditional
child-rearing practices, the patriarchal-authoritarian family (and its
"values"), the suppression of adolescent sexuality, and the
pleasure-denying, pain-affirming attitudes taught by the Church and in
most schools. In place of these, anarchists favour non-authoritarian,
non-repressive child-rearing practices and educational methods (see
sections [J.6](secJ6.html) and [secJ.5.13](secJ5.html#secJ513),
respectively) whose purpose is to prevent, or at least minimise, the
psychological crippling of individuals, allowing them instead to develop
natural self-regulation and self-motivated learning. This, we believe,
is the only way to for people to grow up into happy, creative, and truly
freedom-loving individuals who will provide the psychological ground
where anarchist economic and political institutions can flourish.

B.1.6 Can hierarchy be ended?
-----------------------------

Faced with the fact that hierarchy, in its many distinctive forms, has
been with us such a long time and so negatively shapes those subject to
it, some may conclude that the anarchist hope of ending it, or even
reducing it, is little more than a utopian dream. Surely, it will be
argued, as anarchists acknowledge that those subject to a hierarchy
adapt to it this automatically excludes the creation of people able to
free themselves from it?

Anarchists disagree. Hierarchy can be ended, both in specific forms and
in general. A quick look at the history of the human species shows that
this is the case. People who have been subject to monarchy have ended
it, creating republics where before absolutism reigned. Slavery and
serfdom have been abolished. Alexander Berkman simply stated the obvious
when he pointed out that *"many ideas, once held to be true, have come
to be regarded as wrong and evil. Thus the ideas of divine right of
kings, of slavery and serfdom. There was a time when the whole world
believed those institutions to be right, just, and unchangeable."*
However, they became *"discredited and lost their hold upon the people,
and finally the institutions that incorporated those ideas were
abolished"* as *"they were useful only to the master class"* and *"were
done away with by popular uprisings and revolutions."* [**What is
Anarchism?**, p. 178] It is unlikely, therefore, that current forms of
hierarchy are exceptions to this process.

Today, we can see that this is the case. Malatesta's comments of over
one hundred years ago are still valid: *"the oppressed masses . . . have
never completely resigned themselves to oppression and poverty . . .
[and] show themselves thirsting for justice, freedom and wellbeing."*
[**Anarchy**, p. 33] Those at the bottom are constantly resisting both
hierarchy and its the negative effects and, equally important, creating
non-hierarchical ways of living and fighting. This constant process of
self-activity and self-liberation can be seen from the labour, women's
and other movements -- in which, to some degree, people create their own
alternatives based upon their own dreams and hopes. Anarchism is based
upon, and grew out of, this process of resistance, hope and direct
action. In other words, the libertarian elements that the oppressed
continually produce in their struggles within and against hierarchical
systems are extrapolated and generalised into what is called anarchism.
It is these struggles and the anarchistic elements they produce which
make the end of all forms of hierarchy not only desirable, but possible.

So while the negative impact of hierarchy is not surprising, neither is
the resistance to it. This is because the individual *"is not a blank
sheet of paper on which culture can write its text; he [or she] is an
entity charged with energy and structured in specific ways, which, while
adapting itself, reacts in specific and ascertainable ways to external
conditions."* In this *"process of adaptation,"* people develop
*"definite mental and emotional reactions which follow from specific
properties"* of our nature. [Eric Fromm, **Man for Himself**, p. 23 and
p. 22] For example:

> *"Man can adapt himself to slavery, but he reacts to it by lowering
> his intellectual and moral qualities . . . Man can adapt himself to
> cultural conditions which demand the repression of sexual strivings,
> but in achieving this adaptation he develops . . . neurotic symptoms.
> He can adapt to almost any culture pattern, but in so far as these are
> contradictory to his nature he develops mental and emotional
> disturbances which force him eventually change these conditions since
> he cannot change his nature. . . . If . . . man could adapt himself to
> all conditions without fighting those which are against his nature, he
> would have no history. Human evolution is rooted in man's adaptability
> and in certain indestructible qualities of his nature which compel him
> to search for conditions better adjusted to his intrinsic needs."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 22-23]

So as well as adaptation to hierarchy, there is resistance. This means
that modern society (capitalism), like any hierarchical society, faces a
direct contradiction. On the one hand, such systems divide society into
a narrow stratum of order givers and the vast majority of the population
who are (officially) excluded from decision making, who are reduced to
carrying out (executing) the decisions made by the few. As a result,
most people suffer feelings of alienation and unhappiness. However, in
practice, people try and overcome this position of powerlessness and so
hierarchy produces a struggle against itself by those subjected to it.
This process goes on all the time, to a greater or lesser degree, and is
an essential aspect in creating the possibility of political
consciousness, social change and revolution. People refuse to be treated
like objects (as required by hierarchical society) and by so doing
hierarchy creates the possibility for its own destruction.

For the inequality in wealth and power produced by hierarchies, between
the powerful and the powerless, between the rich and the poor, has not
been ordained by god, nature or some other superhuman force. It has been
created by a specific social system, its institutions and workings -- a
system based upon authoritarian social relationships which effect us
both physically and mentally. So there is hope. Just as authoritarian
traits are learned, so can they be **unlearned.** As Carole Pateman
summarises, the evidence supports the argument *"that we do learn to
participate by participating"* and that a participatory environment
*"might also be effective in diminishing tendencies toward
non-democratic attitudes in the individual."* [**Participaton and
Democratic Theory**, p. 105] So oppression reproduces resistance and the
seeds of its own destruction.

It is for this reason anarchists stress the importance of
self-liberation (see [section A.2.7](secA2.html#seca27)) and *"support
all struggles for partial freedom, because we are convinced that one
learns through struggle, and that once one begins to enjoy a little
freedom one ends by wanting it all."* [Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta:
His Life and Ideas**, p. 195] By means of direct action (see [section
J.2](secJ2.html)), people exert themselves and stand up for themselves.
This breaks the conditioning of hierarchy, breaks the submissiveness
which hierarchical social relationships both need and produce. Thus the
daily struggles against oppression *"serve as a training camp to
develop"* a person's *"understanding of [their] proper role in life, to
cultivate [their] self-reliance and independence, teach him [or her]
mutual help and co-operation, and make him [or her] conscious of [their]
responsibility. [They] will learn to decide and act on [their] own
behalf, not leaving it to leaders or politicians to attend to [their]
affairs and look out for [their] welfare. It will be [them] who will
determine, together with [their] fellows . . . , what they want and what
methods will best serve their aims."* [Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 206]

In other words, struggle encourages all the traits hierarchy erodes and,
consequently, develop the abilities not only to question and resist
authority but, ultimately, end it once and for all. This means that any
struggle **changes** those who take part in it, politicising them and
transforming their personalities by shaking off the servile traits
produced and required by hierarchy. As an example, after the sit-down
strikes in Flint, Michigan, in 1937 one eye-witness saw how *"the auto
worker became a different human being. The women that had participated
actively became a different type of women . . . They carried themselves
with a different walk, their heads were high, and they had confidence in
themselves."* [Genora (Johnson) Dollinger, contained in **Voices of a
People's History of the United States**, Howard Zinn and Anthony Arnove
(eds.), p. 349] Such changes happen in all struggles (also see [section
J.4.2](secJ4.html#secj42)). Anarchists are not surprised for, as
discussed in [section J.1](secJ1.html) and [J.2.1](secJ2.html#secj21),
we have long recognised the liberating aspects of social struggle and
the key role it plays in creating free people and the other
preconditions for needed for an anarchist society (like the initial
social structure -- see [section I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23)).

Needless to say, a hierarchical system like capitalism cannot survive
with a non-submissive working class and the bosses spend a considerable
amount of time, energy and resources trying to break the spirits of the
working class so they will submit to authority (either unwillingly, by
fear of being fired, or willingly, by fooling them into believing that
hierarchy is natural or by rewarding subservient behaviour).
Unsurprisingly, this never completely succeeds and so capitalism is
marked by constant struggles between the oppressed and oppressor. Some
of these struggles succeed, some do not. Some are defensive, some are
not. Some, like strikes, are visible, other less so (such a working
slowly and less efficiently than management desires). And these
struggles are waged by both sides of the hierarchical divide. Those
subject to hierarchy fight to limit it and increase their autonomy and
those who exercise authority fight to increase their power over others.
Who wins varies. The 1960s and 1970s saw a marked increase in victories
for the oppressed all throughout capitalism but, unfortunately, since
the 1980s, as we discuss in [section C.8.3](sec83.html#secc83), there
has been a relentless class war conducted by the powerful which has
succeeded in inflicting a series of defeats on working class people.
Unsurprisingly, the rich have got richer and more powerful since.

So anarchists take part in the on-going social struggle in society in an
attempt to end it in the only way possible, the victory of the
oppressed. A key part of this is to fight for partial freedoms, for
minor or major reforms, as this strengthens the spirit of revolt and
starts the process towards the final end of hierarchy. In such struggles
we stress the autonomy of those involved and see them not only as the
means of getting more justice and freedom in the current unfree system
but also as a means of ending the hierarchies they are fighting once and
for all. Thus, for example, in the class struggle we argue for
*"[o]rganisation from the bottom up, beginning with the shop and
factory, on the foundation of the joint interests of the workers
everywhere, irrespective of trade, race, or country."* [Alexander
Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 207] Such an organisation, as we discuss in
[section J.5.2](secJ5.html#secj52), would be run via workplace
assemblies and would be the ideal means of replacing capitalist
hierarchy in industry by genuine economic freedom, i.e. worker's
self-management of production (see [section I.3](secI3.html)).
Similarly, in the community we argue for popular assemblies (see
[section J.5.1](secJ5.html#secj51)) as a means of not only combating the
power of the state but also replaced it with by free, self-managed,
communities (see [section I.5](secI5.html)).

Thus the current struggle itself creates the bridge between what is and
what could be:

> *"Assembly and community must arise from within the revolutionary
> process itself; indeed, the revolutionary process must **be** the
> formation of assembly and community, and with it, the destruction of
> power. Assembly and community must become 'fighting words,' not
> distant panaceas. They must be created as **modes of struggle**
> against the existing society, not as theoretical or programmatic
> abstractions."* [Murray Bookchin, **Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 104]

This is not all. As well as fighting the state and capitalism, we also
need fight all other forms of oppression. This means that anarchists
argue that we need to combat social hierarchies like racism and sexism
as well as workplace hierarchy and economic class, that we need to
oppose homophobia and religious hatred as well as the political state.
Such oppressions and struggles are not diversions from the struggle
against class oppression or capitalism but part and parcel of the
struggle for human freedom and cannot be ignored without fatally harming
it.

As part of that process, anarchists encourage and support all sections
of the population to stand up for their humanity and individuality by
resisting racist, sexist and anti-gay activity and challenging such
views in their everyday lives, everywhere (as Carole Pateman points out,
*"sexual domination structures the workplace as well as the conjugal
home"* [**The Sexual Contract**, p. 142]). It means a struggle of all
working class people against the internal and external tyrannies we face
-- we must fight against own our prejudices while supporting those in
struggle against our common enemies, no matter their sex, skin colour or
sexuality. Lorenzo Kom'boa Ervin words on fighting racism are applicable
to all forms of oppression:

> *"Racism must be fought vigorously wherever it is found, even if in
> our own ranks, and even in ones own breast. Accordingly, we must end
> the system of white skin privilege which the bosses use to split the
> class, and subject racially oppressed workers to super-exploitation.
> White workers, especially those in the Western world, must resist the
> attempt to use one section of the working class to help them advance,
> while holding back the gains of another segment based on race or
> nationality. This kind of class opportunism and capitulationism on the
> part of white labour must be directly challenged and defeated. There
> can be no workers unity until the system of super-exploitation and
> world White Supremacy is brought to an end."* [**Anarchism and the
> Black Revolution**, p. 128]

Progress towards equality can and has been made. While it is still true
that (in the words of Emma Goldman) *"[n]owhere is woman treated
according to the merit of her work, but rather as a sex"* [**Red Emma
Speaks**, p. 177] and that education is still patriarchal, with young
women still often steered away from traditionally "male" courses of
study and work (which teaches children that men and women are assigned
different roles in society and sets them up to accept these limitations
as they grow up) it is also true that the position of women, like that
of blacks and gays, **has** improved. This is due to the various
self-organised, self-liberation movements that have continually
developed throughout history and these are **the** key to fighting
oppression in the short term (and creating the potential for the long
term solution of dismantling capitalism and the state).

Emma Goldman argued that emancipation begins *"in [a] woman's soul."*
Only by a process of internal emancipation, in which the oppressed get
to know their own value, respect themselves and their culture, can they
be in a position to effectively combat (and overcome) external
oppression and attitudes. Only when you respect yourself can you be in a
position to get others to respect you. Those men, whites and
heterosexuals who are opposed to bigotry, inequality and injustice, must
support oppressed groups and refuse to condone racist, sexist or
homophobic attitudes and actions by others or themselves. For
anarchists, *"not a single member of the Labour movement may with
impunity be discriminated against, suppressed or ignored. . . Labour
[and other] organisations must be built on the principle of equal
liberty of all its members. This equality means that only if each worker
is a free and independent unit, co-operating with the others from his or
her mutual interests, can the whole labour organisation work
successfully and become powerful."* [Lorenzo Kom'boa Ervin, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 127-8]

We must all treat people as equals, while at the same time respecting
their differences. Diversity is a strength and a source of joy, and
anarchists reject the idea that equality means conformity. By these
methods, of internal self-liberation and solidarity against external
oppression, we can fight against bigotry. Racism, sexism and homophobia
can be reduced, perhaps almost eliminated, before a social revolution
has occurred by those subject to them organising themselves, fighting
back **autonomously** and refusing to be subjected to racial, sexual or
anti-gay abuse or to allowing others to get away with it (which plays an
essential role in making others aware of their own attitudes and
actions, attitudes they may even be blind to!).

The example of the ***Mujeres Libres*** (Free Women) in Spain during the
1930s shows what is possible. Women anarchists involved in the C.N.T.
and F.A.I. organised themselves autonomously to raise the issue of
sexism in the wider libertarian movement, to increase women's
involvement in libertarian organisations and help the process of women's
self-liberation against male oppression. Along the way they also had to
combat the (all too common) sexist attitudes of their "revolutionary"
male fellow anarchists. Martha A. Ackelsberg's book **Free Women of
Spain** is an excellent account of this movement and the issues it
raises for all people concerned about freedom. Decades latter, the
women's movement of the 1960s and 1970s did much the same thing, aiming
to challenge the traditional sexism and patriarchy of capitalist
society. They, too, formed their own organisations to fight for their
own needs as a group. Individuals worked together and drew strength for
their own personal battles in the home and in wider society.

Another essential part of this process is for such autonomous groups to
actively support others in struggle (including members of the dominant
race/sex/sexuality). Such practical solidarity and communication can,
when combined with the radicalising effects of the struggle itself on
those involved, help break down prejudice and bigotry, undermining the
social hierarchies that oppress us all. For example, gay and lesbian
groups supporting the 1984/5 UK miners' strike resulted in such groups
being given pride of place in many miners' marches. Another example is
the great strike by Jewish immigrant workers in 1912 in London which
occurred at the same time as a big London Dock Strike. *"The common
struggle brought Jewish and non-Jewish workers together. Joint strike
meetings were held, and the same speakers spoke at huge joint
demonstrations."* The Jewish strike was a success, dealing a
*"death-blow to the sweatshop system. The English workers looked at the
Jewish workers with quite different eyes after this victory."* Yet the
London dock strike continued and many dockers' families were suffering
real wants. The successful Jewish strikers started a campaign *"to take
some of the dockers' children into their homes."* This practical support
*"did a great deal to strengthen the friendship between Jewish and
non-Jewish workers."* [Rudolf Rocker, **London Years**, p. 129 and p.
131] This solidarity was repaid in October 1936, when the dockers were
at the forefront in stopping Mosley's fascist blackshirts marching
through Jewish areas (the famous battle of Cable street).

For whites, males and heterosexuals, the only anarchistic approach is to
support others in struggle, refuse to tolerate bigotry in others and to
root out their own fears and prejudices (while refusing to be uncritical
of self-liberation struggles -- solidarity does not imply switching your
brain off!). This obviously involves taking the issue of social
oppression into all working class organisations and activity, ensuring
that no oppressed group is marginalised within them.

Only in this way can the hold of these social diseases be weakened and a
better, non-hierarchical system be created. An injury to one is an
injury to all.
