B.6 But won't decisions made by individuals with their own money be the best?
=============================================================================

This question refers to an argument commonly used by capitalists to
justify the fact that investment decisions are removed from public
control under capitalism, with private investors making all the
decisions. Clearly the assumption behind this argument is that
individuals suddenly lose their intelligence when they get together and
discuss their common interests. But surely, through debate, we can
enrich our ideas by social interaction. In the marketplace we do not
discuss but instead act as atomised individuals.

This issue involves the *"Isolation Paradox,"* according to which the
very logic of individual decision-making is different from that of
collective decision-making. An example is the *"tyranny of small
decisions."* Let us assume that in the soft drink industry some
companies start to produce (cheaper) non-returnable bottles. The end
result of this is that most, if not all, the companies making returnable
bottles lose business and switch to non-returnables. Result? Increased
waste and environmental destruction.

This is because market price fails to take into account social costs and
benefits, indeed it **mis**-estimates them for both buyer/seller and to
others not involved in the transaction. This is because, as Schumacher
points out, the *"strength of the idea of private enterprise lies in its
terrifying simplicity. It suggests that the totality of life can be
reduced to one aspect - profits..."* [**Small is Beautiful**, p. 215]
But life cannot be reduced to one aspect without impoverishing it and so
capitalism *"knows the price of everything but the value of nothing."*

Therefore the market promotes "the tyranny of small decisions" and this
can have negative outcomes for those involved. The capitalist "solution"
to this problem is no solution, namely to act after the event. Only
after the decisions have been made and their effects felt can action be
taken. But by then the damage has been done. Can suing a company
**really** replace a fragile eco-system? In addition, the economic
context has been significantly altered, because investment decisions are
often difficult to unmake.

In other words, the operations of the market provide an unending source
of examples for the argument that the aggregate results of the pursuit
of private interest may well be collectively damaging. And as
collectives are made up of individuals, that means damaging to the
individuals involved. The remarkable ideological success of "free
market" capitalism is to identify the anti-social choice with
self-interest, so that any choice in the favour of the interests which
we share collectively is treated as a piece of self-sacrifice. However,
by atomising decision making, the market often actively works against
the self-interest of the individuals that make it up.

Game theory is aware that the sum of rational choices do not
automatically yield a rational group outcome. Indeed, it terms such
situations as "collective action" problems. By not agreeing common
standards, a "race to the bottom" can ensue in which a given society
reaps choices that we as individuals really don't want. The rational
pursuit of individual self-interest leaves the group, and so most
individuals, worse off. The problem is not bad individual judgement (far
from it, the individual is the only person able to know what is best for
them in a given situation). It is the absence of social discussion and
remedies that compels people to make unbearable choices because the
available menu presents no good options.

By **not** discussing the impact of their decisions with everyone who
will be affected, the individuals in question have not made a better
decision. Of course, under our present highly centralised statist and
capitalist system, such a discussion would be impossible to implement,
and its closest approximation -- the election process -- is too vast,
bureaucratic and dominated by wealth to do much beyond passing a few
toothless laws which are generally ignored when they hinder profits.

However, let's consider what the situation would be like under
libertarian socialism, where the local community assemblies discuss the
question of returnable bottles along with the workforce. Here the
function of specific interest groups (such as consumer co-operatives,
ecology groups, workplace Research and Development action committees and
so on) would play a critical role in producing information. Knowledge,
as Bakunin, Kropotkin, etc. knew, is widely dispersed throughout society
and the role of interested parties is essential in making it available
to others. Based upon this information and the debate it provokes, the
collective decision reached would most probably favour returnables over
waste. This would be a better decision from a social and ecological
point of view, and one that would benefit the individuals who discussed
and agreed upon its effects on themselves and their society.

In other words, anarchists think we have to take an active part in
creating the menu as well as picking options from it which reflect our
individual tastes and interests.

It needs to be emphasised that such a system does not involve discussing
and voting on everything under the sun, which would paralyse all
activity. To the contrary, most decisions would be left to those
interested (e.g. workers decide on administration and day-to-day
decisions within the factory), the community decides upon policy (e.g.
returnables over waste). Neither is it a case of electing people to
decide for us, as the decentralised nature of the confederation of
communities ensures that power lies in the hands of local people.

This process in no way implies that "society" decides what an individual
is to consume. That, like all decisions affecting the individual only,
is left entirely up to the person involved. Communal decision-making is
for decisions that impact both the individual and society, allowing
those affected by it to discuss it among themselves as equals, thus
creating a rich social context within which individuals can act. This is
an obvious improvement over the current system, where decisions that
often profoundly alter people's lives are left to the discretion of an
elite class of managers and owners, who are supposed to "know best."

There is, of course, the danger of "tyranny of the majority" in any
democratic system, but in a direct libertarian democracy, this danger
would be greatly reduced, for reasons discussed in section I.5.6 (
[Won't there be a danger of a "tyranny of the majority" under
libertarian socialism?](secI5.html#seci56)).
