B.7 What classes exist within modern society?
=============================================

For anarchists, class analysis is an important means of understanding
the world and what is going on in it. While recognition of the fact that
classes actually exist is less prevalent now than it once was, this does
not mean that classes have ceased to exist. Quite the contrary. As we'll
see, it means only that the ruling class has been more successful than
before in obscuring the existence of class.

Class can be objectively defined: the relationship between an individual
and the sources of power within society determines his or her class. We
live in a class society in which a few people possess far more political
and economic power than the majority, who usually work for the minority
that controls them and the decisions that affect them. This means that
class is based both on exploitation **and** oppression, with some
controlling the labour of others for their own gain. The means of
oppression have been indicated in earlier parts of [section
B](secBcon.html), while section C ([What are the myths of capitalist
economics?](secCcon.html)) indicates exactly how exploitation occurs
within a society apparently based on free and equal exchange. In
addition, it also highlights the effects on the economic system itself
of this exploitation. The social and political impact of the system and
the classes and hierarchies it creates is discussed in depth in section
D ([How do statism and capitalism affect society?](secDcon.html)).

We must emphasise at the outset that the idea of the "working class" as
composed of nothing but industrial workers is simply false. It is
**not** applicable today, if it ever was. Power, in terms of hire/fire
and investment decisions, is the important thing. Ownership of capital
as a means of determining a person's class, while still important, does
not tell the whole story. An obvious example is that of the higher
layers of management within corporations. They have massive power within
the company, basically taking over the role held by the actual
capitalist in smaller firms. While they may technically be "salary
slaves" their power and position in the social hierarchy indicate that
they are members of the ruling class in practice (and, consequently,
their income is best thought of as a share of profits rather than a
wage). Much the same can be said of politicians and state bureaucrats
whose power and influence does not derive from the ownership of the
means of production but rather then control over the means of coercion.
Moreover, many large companies are owned by other large companies,
through pension funds, multinationals, etc. (in 1945, 93% of shares were
owned by individuals; by 1997, this had fallen to 43%). Needless to say,
if working-class people own shares that does not make them capitalists
as the dividends are **not** enough to live on nor do they give them any
say in how a company is run).

For most anarchists, there are two main classes:

Obviously there are "grey" areas in any society, individuals and groups
who do not fit exactly into either the working or ruling class. Such
people include those who work but have some control over other people,
e.g. power of hire/fire. These are the people who make the minor,
day-to-day decisions concerning the running of capital or state. This
area includes lower to middle management, professionals, and small
capitalists.

There is some argument within the anarchist movement whether this "grey"
area constitutes another ("middle") class or not. Most anarchists say
no, most of this "grey" area are working class, others (such as the
British **Class War Federation**) argue it is a different class. One
thing is sure, all anarchists agree that most people in this "grey" area
have an interest in getting rid of the current system just as much as
the working class (we should point out here that what is usually called
"middle class" in the USA and elsewhere is nothing of the kind, and
usually refers to working class people with decent jobs, homes, etc. As
class is considered a rude word in polite society in the USA, such
mystification is to be expected).

So, there will be exceptions to this classification scheme. However,
most of society share common interests, as they face the economic
uncertainties and hierarchical nature of capitalism.

We do not aim to fit all of reality into this class scheme, but only to
develop it as reality indicates, based on our own experiences of the
changing patterns of modern society. Nor is this scheme intended to
suggest that all members of a class have identical interests or that
competition does not exist between members of the same class, as it does
between the classes. Capitalism, by its very nature, is a competitive
system. As Malatesta pointed out, *"one must bear in mind that on the
one hand the bourgeoisie (the property owners) are always at war amongst
themselves. . . and that on the other hand the government, though
springing from the bourgeoisie and its servant and protector, tends, as
every servant and every protector, to achieve its own emancipation and
to dominate whoever it protects. Thus the game of the swings, the
manoeuvres, the concessions and the withdrawals, the attempts to find
allies among the people and against the conservatives, and among
conservatives against the people, which is the science of the governors,
and which blinds the ingenuous and phlegmatic who always wait for
salvation to come down to them from above."* [**Anarchy**, p. 25]

However, no matter how much inter-elite rivalry goes on, at the
slightest threat to the system from which they benefit, the ruling class
will unite to defend their common interests. Once the threat passes,
they will return to competing among themselves for power, market share
and wealth. Unfortunately, the working class rarely unites as a class,
mainly due to its chronic economic and social position. At best, certain
sections unite and experience the benefits and pleasure of co-operation.
Anarchists, by their ideas and action try to change this situation and
encourage solidarity within the working class in order to resist, and
ultimately get rid of, capitalism. However, their activity is helped by
the fact that those in struggle often realise that *"solidarity is
strength"* and so start to work together and unite their struggles
against their common enemy. Indeed, history is full of such
developments.

B.7.1 But do classes actually exist?
------------------------------------

So do classes actually exist, or are anarchists making them up? The fact
that we even need to consider this question points to the pervasive
propaganda efforts by the ruling class to suppress class consciousness,
which will be discussed further on. First, however, let's examine some
statistics, taking the USA as an example. We have done so because the
state has the reputation of being a land of opportunity and capitalism.
Moreover, class is seldom talked about there (although its business
class is **very** class conscious). Moreover, when countries have
followed the US model of freer capitalism (for example, the UK), a
similar explosion of inequality develops along side increased poverty
rates and concentration of wealth into fewer and fewer hands.

There are two ways of looking into class, by income and by wealth. Of
the two, the distribution of wealth is the most important to
understanding the class structure as this represents your assets, what
you own rather than what you earn in a year. Given that wealth is the
source of income, this represents the impact and power of private
property and the class system it represents. After all, while all
employed workers have an income (i.e. a wage), their actual wealth
usually amounts to their personal items and their house (if they are
lucky). As such, their wealth generates little or no income, unlike the
owners of resources like companies, land and patents. Unsurprisingly,
wealth insulates its holders from personal economic crises, like
unemployment and sickness, as well as gives its holders social and
political power. It, and its perks, can also be passed down the
generations. Equally unsurprisingly, the distribution of wealth is much
more unequal than the distribution of income.

At the start of the 1990s, the share of total US income was as follows:
one third went to the top 10% of the population, the next 30% gets
another third and the bottom 60% gets the last third. Dividing the
wealth into thirds, we find that the top 1% owns a third, the next 9%
owns a third, and bottom 90% owns the rest. [David Schweickart, **After
Capitalism**, p. 92] Over the 1990s, the inequalities in US society have
continued to increase. In 1980, the richest fifth of Americans had
incomes about ten times those of the poorest fifth. A decade later, they
has twelve times. By 2001, they had incomes over fourteen times greater.
[Doug Henwood, **After the New Economy**, p. 79] Looking at the figures
for private family wealth, we find that in 1976 the wealthiest one
percent of Americans owned 19% of it, the next 9% owned 30% and the
bottom 90% of the population owned 51%. By 1995 the top 1% owned 40%,
more than owned by the bottom 92% of the US population combined -- the
next 9% had 31% while the bottom 90% had only 29% of total (see Edward
N. Wolff, **Top Heavy: A Study of Increasing Inequality in America** for
details).

So in terms of wealth ownership, we see a system in which a very small
minority own the means of life. In 1992 the richest 1% of households --
about 2 million adults -- owned 39% of the stock owned by individuals.
The top 10%, owned over 81%. In other words, the bottom 90% of the
population had a smaller share (23%) of investable capital of all kinds
than the richest 1/2% (29%). Stock ownership was even more densely
concentrated, with the richest 5% holding 95% of all shares. [Doug
Henwood, **Wall Street: Class racket**] Three years later, *"the richest
1% of households . . . owned 42% of the stock owned by individuals, and
56% of the bonds . . . the top 10% together owned nearly 90% of both."*
Given that around 50% of all corporate stock is owned by households,
this means that 1% of the population *"owns a quarter of the productive
capital and future profits of corporate America; the top 10% nearly
half."* [Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, pp. 66-7] Unsurprisingly, the
Congressional Budget Office estimates that more than half of corporate
profits ultimately accrue to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers,
while only about 8 percent go to the bottom 60 percent.

Henwood summarises the situation by noting that *"the richest tenth of
the population has a bit over three-quarters of all the wealth in this
society, and the bottom half has almost none -- but it has lots of
debt."* Most middle-income people have most of their (limited) wealth in
their homes and if we look at non-residential wealth we find a *"very,
very concentrated"* situation. The *"bottom half of the population
claimed about 20% of all income in 2001 -- but only 2% of
non-residential wealth. The richest 5% of the population claimed about
23% of income, a bit more than the entire bottom half. But it owned
almost two-thirds -- 65% -- of the wealth."* [**After the New Economy**,
p. 122]

In terms of income, the period since 1970 has also been marked by
increasing inequalities and concentration:

> *"According to estimates by the economists Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel
> Saez -- confirmed by data from the Congressional Budget Office --
> between 1973 and 2000 the average real income of the bottom 90 percent
> of American taxpayers actually fell by 7 percent. Meanwhile, the
> income of the top 1 percent rose by 148 percent, the income of the top
> 0.1 percent rose by 343 percent and the income of the top 0.01 percent
> rose 599 percent."* [Paul Krugman, *"The Death of Horatio Alger"*,
> **The Nation**, January 5, 2004]

Doug Henwood provides some more details on income [**Op. Cit.**, p. 90]:

**Changes in income, 1977-1999**

real income growth \
 1977-99

Share of total income

1977

1999

Change

poorest 20%

-9%

5.7%

4.2%

-1.5%

second 20%

+1

11.5

9.7

-1.8

middle 20%

+8

16.4

14.7

-1.7

fourth 20%

+14

22.8

21.3

-1.5

top 20%

+43

44.2

50.4

+6.2

top 1%

+115

7.3

12.9

+5.6

By far the biggest gainers from the wealth concentration since the 1980s
have been the super-rich. The closer you get to the top, the bigger the
gains. In other words, it is not simply that the top 20 percent of
families have had bigger percentage gains than the rest. Rather, the top
5 percent have done better than the next 15, the top 1 percent better
than the next 4 per cent, and so on.

As such, if someone argues that while the share of national income going
to the top 10 percent of earners has increased that it does not matter
because anyone with an income over \$81,000 is in that top 10 percent
they are missing the point. The lower end of the top ten per cent were
not the big winners over the last 30 years. Most of the gains in the
share in that top ten percent went to the top 1 percent (who earn at
least \$230,000). Of these gains, 60 percent went to the top 0.1 percent
(who earn more than \$790,000). And of these gains, almost half went to
the top 0.01 percent (a mere 13,000 people who had an income of at least
\$3.6 million and an average income of \$17 million). [Paul Krugman,
*"For Richer"*, **New York Times**, 20/10/02]

All this proves that classes do in fact exist, with wealth and power
concentrating at the top of society, in the hands of the few.

To put this inequality of income into some perspective, the average
full-time Wal-Mart employee was paid only about \$17,000 a year in 2004.
Benefits are few, with less than half the company's workers covered by
its health care plan. In the same year Wal-Mart's chief executive, Scott
Lee Jr., was paid \$17.5 million. In other words, every two weeks he was
paid about as much as his average employee would earn after a lifetime
working for him.

Since the 1970s, most Americans have had only modest salary increases
(if that). The average annual salary in America, expressed in 1998
dollars (i.e., adjusted for inflation) went from \$32,522 in 1970 to
\$35,864 in 1999. That is a mere 10 percent increase over nearly 30
years. Over the same period, however, according to Fortune magazine, the
average real annual compensation of the top 100 C.E.O.'s went from \$1.3
million -- 39 times the pay of an average worker -- to \$37.5 million,
more than 1,000 times the pay of ordinary workers.

Yet even here, we are likely to miss the real picture. The average
salary is misleading as this does not reflect the distribution of
wealth. For example, in the UK in the early 1990s, two-thirds of workers
earned the average wage or below and only a third above. To talk about
the "average" income, therefore, is to disguise remarkable variation. In
the US, adjusting for inflation, average family income -- total income
divided by the number of families -- grew 28% between 1979 and 1997. The
median family income -- the income of a family in the middle (i.e. the
income where half of families earn more and half less) grew by only 10%.
The median is a better indicator of how typical American families are
doing as the distribution of income is so top heavy in the USA (i.e. the
average income is considerably higher than the median). It should also
be noted that the incomes of the bottom fifth of families actually fell
slightly. In other words, the benefits of economic growth over nearly
two decades have **not** trickled down to ordinary families. Median
family income has risen only about 0.5% per year. Even worse, *"just
about all of that increase was due to wives working longer hours, with
little or no gain in real wages."* [Paul Krugman, *"For Richer"*, **Op.
Cit.**]

So if America does have higher average or per capita income than other
advanced countries, it is simply because the rich are richer. This means
that a high average income level can be misleading if a large amount of
national income is concentrated in relatively few hands. This means that
large numbers of Americans are worse off economically than their
counterparts in other advanced countries. Thus Europeans have, in
general, shorter working weeks and longer holidays than Americans. They
may have a lower average income than the United States but they do not
have the same inequalities. This means that the median European family
has a standard of living roughly comparable with that of the median U.S.
family -- wages may even be higher.

As Doug Henwood notes, *"[i]nternational measures put the United States
in a disgraceful light. . . The soundbite version of the LIS [Luxembourg
Income Study] data is this: for a country th[at] rich, [it] ha[s] a lot
of poor people."* Henwood looked at both relative and absolute measures
of income and poverty using the cross-border comparisons of income
distribution provided by the LIS and discovered that *"[f]or a country
that thinks itself universally middle class [i.e. middle income], the
United States has the second-smallest middle class of the nineteen
countries for which good LIS data exists."* Only Russia, a country in
near-total collapse was worse (40.9% of the population were middle
income compared to 46.2% in the USA. Households were classed as poor if
their incomes were under 50 percent of the national medium; near-poor,
between 50 and 62.5 percent; middle, between 62.5 and 150 percent; and
well-to-do, over 150 percent. The USA rates for poor (19.1%), near-poor
(8.1%) and middle (46.2%) were worse than European countries like
Germany (11.1%, 6.5% and 64%), France (13%, 7.2% and 60.4%) and Belgium
(5.5%, 8.0% and 72.4%) as well as Canada (11.6%, 8.2% and 60%) and
Australia (14.8%, 10% and 52.5%).

The reasons for this? Henwood states that the *"reasons are clear --
weak unions and a weak welfare state. The social-democratic states --
the ones that interfere most with market incomes -- have the largest
[middles classes]. The US poverty rate is nearly twice the average of
the other eighteen."* Needless to say, "middle class" as defined by
income is a very blunt term (as Henwood states). It says nothing about
property ownership or social power, for example, but income is often
taken in the capitalist press as the defining aspect of "class" and so
is useful to analyse in order to refute the claims that the free-market
promotes general well-being (i.e. a larger "middle class"). That the
most free-market nation has the worse poverty rates **and** the smallest
"middle class" indicates well the anarchist claim that capitalism, left
to its own devices, will benefit the strong (the ruling class) over the
weak (the working class) via "free exchanges" on the "free" market (as
we argue in [section C.7](secC7.html), only during periods of full
employment -- and/or wide scale working class solidarity and militancy
-- does the balance of forces change in favour of working class people.
Little wonder, then, that periods of full employment also see falling
inequality -- see James K. Galbraith's **Created Unequal** for more
details on the correlation of unemployment and inequality).

Of course, it could be objected that this relative measure of poverty
and income ignores the fact that US incomes are among the highest in the
world, meaning that the US poor may be pretty well off by foreign
standards. Henwood refutes this claim, noting that *"even on absolute
measures, the US performance is embarrassing. LIS researcher Lane
Kenworthy estimated poverty rates for fifteen countries using the US
poverty line as the benchmark. . . Though the United States has the
highest average income, it's far from having the lowest poverty rate."*
Only Italy, Britain and Australia had higher levels of absolute poverty
(and Australia exceeded the US value by 0.2%, 11.9% compared to 11.7%).
Thus, in both absolute **and** relative terms, the USA compares badly
with European countries. [Doug Henwood, *"Booming, Borrowing, and
Consuming: The US Economy in 1999"*, pp.120-33, **Monthly Review**, vol.
51, no. 3, pp. 129-31]

In summary, therefore, taking the USA as being the most capitalist
nation in the developed world, we discover a class system in which a
very small minority own the bulk of the means of life and get most of
the income. Compared to other Western countries, the class inequalities
are greater and the society is more polarised. Moreover, over the last
20-30 years those inequalities have increased spectacularly. The ruling
elite have become richer and wealth has flooded upwards rather than
trickled down.

The cause of the increase in wealth and income polarisation is not hard
to find. It is due to the increased economic and political power of the
capitalist class and the weakened position of working class people. As
anarchists have long argued, any "free contract" between the powerful
and the powerless will benefit the former far more than the latter. This
means that if the working class's economic and social power is weakened
then we will be in a bad position to retain a given share of the wealth
we produce but is owned by our bosses and accumulates in the hands of
the few.

Unsurprisingly, therefore, there has been an increase in the share of
total income going to capital (i.e., interest, dividends, and rent) and
a decrease in the amount going to labour (wages, salaries, and
benefits). Moreover, an increasing part of the share to labour is
accruing to high-level management (in electronics, for example, top
executives used to paid themselves 42 times the average worker in 1991,
a mere 5 years later it was 220 times as much).

Since the start of the 1980s, unemployment and globalisation has
weakened the economic and social power of the working class. Due to the
decline in the unions and general labour militancy, wages at the bottom
have stagnated (real pay for most US workers is lower in 2005 than it
was in 1973!). This, combined with "trickle-down" economic policies of
tax cuts for the wealthy, tax raises for the working classes, the
maintaining of a "natural" law of unemployment (which weakens unions and
workers power) and cutbacks in social programs, has seriously eroded
living standards for all but the upper strata -- a process that is
clearly leading toward social breakdown, with effects that will be
discussed later (see [section D.9](secD9.html)).

Little wonder Proudhon argued that the law of supply and demand was a
*"deceitful law . . . suitable only for assuring the victory of the
strong over the weak, of those who own property over those who own
nothing."* [quoted by Alan Ritter, **The Political Thought of
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 121]

B.7.2 Does social mobility make up for class inequality?
--------------------------------------------------------

Faced with the massive differences between classes under capitalism we
highlighted in the [last section](secB7.html#secb71), many supporters of
capitalism still deny the obvious. They do so by confusing a **caste**
system with a **class** system. In a caste system, those born into it
stay in it all their lives. In a class system, the membership of classes
can and does change over time.

Therefore, it is claimed, what is important is not the existence of
classes but of social mobility (usually reflected in income mobility).
According to this argument, if there is a high level of social/income
mobility then the degree of inequality in any given year is unimportant.
This is because the redistribution of income over a person's life time
would be very even. Thus the inequalities of income and wealth of
capitalism does not matter as capitalism has high social mobility.

Milton Friedman puts the argument in this way:

> *"Consider two societies that have the same distribution of annual
> income. In one there is a great mobility and change so that the
> position of particular families in the income hierarchy varies widely
> from year to year. In the other, there is great rigidity so that each
> family stays in the same position. Clearly, in any meaningful sense,
> the second would be the more unequal society. The one kind of
> inequality is a sign of dynamic change, social mobility, equality of
> opportunity; the other of a status society. The confusion behind these
> two kinds of inequality is particularly important, precisely because
> competitive free-enterprise capitalism tends to substitute the one for
> the other."* [**Capitalism and Freedom**, p. 171]

As with so many things, Friedman is wrong in his assertion (and that is
all it is, no evidence is provided). The more free market capitalist
regimes have **less** social mobility than those, like Western Europe,
which have extensive social intervention in the economy. As an added
irony, the facts suggest that implementing Friedman's suggested policies
in favour of his beloved "competitive free-enterprise capitalism" has
made social mobility less, not greater. In effect, as with so many
things, Friedman ensured the refutation of his own dogmas.

Taking the USA as an example (usually considered one of the most
capitalist countries in the world) there is income mobility, but not
enough to make income inequality irrelevant. Census data show that 81.6
percent of those families who were in the bottom quintile of the income
distribution in 1985 were still there in the next year; for the top
quintile, it was 76.3 percent.

Over longer time periods, there is more mixing but still not that much
and those who do slip into different quintiles are typically at the
borders of their category (e.g. those dropping out of the top quintile
are typically at the bottom of that group). Only around 5% of families
rise from bottom to top, or fall from top to bottom. In other words, the
class structure of a modern capitalist society is pretty solid and
*"much of the movement up and down represents fluctuations around a
fairly fixed long term distribution."* [Paul Krugman, **Peddling
Prosperity**, p. 143]

Perhaps under a "pure" capitalist system things would be different?
Ronald Reagan helped make capitalism more "free market" in the 1980s,
but there is no indication that income mobility increased significantly
during that time. In fact, according to one study by Greg Duncan of the
University of Michigan, the middle class shrank during the 1980s, with
fewer poor families moving up or rich families moving down. Duncan
compared two periods. During the first period (1975 to 1980) incomes
were more equal than they are today. In the second (1981 to 1985) income
inequality began soaring. In this period there was a reduction in income
mobility upward from low to medium incomes of over 10%.

Here are the exact figures [cited by Paul Krugman, *"The Rich, the
Right, and the Facts,"* **The American Prospect** no. 11, Fall 1992, pp.
19-31]:

**Percentages of families making transitions to and from middle class
(5-year period before and after 1980)**

  Transition                     Before 1980   After 1980
  ------------------------------ ------------- ------------
  Middle income to low income    8.5           9.8
  Middle income to high income   5.8           6.8
  Low income to middle income    35.1          24.6
  High income to middle income   30.8          27.6

Writing in 2004, Krugman returned to this subject. The intervening
twelve years had made things worse. America, he notes, is *"more of a
caste society than we like to think. And the caste lines have lately
become a lot more rigid."* Before the rise of neo-liberalism in the
1980s, America had more intergenerational mobility. *"A classic 1978
survey found that among adult men whose fathers were in the bottom 25
percent of the population as ranked by social and economic status, 23
percent had made it into the top 25 percent. In other words, during the
first thirty years or so after World War II, the American dream of
upward mobility was a real experience for many people."* However, a new
survey of today's adult men *"finds that this number has dropped to only
10 percent. That is, over the past generation upward mobility has fallen
drastically. Very few children of the lower class are making their way
to even moderate affluence. This goes along with other studies
indicating that rags-to-riches stories have become vanishingly rare, and
that the correlation between fathers' and sons' incomes has risen in
recent decades. In modern America, it seems, you're quite likely to stay
in the social and economic class into which you were born."* [Paul
Krugman, *"The Death of Horatio Alger"*, **The Nation**, January 5,
2004]

British Keynesian economist Will Hutton quotes US data from 2000-1 which
*"compare[s] the mobility of workers in America with the four biggest
European economies and three Nordic economies."* The US *"has the lowest
share of workers moving from the bottom fifth of workers into the second
fifth, the lowest share moving into the top 60 per cent and the highest
share unable to sustain full-time employment."* He cites an OECD study
which *"confirms the poor rates of relative upward mobility for very
low-paid American workers; it also found that full-time workers in
Britain, Italy and Germany enjoy much more rapid growth in their
earnings than those in the US . . . However, downward mobility was more
marked in the US; American workers are more likely to suffer a reduction
in their real earnings than workers in Europe."* Thus even the OECD (the
*"high priest of deregulation"*) was *"forced to conclude that countries
with more deregulated labour and product markets (pre-eminently the US)
do not appear to have higher relative mobility, nor do low-paid workers
in these economies experience more upward mobility. The OECD is pulling
its punches. The US experience is worse than Europe's."* Numerous
studies have shown that *"either there is no difference"* in income
mobility between the USA and Europe *"or that there is less mobility in
the US."* [**The World We're In**, pp. 166-7]

Little wonder, then, that Doug Henwood argues that *"the final appeal of
apologists of the American way is an appeal to our legendary mobility"*
fails. In fact, *"people generally don't move far from the income class
they are born into, and there is little difference between US and
European mobility patterns. In fact, the United States has the largest
share of what the OECD called 'low-wage' workers, and the poorest
performance on the emergence from the wage cellar of any country it
studied."*[**Op. Cit.**, p. 130]

Indeed, *"both the US and British poor were more likely to stay poor for
a long period of time: almost half of all people who were poor for one
year stayed poor for five or more years, compared with 30% in Canada and
36% in Germany. And, despite claims of great upward mobility in the US,
45% of the poor rose out of poverty in a given year, compared with 45%
in the UK, 53% in Germany, and 56% in Canada. And of those who did exit
poverty, 15% of Americans were likely to make a round trip back under
the poverty line, compared with 16% in Germany, 10% in the UK, and 7% in
Canada."* [Doug Henwood, **After the New Economy**, pp. 136-7]

A 2005 study of income mobility by researchers at the London School of
Economics (on behalf of the educational charity the Sutton Trust)
confirms that the more free market a country, the worse is its levels of
social mobility. [Jo Blanden, Paul Gregg and Stephen Machin,
**Intergenerational Mobility in Europe and North America**, April, 2005]
They found that Britain has one of the worst records for social mobility
in the developed world, beaten only by the USA out of eight European and
North American countries. Norway was the best followed by Denmark,
Sweden, Finland, Germany and Canada.

This means that children born to poor families in Britain and the USA
are less likely to fulfil their full potential than in other countries
and are less likely to break free of their backgrounds than in the past.
In other words, we find it harder to earn more money and get better jobs
than our parents. Moreover, not only is social mobility in Britain much
lower than in other advanced countries, it is actually declining and has
fallen markedly over time. The findings were based on studies of two
groups of children, one set born in the 1950s and the other in the
1970s. In the UK, while 17 per cent of the former made it from the
bottom quarter income group to the top, only 11 per cent of the latter
did so. Mobility in the Nordic countries was twice that of the UK. While
only the US did worse than the UK in social mobility

The puzzle of why, given that there is no evidence of American
exceptionalism or higher social mobility, the myth persists has an easy
solution. It has utility for the ruling class in maintaining the system.
By promoting the myth that people can find the path to the top easy then
the institutions of power will not be questioned, just the moral
character of the many who do not.

Needless to say, income mobility does not tell the whole story.
Increases in income do not automatically reflect changes in class, far
from it. A better paid worker is still working class and, consequently,
still subject to oppression and exploitation during working hours. As
such, income mobility, while important, does not address inequalities in
power. Similarly, income mobility does not make up for a class system
and its resulting authoritarian social relationships and inequalities in
terms of liberty, health and social influence. And the facts suggest
that the capitalist dogma of "meritocracy" that attempts to justify this
system has little basis in reality. Capitalism is a class ridden system
and while there is some changes in the make-up of each class they are
remarkably fixed, particularly once you get to the top 5-10% of the
population (i.e. the ruling class).

Logically, this is not surprising. There is no reason to think that more
unequal societies should be more mobile. The greater the inequality, the
more economic power those at the top will have and, consequently, the
harder it will be those at the bottom to climb upwards. To suggest
otherwise is to argue that it is easier to climb a mountain than a hill!
Unsurprisingly the facts support the common sense analysis that the
higher the inequality of incomes and wealth, the lower the equality of
opportunity and, consequently, the lower the social mobility.

Finally, we should point out even if income mobility was higher it does
not cancel out the fact that a class system is marked by differences in
**power** which accompany the differences in income. In other words,
because it is possible (in theory) for everyone to become a boss this
does not make the power and authority that bosses have over their
workers (or the impact of their wealth on society) any more legitimate
(just because everyone -- in theory -- can become a member of the
government does not make government any less authoritarian). Because the
membership of the boss class can change does not negate the fact that
such a class exists.

Ultimately, using (usually highly inflated) notions of social mobility
to defend a class system is unconvincing. After all, in most slave
societies slaves could buy their freedom and free people could sell
themselves into slavery (to pay off debts). If someone tried to defend
slavery with the reference to this fact of social mobility they would be
dismissed as mad. The evil of slavery is not mitigated by the fact that
a few slaves could stop being slaves if they worked hard enough.

B.7.3 Why is the existence of classes denied?
---------------------------------------------

It is clear, then, that classes do exist, and equally clear that
individuals can rise and fall within the class structure -- though, of
course, it's easier to become rich if you're born in a rich family than
a poor one. Thus James W. Loewen reports that *"ninety-five percent of
the executives and financiers in America around the turn of the century
came from upper-class or upper-middle-class backgrounds. Fewer than 3
percent started as poor immigrants or farm children. Throughout the
nineteenth century, just 2 percent of American industrialists came from
working-class origins"* [in *"Lies My Teacher Told Me"* citing William
Miller, *"American Historians and the Business Elite,"* in **Men in
Business**, pp. 326-28; cf. David Montgomery, **Beyond Equality**, pg.
15] And this was at the height of USA "free market" capitalism.
According to a survey done by C. Wright Mills and reported in his book
**The Power Elite**, about 65% of the highest-earning CEOs in American
corporations come from wealthy families. Meritocracy, after all, does
not imply a "classless" society, only that some mobility exists between
classes. Yet we continually hear that class is an outmoded concept; that
classes don't exist any more, just atomised individuals who all enjoy
"equal opportunity," "equality before the law," and so forth. So what's
going on?

The fact that the capitalist media are the biggest promoters of the
"end-of-class" idea should make us wonder exactly **why** they do it.
Whose interest is being served by denying the existence of classes?
Clearly it is those who run the class system, who gain the most from it,
who want everyone to think we are all "equal." Those who control the
major media don't want the idea of class to spread because they
themselves are members of the ruling class, with all the privileges that
implies. Hence they use the media as propaganda organs to mould public
opinion and distract the middle and working classes from the crucial
issue, i.e., their own subordinate status. This is why the mainstream
news sources give us nothing but superficial analyses, biased and
selective reporting, outright lies, and an endless barrage of yellow
journalism, titillation, and "entertainment," rather than talking about
the class nature of capitalist society (see section D.3 -- ["How does
wealth influence the mass media?"](secD3.html))

The universities, think tanks, and private research foundations are also
important propaganda tools of the ruling class. This is why it is
virtually taboo in mainstream academic circles to suggest that anything
like a ruling class even exists in the United States. Students are
instead indoctrinated with the myth of a "pluralist" and "democratic"
society -- a Never-Never Land where all laws and public policies
supposedly get determined only by the amount of "public support" they
have -- certainly not by any small faction wielding power in
disproportion to its size.

To deny the existence of class is a powerful tool in the hands of the
powerful. As Alexander Berkman points out, *"[o]ur social institutions
are founded on certain ideas; so long as the latter are generally
believed, the institutions built on them are safe. Government remains
strong because people think political authority and legal compulsion
necessary. Capitalism will continue as long as such an economic system
is considered adequate and just. The weakening of the ideas which
support the evil and oppressive present day conditions means the
ultimate breakdown of government and capitalism."* [*"Author's
Foreword,"* **What is Anarchism?**, p. xii]

Unsurprisingly, to deny the existence of classes is an important means
of bolstering capitalism, to undercut social criticism of inequality and
oppression. It presents a picture of a system in which only individuals
exist, ignoring the differences between one set of people (the ruling
class) and the others (the working class) in terms of social position,
power and interests. This obviously helps those in power maintain it by
focusing analysis away from that power and its sources (wealth,
hierarchy, etc.).

It also helps maintain the class system by undermining collective
struggle. To admit class exists means to admit that working people share
common interests due to their common position in the social hierarchy.
And common interests can lead to common action to change that position.
Isolated consumers, however, are in no position to act for themselves.
One individual standing alone is easily defeated, whereas a ***union***
of individuals supporting each other is not. Throughout the history of
capitalism there have been attempts by the ruling class -- often
successful -- to destroy working class organisations. Why? Because in
union there is power -- power which can destroy the class system as well
as the state and create a new world.

That's why the very existence of class is denied by the elite. It's part
of their strategy for winning the battle of ideas and ensuring that
people remain as atomised individuals. By *"manufacturing consent"* (to
use Walter Lipman's expression for the function of the media), force
need not be used. By limiting the public's sources of information to
propaganda organs controlled by state and corporate elites, all debate
can be confined within a narrow conceptual framework of capitalist
terminology and assumptions, and anything premised on a different
conceptual framework can be marginalised. Thus the average person is
brought to accept current society as "fair" and "just," or at least as
"the best available," because no alternatives are ever allowed to be
discussed.

B.7.4 What do anarchists mean by *"class consciousness"*?
---------------------------------------------------------

Given that the existence of classes is often ignored or considered
unimportant ("boss and worker have common interests") in mainstream
culture, its important to continually point out the facts of the
situation: that a wealthy elite run the world and the vast majority are
subjected to hierarchy and work to enrich this elite. To be class
conscious means that we are aware of the objective facts and act
appropriately to change them.

This is why anarchists stress the need for ***"class consciousness,"***
for recognising that classes exist and that their interests are in
**conflict.** The reason why this is the case is obvious enough. As
Alexander Berkman argues, *"the interests of capital and labour are not
the same. No greater lie was ever invented than the so-called 'identity
of interests' [between capital and labour] . . . labour produces all the
wealth of the world . . . [and] capital is owned by the masters is
stolen property, stolen products of labour. Capitalist industry is the
process of continuing to appropriate the products of labour for the
benefit of the master class . . . It is clear that your interests as a
worker are **different** from the interests of your capitalistic
masters. More than different: they are entirely opposite; in fact,
contrary, antagonistic to each other. The better wages the boss pays
you, the less profit he makes out of you. It does not require great
philosophy to understand that."* [**What is Anarchism?**, pp. 75-6]

That classes are in conflict can be seen from the post-war period in
most developed countries. Taking the example of the USA, the immediate
post-war period (the 1950s to the 1970s) were marked by social conflict,
strikes and so forth. From the 1980s onwards, there was a period of
relative social peace because the bosses managed to inflict a series of
defeats on the working class. Workers became less militant, the trade
unions went into a period of decline and the success of capitalism
proclaimed. If the interests of both classes were the same we would
expect that all sections of society would have benefited more in the
1980s onwards than between the 1950s to 1970s. This is **not** the case.
While income grew steadily across the board between 1950 and 1980s,
since then wealth has flooded up to the top while those at the bottom
found it harder to make ends meet.

A similar process occurred in the 1920s when Alexander Berkman stated
the obvious:

> *"The masters have found a very effective way to paralyse the strength
> of organised labour. They have persuaded the workers that they have
> the same interests as the employers . . . that what is good for the
> employer is good for his employees . . . [that] the workers will not
> think of fighting their masters for better conditions, but they will
> be patient and wait till the employer can 'share his prosperity' with
> them. They will also consider the interests of 'their' country and
> they will not 'disturb industry' and the 'orderly life of the
> community' by strikes and stoppage of work. If you listen to your
> exploiters and their mouthpieces you will be 'good' and consider only
> the interests of your masters, of your city and country -- but no one
> cares about **your** interests and those of your family, the interests
> of your union and of your fellow workers of the labouring class.
> 'Don't be selfish,' they admonish you, while the boss is getting rich
> by your being good and unselfish. And they laugh in their sleeves and
> thank the Lord that you are such an idiot."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 74-5]

So, in a nutshell, class consciousness is to look after your own
interest as a member of the working class. To be aware that there is
inequality in society and that you cannot expect the wealthy and
powerful to be concerned about anyone's interest except their own. That
only by struggle can you gain respect and an increased slice of the
wealth you produce but do not own. And that there is *"an irreconcilable
antagonism"* between the ruling class and working class *"which results
inevitably from their respective stations in life."* The riches of the
former are *"based on the exploitation and subjugation of the latter's
labour"* which means *"war between"* the two *"is unavoidable."* For the
working class desires *"only equality"* while the ruling elite
*"exist[s] only through inequality."* For the latter, *"as a separate
class, equality is death"* while for the former *"the least inequality
is slavery."* [Bakunin, **The Basic Bakunin**, p. 97 and pp. 91-2]

Although class analysis may at first appear to be a novel idea, the
conflicting interests of the classes is **well** recognised on the other
side of the class divide. For example, James Madison in the **Federalist
Paper** \#10 states that *"those who hold and those who are without have
ever formed distinct interests in society."* For anarchists, class
consciousness means to recognise what the bosses already know: the
importance of solidarity with others in the same class position as
oneself and of acting together as equals to attain common goals. The
difference is that the ruling class wants to keep the class system going
while anarchists seek to end it once and for all.

It could therefore be argued that anarchists actually want an
***"anti-class"*** consciousness to develop -- that is, for people to
recognise that classes exist, to understand **why** they exist, and act
to abolish the root causes for their continued existence (*"class
consciousness,"* argues Vernon Richards, *"but not in the sense of
wanting to perpetuate classes, but the consciousness of their existence,
an understanding of why they exist, and a determination, informed by
knowledge and militancy, to abolish them."* [**The Impossibilities of
Social Democracy**, p. 133]). In short, anarchists want to eliminate
classes, not universalise the class of "wage worker" (which would
presuppose the continued existence of capitalism).

More importantly, class consciousness does not involve "worker worship."
To the contrary, as Murray Bookchin points out, *"[t]he worker begins to
become a revolutionary when he undoes his [or her] 'workerness', when he
[or she] comes to detest his class status here and now, when he begins
to shed. . . his work ethic, his character-structure derived from
industrial discipline, his respect for hierarchy, his obedience to
leaders, his consumerism, his vestiges of puritanism."* [**Post-Scarcity
Anarchism**, p. 119] For, in the end, anarchists *"cannot build until
the working class gets rid of its illusions, its acceptance of bosses
and faith in leaders."* [Marie-Louise Berneri, **Neither East Nor
West**, p. 19]

It may be objected that there are only individuals and anarchists are
trying to throw a lot of people in a box and put a label like "working
class" on them. In reply, anarchists agree, yes, there are "only"
individuals but some of them are bosses, most of them are working class.
This is an objective division within society which the ruling class does
its best to hide but which comes out during social struggle. And such
struggle is part of the process by which more and more oppressed people
subjectivity recognise the objective facts. And by more and more people
recognising the facts of capitalist reality, more and more people will
want to change them.

Currently there are working class people who want an anarchist society
and there are others who just want to climb up the hierarchy to get to a
position where they can impose their will to others. But that does not
change the fact that their current position is that they are subjected
to the authority of hierarchy and so can come into conflict with it. And
by so doing, they must practise self-activity and this struggle can
change their minds, what they think, and so they become radicalised.
This, the radicalising effects of self-activity and social struggle, is
a key factor in why anarchists are involved in it. It is an important
means of creating more anarchists and getting more and more people aware
of anarchism as a viable alternative to capitalism.

Ultimately, it does not matter what class you are, it's what you
**believe in** that matters. And what you **do.** Hence we see
anarchists like Bakunin and Kropotkin, former members of the Russian
ruling class, or like Malatesta, born into an Italian middle class
family, rejecting their backgrounds and its privileges and becoming
supporters of working class self-liberation. But anarchists base their
activity primarily on the working class (including peasants,
self-employed artisans and so on) because the working class is subject
to hierarchy and so have a real need to resist to exist. This process of
resisting the powers that be can and does have a radicalising effect on
those involved and so what they believe in and what they do **changes.**
Being subject to hierarchy, oppression and exploitation means that it is
in the working class people's *"own interest to abolish them. It has
been truly said that 'the emancipation of the workers must be
accomplished by the workers themselves,' for no social class will do it
for them . . . It is . . . **the interest** of the proletariat to
emancipate itself from bondage . . . It is only be growing to a true
realisation of their present position, by visualising their
possibilities and powers, by learning unity and co-operation, and
practising them, that the masses can attain freedom."* [Alexander
Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 187-8]

We recognise, therefore, that only those at the bottom of society have a
**self**-interest in freeing themselves from the burden of those at the
top, and so we see the importance of class consciousness in the struggle
of oppressed people for self-liberation. Thus, *"[f]ar from believing in
the messianic role of the working class, the anarchists' aim is to
**abolish** the working class in so far as this term refers to the
underprivileged majority in all existing societies. . . What we do say
is that no revolution can succeed without the active participation of
the working, producing, section of the population. . . The power of the
State, the values of authoritarian society can only be challenged and
destroyed by a greater power and new values."* [Vernon Richards, **The
Raven**, no. 14, pp. 183-4] Anarchists also argue that one of the
effects of direct action to resist oppression and exploitation of
working class people would be the **creation** of such a power and new
values, values based on respect for individual freedom and solidarity
(see sections [J.2](secJ2.html) and [J.4](secJ4.html) on direct action
and its liberating potential).

As such, class consciousness also means recognising that working class
people not only have an interest in ending its oppression but that we
also have the power to do so. *"This power, the people's power,"* notes
Berkman, *"is **actual**: it cannot be taken away, as the power of the
ruler, of the politician, or of the capitalist can be. It cannot be
taken away because it does not consist of possessions but in ability. It
is the ability to create, to produce; the power that feeds and clothes
the world, that gives us life, health and comfort, joy and pleasure."*
The power of government and capital *"disappear when the people refuse
to acknowledge them as masters, refuse to let them lord it over them."*
This is *"the all-important **economic power**"* of the working class.
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 87, p. 86 and p. 88]

This potential power of the oppressed, anarchist argue, shows that not
only are classes wasteful and harmful, but that they can be ended once
those at the bottom seek to do so and reorganise society appropriately.
This means that we have the power to transform the economic system into
a non-exploitative and classless one as *"only a productive class may be
libertarian in nature, because it does not need to exploit."* [Albert
Meltzer, **Anarchism: Arguments For and Against**, p. 23]

Finally, it is important to stress that anarchists think that class
consciousness **must** also mean to be aware of **all** forms of
hierarchical power, not just economic oppression. As such, class
consciousness and class conflict is not simply about inequalities of
wealth or income but rather questioning all forms of domination,
oppression and exploitation.

For anarchists, *"[t]he class struggle does not centre around material
exploitation alone but also around spiritual exploitation, . . . [as
well as] psychological and environmental oppression."* [Bookchin, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 151] This means that we do not consider economic oppression
to be the only important thing, ignoring struggles and forms of
oppression outside the workplace. To the contrary, workers are human
beings, not the economically driven robots of capitalist and Leninist
mythology. They are concerned about everything that affects them --
their parents, their children, their friends, their neighbours, their
planet and, very often, total strangers.
