B.2 Why are anarchists against the state?
=========================================

As previously noted (see [section B.1](secB1.html)), anarchists oppose
all forms of hierarchical authority. Historically, however, they have
spent most of their time and energy opposing two main forms in
particular. One is capitalism, the other, the state. These two forms of
authority have a symbiotic relationship and cannot be easily separated:

> "[T]he State . . . and Capitalism are facts and conceptions which we
> cannot separate from each other. In the course of history these
> institutions have developed, supporting and reinforcing each other.
> "They are connected with each other -- not as mere accidental
> co-incidences. They are linked together by the links of cause and
> effect." [Kropotkin, **Evolution and Environment**, p. 94]

In this section, in consequence, as well as explaining why anarchists
oppose the state, we will necessarily have to analyse the relationship
between it and capitalism.

So what is the state? As Malatesta put it, anarchists *"have used the
word State, and still do, to mean the sum total of the political,
legislative, judiciary, military and financial institutions through
which the management of their own affairs, the control over their
personal behaviour, the responsibility for their personal safety, are
taken away from the people and entrusted to others who, by usurpation or
delegation, are vested with the power to make laws for everything and
everybody, and to oblige the people to observe them, if need be, by the
use of collective force."* [**Anarchy**, p. 17]

He continues:

> *"For us, government [or the state] is made up of all the governors;
> and the governors . . . are those who have the power to make **laws**
> regulating inter-human relations and to see that they are carried out
> . . . [and] who have the power, to a greater or lesser degree, to make
> use of the social power, that is of the physical, intellectual and
> economic power of the whole community, in order to oblige everybody to
> carry out their wishes. And this power, in our opinion, constitutes
> the principle of government, of authority."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 19]

Kropotkin presented a similar analysis, arguing that the state *"not
only includes the existence of a power situated above society, but also
of a **territorial concentration** as well as the concentration **in the
hands of a few of many functions in the life of societies** . . . A
whole mechanism of legislation and of policing has to be developed in
order to subject some classes to the domination of others."* [**The
State: Its Historic Role**, p. 10] For Bakunin, all states *"are in
essence only machines governing the masses from above, through . . . a
privileged minority, allegedly knowing the genuine interests of the
people better than the people themselves."* [**The Political Philosophy
of Bakunin**, p. 211] On this subject Murray Bookchin writes:

> *"Minimally, the State is a professional system of social coercion --
> not merely a system of social administration as it is still naively
> regarded by the public and by many political theorists. The word
> 'professional' should be emphasised as much as the word 'coercion.' .
> . . It is only when coercion is institutionalised into a professional,
> systematic and organised form of social control -- that is, when
> people are plucked out of their everyday lives in a community and
> expected not only to 'administer' it but to do so with the backing of
> a monopoly of violence -- that we can properly speak of a State."*
> [**Remaking Society**, p. 66]

As Bookchin indicates, anarchists reject the idea that the state is the
same as society or that **any** grouping of human beings living and
organised together is a state. This confusion, as Kropotkin notes,
explains why *"anarchists are generally upbraided for wanting to
'destroy society' and of advocating a return to 'the permanent war of
each against all.'"* Such a position *"overlook[s] the fact that Man
lived in Societies for thousands of years before the State had been
heard of"* and that, consequently, the State *"is only one of the forms
assumed by society in the course of history."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 10]

The state, therefore, is not just federations of individuals or peoples
and so, as Malatesta stressed, cannot be used to describe a *"human
collectively gathered together in a particular territory and making up
what is called a social unit irrespective of the way the way said
collectivity are grouped or the state of relations between them."* It
cannot be *"used simply as a synonym for society."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
17] The state is a particular form of social organisation based on
certain key attributes and so, we argue, *"the word 'State' . . . should
be reserved for those societies with the hierarchical system and
centralisation."* [Peter Kropotkin, **Ethics**, p. 317f] As such, the
state *"is a historic, transitory institution, a temporary form of
society"* and one whose *"utter extinction"* is possible as the *"State
is not society."* [Bakunin, **Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p.
151]

In summary, the state is a specific way in which human affairs are
organised in a given area, a way marked by certain institutions which,
in turn, have certain characteristics. This does not imply, however,
that the state is a monolithic entity that has been the same from its
birth to the present day. States vary in many ways, especially in their
degree of authoritarianism, in the size and power of their bureaucracy
and how they organise themselves. Thus we have monarchies, oligarchies,
theocracies, party dictatorships and (more or less) democratic states.
We have ancient states, with minimal bureaucracy, and modern ones, with
enormous bureaucracy.

Moreover, anarchists argue that *"the **political** regime . . . is
always an expression of the **economic** regime which exists at the
heart of society."* This means that regardless of how the state changes,
it *"continues to be shaped by the economic system, of which it is
always the expression and, at the same time, the consecration and the
sustaining force."* Needless to say, there is not always an exact match
and sometimes *"the political regime of a country finds itself lagging
behind the economic changes that are taking place, and in that case it
will abruptly be set aside and remodelled in a way appropriate to the
economic regime that has been established."* [Kropotkin, **Words of a
Rebel**, p. 118]

At other times, the state can change its form to protect the economic
system it is an expression of. Thus we see democracies turn to
dictatorships in the face of popular revolts and movements. The most
obvious examples of Pinochet's Chile, Franco's Spain, Mussolini's Italy
and Hitler's Germany are all striking confirmations of Bakunin's comment
that while *"[n]o government could serve the economic interests of the
bourgeoisie better than a republic,"* that class would *"prefer . . .
military dictatorship"* if needed to crush *"the revolts of the
proletariat."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 417]

However, as much as the state may change its form it still has certain
characteristics which identify a social institution as a state. As such,
we can say that, for anarchists, the state is marked by three things:

Of these three aspects, the last one (its centralised, hierarchical
nature) is the most important simply because the concentration of power
into the hands of the few ensures a division of society into government
and governed (which necessitates the creation of a professional body to
enforce that division). Hence we find Bakunin arguing that *"[w]ith the
State there must go also . . . all organisation of social life from the
top downward, via legislation and government."* [**The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 242] In other words, *"the people was not
governing itself."* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 120]

This aspect implies the rest. In a state, all the people residing in an
area are subject to the state, submitting themselves to the individuals
who make up the institution of authority ruling that territory. To
enforce the will of this few, they must have a monopoly of force within
the territory. As the members of the state collectively monopolise
political decision making power, they are a privileged body separated by
its position and status from the rest of the population as a whole which
means they cannot rely on them to enforce its will. This necessities a
professional body of some kind to enforce their decisions, a separate
police force or army rather than the people armed.

Given this, the division of society into rulers and ruled is the key to
what constitutes a state. Without such a division, we would not need a
monopoly of violence and so would simply have an association of equals,
unmarked by power and hierarchy (such as exists in many stateless
"primitive" tribes and will exist in a future anarchist society). And,
it must be stressed, such a division exists even in democratic states as
*"with the state there is always a hierarchical and status difference
between rulers and ruled. Even if it is a democracy, where we suppose
those who rule today are not rulers tomorrow, there are still
differences in status. In a democratic system, only a tiny minority will
ever have the opportunity to rule and these are invariably drawn from
the elite."* [Harold Barclay, **The State**, pp. 23-4]

Thus, the *"essence of government"* is that *"it is a thing apart,
developing its own interests"* and so is *"an institution existing for
its own sake, preying upon the people, and teaching them whatever will
tend to keep it secure in its seat."* [Voltairine de Cleyre, **The
Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**, p. 27 and p. 26] And so *"despotism
resides not so much in the **form** of the State or power as in the very
**principle** of the State and political power."* [Bakunin, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 211]

As the state is the delegation of power into the hands of the few, it is
obviously based on hierarchy. This delegation of power results in the
elected people becoming isolated from the mass of people who elected
them and outside of their control (see [section
B.2.4](secB2.html#secb24)). In addition, as those elected are given
power over a host of different issues and told to decide upon them, a
bureaucracy soon develops around them to aid in their decision-making
and enforce those decisions once they have been reached. However, this
bureaucracy, due to its control of information and its permanency, soon
has more power than the elected officials. Therefore *"a highly complex
state machine . . . leads to the formation of a class especially
concerned with state management, which, using its acquired experience,
begins to deceive the rest for its personal advantage."* [Kropotkin,
**Selected Writings on Anarchism and Revolution**, p. 61] This means
that those who serve the people's (so-called) servant have more power
than those they serve, just as the politician has more power than those
who elected him. All forms of state-like (i.e. hierarchical)
organisations inevitably spawn a bureaucracy about them. This
bureaucracy soon becomes the de facto focal point of power in the
structure, regardless of the official rules.

This marginalisation and disempowerment of ordinary people (and so the
empowerment of a bureaucracy) is the key reason for anarchist opposition
to the state. Such an arrangement ensures that the individual is
disempowered, subject to bureaucratic, authoritarian rule which reduces
the person to an object or a number, **not** a unique individual with
hopes, dreams, thoughts and feelings. As Proudhon forcefully argued:

> *"To be GOVERNED is to be kept in sight, inspected, spied upon,
> directed, law-driven, numbered, enrolled, indoctrinated, preached at,
> controlled, estimated, valued, censured, commanded, by creatures who
> have neither the right, nor the wisdom, nor the virtue to do so . . .
> To be GOVERNED is to be at every operation, at every transaction,
> noted, registered, enrolled, taxed, stamped, measured, numbered,
> assessed, licensed, authorised, admonished, forbidden, reformed,
> corrected, punished. It is, under the pretext of public utility, and
> in the name of the general interest, to be placed under contribution,
> trained, ransomed, exploited, monopolised, extorted, squeezed,
> mystified, robbed; then, at the slightest resistance, the first word
> of complaint, to be repressed, fined, despised, harassed, tracked,
> abused, clubbed, disarmed, choked, imprisoned, judged, condemned,
> shot, deported, sacrificed, sold, betrayed; and, to crown it all,
> mocked, ridiculed, outraged, dishonoured. That is government; that is
> its justice; that is its morality."* [**General Idea of the
> Revolution**, p. 294]

Such is the nature of the state that **any** act, no matter how evil,
becomes good if it helps forward the interests of the state and the
minorities it protects. As Bakunin put it:

> "**The State . . . is the most flagrant, the most cynical, and the
> most complete negation of humanity.** It shatters the universal
> solidarity of all men [and women] on the earth, and brings some of
> them into association only for the purpose of destroying, conquering,
> and enslaving all the rest . . .
>
> "This flagrant negation of humanity which constitutes the very essence
> of the State is, from the standpoint of the State, its supreme duty
> and its greatest virtue . . . Thus, to offend, to oppress, to despoil,
> to plunder, to assassinate or enslave one's fellowman [or woman] is
> ordinarily regarded as a crime. In public life, on the other hand,
> from the standpoint of patriotism, when these things are done for the
> greater glory of the State, for the preservation or the extension of
> its power, it is all transformed into duty and virtue. And this
> virtue, this duty, are obligatory for each patriotic citizen; everyone
> if supposed to exercise them not against foreigners only but against
> one's own fellow citizens . . . whenever the welfare of the State
> demands it.
>
> "This explains why, since the birth of the State, the world of
> politics has always been and continues to be the stage for unlimited
> rascality and brigandage . . . This explains why the entire history of
> ancient and modern states is merely a series of revolting crimes; why
> kings and ministers, past and present, of all times and all countries
> -- statesmen, diplomats, bureaucrats, and warriors -- if judged from
> the standpoint of simply morality and human justice, have a hundred, a
> thousand times over earned their sentence to hard labour or to the
> gallows. There is no horror, no cruelty, sacrilege, or perjury, no
> imposture, no infamous transaction, no cynical robbery, no bold
> plunder or shabby betrayal that has not been or is not daily being
> perpetrated by the representatives of the states, under no other
> pretext than those elastic words, so convenient and yet so terrible:
> '**for reasons of state.**'" [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, pp. 133-4]

Governments habitually lie to the people they claim to represent in
order to justify wars, reductions (if not the destruction) of civil
liberties and human rights, policies which benefit the few over the
many, and other crimes. And if its subjects protest, the state will
happily use whatever force deemed necessary to bring the rebels back in
line (labelling such repression "law and order"). Such repression
includes the use of death squads, the institutionalisation of torture,
collective punishments, indefinite imprisonment, and other horrors at
the worse extremes.

Little wonder the state usually spends so much time ensuring the
(mis)education of its population -- only by obscuring (when not hiding)
its actual practises can it ensure the allegiance of those subject to
it. The history of the state could be viewed as nothing more than the
attempts of its subjects to control it and bind it to the standards
people apply to themselves.

Such behaviour is not surprising, given that Anarchists see the state,
with its vast scope and control of deadly force, as the "ultimate"
hierarchical structure, suffering from all the negative characteristics
associated with authority described in the [last section](secB1.html).
*"Any loical and straightforward theory of the State,"* argued Bakunin,
*"is essentially founded upon the principle of **authority**, that is
the eminently theological, metaphysical, and political idea that the
masses, **always** incapable of governing themselves, must at all times
submit to the beneficent yoke of a wisdom and a justice imposed upon
them, in some way or other, from above."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p.
142] Such a system of authority cannot help being centralised,
hierarchical and bureaucratic in nature. And because of its centralised,
hierarchical, and bureaucratic nature, the state becomes a great weight
over society, restricting its growth and development and making popular
control impossible. As Bakunin put it:

> *"the so-called general interests of society supposedly represented by
> the State . . . [are] in reality . . . the general and permanent
> negation of the positive interests of the regions, communes, and
> associations, and a vast number of individuals subordinated to the
> State . . . [in which] all the best aspirations, all the living forces
> of a country, are sanctimoniously immolated and interred."* [**The
> Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 207]

That is by no means the end of it. As well as its obvious hierarchical
form, anarchists object to the state for another, equally important,
reason. This is its role as a defender of the economically dominant
class in society against the rest of it (i.e. from the working class).
This means, under the current system, the capitalists *"need the state
to legalise their methods of robbery, to protect the capitalist
system."* [Berkman, **What is Anarchism?**, p. 16] The state, as we
discuss in [section B.2.1](secB2.html#secb21), is the defender of
private property (see [section B.3](secB3.html) for a discussion of what
anarchists mean by that term and how it differs from individual
possessions).

This means that in capitalist states the mechanisms of state domination
are controlled by and for a corporate elite (and hence the large
corporations are often considered to belong to a wider
*"state-complex"*). Indeed, as we discuss in more depth in [section
F.8](secF8.html), the *"State has been, and still is, the main pillar
and the creator, direct and indirect, of Capitalism and its powers over
the masses."* [Kropotkin, **Evolution and Environment**, p. 97] [Section
B.2.3](secB2.html#secb23) indicates how this is domination is achieved
in a representative democracy.

However this does not mean anarchists think that the state is purely an
instrument of economic class rule. As Malatesta argued, while *"a
special class (government) which, provided with the necessary means of
repression, exists to legalise and protect the owning class from the
demands of the workers . . . it uses the powers at its disposal to
create privileges for itself and to subject, if it can, the owning class
itself as well."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 183]
Thus the state has interests of its own, distinct from and sometimes in
opposition to the economic ruling elite. This means that both state
**and** capitalism needs to be abolished, for the former is as much a
distinct (and oppressive and exploitative) class as the former. This
aspects of the state is discussed in [section B.2.6](secB2.html#secb26).

As part of its role as defender of capitalism, the state is involved in
not only in political domination but also in economic domination. This
domination can take different forms, varying from simply maintaining
capitalist property rights to actually owning workplaces and exploiting
labour directly. Thus every state intervenes in the economy in some
manner. While this is usually to favour the economically dominant, it
can also occur try and mitigate the anti-social nature of the capitalist
market and regulate its worse abuses. We discuss this aspect of the
state in [section B.2.2](secB2.html#secb22).

Needless to say, the characteristics which mark a state did not develop
by chance. As we discuss in [section H.3.7](secH3.html#sech37),
anarchists have an evolutionary perspective on the state. This means
that it has a hierarchical nature in order to facilitate the execution
of its role, its function. As sections [B.2.4](secB2.html#secb24) and
[B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25) indicate, the centralisation that marks a
state is required to secure elite rule and was deliberately and actively
created to do so. This means that states, by their very nature, are
top-down institutions which centralise power into a few hands and, as a
consequence, a state *"with its traditions, its hierarchy, and its
narrow nationalism"* can *"not be utilised as an instrument of
emancipation."* [Kropotkon, **Evolution and Environment**, p. 78] It is
for this reason that anarchists aim to create a new form of social
organisation and life, a decentralised one based on decision making from
the bottom-up and the elimination of hierarchy.

Finally, we must point out that anarchists, while stressing what states
have in common, do recognise that some forms of the state are better
than others. Democracies, for example, tend to be less oppressive than
dictatorships or monarchies. As such it would be false to conclude that
anarchists, *"in criticising the democratic government we thereby show
our preference for the monarchy. We are firmly convinced that the most
imperfect republic is a thousand times better than the most enlightened
monarchy."* [Bakunin, **Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 144] However, this
does not change the nature or role of the state. Indeed, what liberties
we have are **not** dependent on the goodwill of the state but rather
the result of people standing against it and exercising their autonomy.
Left to itself, the state would soon turn the liberties and rights it
says it defends into dead-laws -- things that look good in print but not
practised in real life.

So in the rest of this section we will discuss the state, its role, its
impact on a society's freedom and who benefits from its existence.
Kropotkin's classic essay, **The State: It's Historic Role** is
recommended for further reading on this subject. Harold Barclay's **The
State** is a good overview of the origins of the state, how it has
changed over the millenniums and the nature of the modern state.

B.2.1 What is main function of the state?
-----------------------------------------

The main function of the state is to guarantee the existing social
relationships and their sources within a given society through
centralised power and a monopoly of violence. To use Malatesta's words,
the state is basically *"the property owners' **gendarme.**"* This is
because there are *"two ways of oppressing men [and women]: either
directly by brute force, by physical violence; or indirectly by denying
them the means of life and thus reducing them to a state of surrender."*
The owning class, *"gradually concentrating in their hands the means of
production, the real sources of life, agriculture, industry, barter,
etc., end up establishing their own power which, by reason of the
superiority of its means . . . always ends by more or less openly
subjecting the political power, which is the government, and making it
into its own **gendarme.**"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 23, p. 21 and p. 22]

The state, therefore, is *"the political expression of the economic
structure"* of society and, therefore, *"the representative of the
people who own or control the wealth of the community and the oppressor
of the people who do the work which creates the wealth."* [Nicholas
Walter, **About Anarchism**, p. 37] It is therefore no exaggeration to
say that the state is the extractive apparatus of society's parasites.

The state ensures the exploitative privileges of its ruling elite by
protecting certain economic monopolies from which its members derive
their wealth. The nature of these economic privileges varies over time.
Under the current system, this means defending capitalist property
rights (see [section B.3.2](secB3.html#secb32)). This service is
referred to as "protecting private property" and is said to be one of
the two main functions of the state, the other being to ensure that
individuals are "secure in their persons." However, although this second
aim is professed, in reality most state laws and institutions are
concerned with the protection of property (for the anarchist definition
of "property" see [section B.3.1](secB3.html#secb31)).

From this we may infer that references to the "security of persons,"
"crime prevention," etc., are mostly rationalisations of the state's
existence and smokescreens for its perpetuation of elite power and
privileges. This does not mean that the state does not address these
issues. Of course it does, but, to quote Kropotkin, any *"laws developed
from the nucleus of customs useful to human communities . . . have been
turned to account by rulers to sanctify their own domination." of the
people, and maintained only by the fear of punishment."* [**Anarchism**,
p. 215]

Simply put, if the state *"presented nothing but a collection of
prescriptions serviceable to rulers, it would find some difficulty in
insuring acceptance and obedience"* and so the law reflects customs
"essential to the very being of society" but these are *"cleverly
intermingled with usages imposed by the ruling caste and both claim
equal respect from the crowd."* Thus the state's laws have a *"two-fold
character."* While its *"origin is the desire of the ruling class to
give permanence to customs imposed by themselves for their own
advantage"* it also passes into law *"customs useful to society, customs
which have no need of law to insure respect"* -- unlike those *"other
customs useful only to rulers, injurious to the mass of the people, and
maintained only by the fear of punishment."* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**,
pp. 205-6] To use an obvious example, we find the state using the
defence of an individual's possessions as the rationale for imposing
capitalist private property rights upon the general public and,
consequently, defending the elite and the source of its wealth and power
against those subject to it.

Moreover, even though the state does take a secondary interest in
protecting the security of persons (particularly elite persons), the
vast majority of crimes against persons are motivated by poverty and
alienation due to state-supported exploitation and also by the
desensitisation to violence created by the state's own violent methods
of protecting private property. In other words, the state rationalises
its existence by pointing to the social evils it itself helps to create
(either directly or indirectly). Hence, anarchists maintain that without
the state and the crime-engendering conditions to which it gives rise,
it would be possible for decentralised, voluntary community associations
to deal compassionately (not punitively) with the few incorrigibly
violent people who might remain (see [section
I.5.8](secI5.html#seci58)).

Anarchists think it is pretty clear what the real role of the modern
state is. It represents the essential coercive mechanisms by which
capitalism and the authority relations associated with private property
are sustained. The protection of property is fundamentally the means of
assuring the social domination of owners over non-owners, both in
society as a whole and in the particular case of a specific boss over a
specific group of workers. Class domination is the authority of property
owners over those who use that property and it is the primary function
of the state to uphold that domination (and the social relationships
that generate it). In Kropotkin's words, *"the rich perfectly well know
that if the machinery of the State ceased to protect them, their power
over the labouring classes would be gone immediately."* [**Evolution and
Environment**, p. 98] Protecting private property and upholding class
domination are the same thing.

The historian Charles Beard makes a similar point:

> *"Inasmuch as the primary object of a government, beyond mere
> repression of physical violence, is the making of the rules which
> determine the property relations of members of society, the dominant
> classes whose rights are thus to be protected must perforce obtain
> from the government such rules as are consonant with the larger
> interests necessary to the continuance of their economic processes, or
> they must themselves control the organs of government."* ["An Economic
> Interpretation of the Constitution," quoted by Howard Zinn, **Op.
> Cit.**, p. 89]

This role of the state -- to protect capitalism and the property, power
and authority of the property owner -- was also noticed by Adam Smith:

> *"[T]he inequality of fortune . . . introduces among men a degree of
> authority and subordination which could not possibly exist before. It
> thereby introduces some degree of that civil government which is
> indispensably necessary for its own preservation . . . [and] to
> maintain and secure that authority and subordination. The rich, in
> particular, are necessarily interested to support that order of things
> which can alone secure them in the possession of their own advantages.
> Men of inferior wealth combine to defend those of superior wealth in
> the possession of their property, in order that men of superior wealth
> may combine to defend them in the possession of theirs . . . [T]he
> maintenance of their lesser authority depends upon that of his greater
> authority, and that upon their subordination to him depends his power
> of keeping their inferiors in subordination to them. They constitute a
> sort of little nobility, who feel themselves interested to defend the
> property and to support the authority of their own little sovereign in
> order that he may be able to defend their property and to support
> their authority. Civil government, so far as it is instituted for the
> security of property, is in reality instituted for the defence of the
> rich against the poor, or of those who have some property against
> those who have none at all."* [**The Wealth of Nations**, book 5, pp.
> 412-3]

This is reflected in both the theory and history of the modern state.
Theorists of the liberal state like John Locke had no qualms about
developing a theory of the state which placed the defence of private
property at its heart. This perspective was reflected in the American
Revolution. For example, there is the words of John Jay (the first chief
justice of the Supreme Court), namely that *"the people who own the
country ought to govern it."* [quoted by Noam Chomksy, **Understanding
Power**, p. 315] This was the maxim of the Founding Fathers of American
*"democracy"* and it has continued ever since.

So, in a nutshell, the state is the means by which the ruling class
rules. Hence Bakunin:

> *"The State is authority, domination, and force, organised by the
> property-owning and so-called enlightened classes against the masses .
> . . the State's domination . . . [ensures] that of the privileged
> classes who it solely represents."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 140]

Under the current system, this means that the state *"constitutes the
chief bulwark of capital"* because of its *"centralisation, law (always
written by a minority in the interest of that minority), and courts of
justice (established mainly for the defence of authority and capital)."*
Thus it is *"the mission of all governments . . . is to protect and
maintain by force the . . . privileges of the possessing classes."*
Consequently, while *"[i]n the struggle between the individual and the
State, anarchism . . . takes the side of the individual as against the
State, of society against the authority which oppresses it,"* anarchists
are well aware that the state does not exist above society, independent
of the classes which make it up. [Kropotkin, **Anarchism**, pp. 149-50,
p. 214 and pp. 192-3]

Consequently anarchists reject the idea that the role of the state is
simply to represent the interests of the people or "the nation." For
*"democracy is an empty pretence to the extent that production, finance
and commerce -- and along with them, the political processes of the
society as well -- are under control of 'concentrations of private
power.' The 'national interest' as articulated by those who dominate the
. . . societies will be their special interests. Under these
circumstances, talk of 'national interest' can only contribute to
mystification and oppression."* [Noam Chomsky, **Radical Priorities**,
p. 52] As we discuss in [section D.6](secD6.html), nationalism always
reflects the interests of the elite, not those who make up a nation and,
consequently, anarchists reject the notion as nothing more than a con
(i.e. the use of affection of where you live to further ruling class
aims and power).

Indeed, part of the state's role as defender of the ruling elite is to
do so internationally, defending "national" (i.e. elite) interests
against the elites of other nations. Thus we find that at the IMF and
World Bank, nations are represented by ministers who are *"closely
aligned with particular constituents **within** their countries. The
trade ministers reflect the concerns of the business community"* while
the *"finance ministers and central bank governors are closely tied to
financial community; they come from financial firms, and after their
period in service, that is where they return . . . These individuals see
the world through the eyes of the financial community."* Unsurprisingly,
the *"decisions of any institution naturally reflect the perspectives
and interests of those who make the decisions"* and so the *"policies of
the international economic institutions are all too often closely
aligned with the commercial and financial interests of those in the
advanced industrial countries."* [Joseph Stiglitz, **Globalisation and
its Discontents**, pp. 19-20]

This, it must be stressed, does not change in the so-called democratic
state. Here, however, the primary function of the state is disguised by
the "democratic" facade of the representative electoral system, through
which it is made to appear that the people rule themselves. Thus Bakunin
writes that the modern state *"unites in itself the two conditions
necessary for the prosperity of the capitalistic economy: State
centralisation and the actual subjection of . . . the people . . . to
the minority allegedly representing it but actually governing it."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 210] How this is achieved is discussed in [section
B.2.3](secB2.html#secb23).

B.2.2 Does the state have subsidiary functions?
-----------------------------------------------

Yes, it does. While, as discussed in the [last
section](secB2.html#secb21), the state is an instrument to maintain
class rule this does not mean that it is limited to just defending the
social relationships in a society and the economic and political sources
of those relationships. No state has ever left its activities at that
bare minimum. As well as defending the rich, their property and the
specific forms of property rights they favoured, the state has numerous
other subsidiary functions.

What these are has varied considerably over time and space and,
consequently, it would be impossible to list them all. However, **why**
it does is more straight forward. We can generalise two main forms of
subsidiary functions of the state. The first one is to boost the
interests of the ruling elite either nationally or internationally
beyond just defending their property. The second is to protect society
against the negative effects of the capitalist market. We will discuss
each in turn and, for simplicity and relevance, we will concentrate on
capitalism (see also [section D.1](secD1.html)).

The first main subsidiary function of the state is when it intervenes in
society to help the capitalist class in some way. This can take obvious
forms of intervention, such as subsidies, tax breaks, non-bid government
contracts, protective tariffs to old, inefficient, industries, giving
actual monopolies to certain firms or individuals, bailouts of
corporations judged by state bureaucrats as too important to let fail,
and so on. However, the state intervenes far more than that and in more
subtle ways. Usually it does so to solve problems that arise in the
course of capitalist development and which cannot, in general, be left
to the market (at least initially). These are designed to benefit the
capitalist class as a whole rather than just specific individuals,
companies or sectors.

These interventions have taken different forms in different times and
include state funding for industry (e.g. military spending); the
creation of social infrastructure too expensive for private capital to
provide (railways, motorways); the funding of research that companies
cannot afford to undertake; protective tariffs to protect developing
industries from more efficient international competition (the key to
successful industrialisation as it allows capitalists to rip-off
consumers, making them rich and increasing funds available for
investment); giving capitalists preferential access to land and other
natural resources; providing education to the general public that
ensures they have the skills and attitude required by capitalists and
the state (it is no accident that a key thing learned in school is how
to survive boredom, being in a hierarchy and to do what it orders);
imperialist ventures to create colonies or client states (or protect
citizen's capital invested abroad) in order to create markets or get
access to raw materials and cheap labour; government spending to
stimulate consumer demand in the face of recession and stagnation;
maintaining a "natural" level of unemployment that can be used to
discipline the working class, so ensuring they produce more, for less;
manipulating the interest rate in order to try and reduce the effects of
the business cycle and undermine workers' gains in the class struggle.

These actions, and others like it, ensures that a key role of the state
within capitalism *"is essentially to socialise risk and cost, and to
privatise power and profit."* Unsurprisingly, *"with all the talk about
minimising the state, in the OECD countries the state continues to grow
relative to GNP."* [Noam Chomsky, **Rogue States**, p. 189] Hence David
Deleon:

> *"Above all, the state remains an institution for the continuance of
> dominant socioeconomic relations, whether through such agencies as the
> military, the courts, politics or the police . . . Contemporary states
> have acquired . . . less primitive means to reinforce their property
> systems [than state violence -- which is always the means of last,
> often first, resort]. States can regulate, moderate or resolve
> tensions in the economy by preventing the bankruptcies of key
> corporations, manipulating the economy through interest rates,
> supporting hierarchical ideology through tax benefits for churches and
> schools, and other tactics. In essence, it is not a neutral
> institution; it is powerfully for the status quo. The capitalist
> state, for example, is virtually a gyroscope centred in capital,
> balancing the system. If one sector of the economy earns a level of
> profit, let us say, that harms the rest of the system -- such as oil
> producers' causing public resentment and increased manufacturing costs
> -- the state may redistribute some of that profit through taxation, or
> offer encouragement to competitors."* [*"Anarchism on the origins and
> functions of the state: some basic notes"*, **Reinventing Anarchy**,
> pp. 71-72]

In other words, the state acts to protect the long-term interests of the
capitalist class as a whole (and ensure its own survival) by protecting
the system. This role can and does clash with the interests of
particular capitalists or even whole sections of the ruling class (see
[section B.2.6](secB2.html#secb26)). But this conflict does not change
the role of the state as the property owners' policeman. Indeed, the
state can be considered as a means for settling (in a peaceful and
apparently independent manner) upper-class disputes over what to do to
keep the system going.

This subsidiary role, it must be stressed, is no accident, It is part
and parcel capitalism. Indeed, *"successful industrial societies have
consistently relied on departures from market orthodoxies, while
condemning their victims [at home and abroad] to market discipline."*
[Noam Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p. 113] While such state
intervention grew greatly after the Second World War, the role of the
state as active promoter of the capitalist class rather than just its
passive defender as implied in capitalist ideology (i.e. as defender of
property) has always been a feature of the system. As Kropotkin put it:

> *"every State reduces the peasants and the industrial workers to a
> life of misery, by means of taxes, and through the monopolies it
> creates in favour of the landlords, the cotton lords, the railway
> magnates, the publicans, and the like . . . we need only to look
> round, to see how everywhere in Europe and America the States are
> constituting monopolies in favour of capitalists at home, and still
> more in conquered lands [which are part of their empires]."*
> [**Evolution and Environment**, p. 97]

By *"monopolies,"* it should be noted, Kropotkin meant general
privileges and benefits rather than giving a certain firm total control
over a market. This continues to this day by such means as, for example,
privatising industries but providing them with state subsidies or by
(mis-labelled) "free trade" agreements which impose protectionist
measures such as intellectual property rights on the world market.

All this means that capitalism has rarely relied on purely economic
power to keep the capitalists in their social position of dominance
(either nationally, vis-à-vis the working class, or internationally,
vis-à-vis competing foreign elites). While a "free market" capitalist
regime in which the state reduces its intervention to simply protecting
capitalist property rights has been approximated on a few occasions,
this is not the standard state of the system -- direct force, i.e. state
action, almost always supplements it.

This is most obviously the case during the birth of capitalist
production. Then the bourgeoisie wants and uses the power of the state
to "regulate" wages (i.e. to keep them down to such levels as to
maximise profits and force people attend work regularly), to lengthen
the working day and to keep the labourer dependent on wage labour as
their own means of income (by such means as enclosing land, enforcing
property rights on unoccupied land, and so forth). As capitalism is not
and has never been a "natural" development in society, it is not
surprising that more and more state intervention is required to keep it
going (and if even this was not the case, if force was essential to
creating the system in the first place, the fact that it latter can
survive without further direct intervention does not make the system any
less statist). As such, "regulation" and other forms of state
intervention continue to be used in order to skew the market in favour
of the rich and so force working people to sell their labour on the
bosses terms.

This form of state intervention is designed to prevent those greater
evils which might threaten the efficiency of a capitalist economy or the
social and economic position of the bosses. It is designed not to
provide positive benefits for those subject to the elite (although this
may be a side-effect). Which brings us to the other kind of state
intervention, the attempts by society, by means of the state, to protect
itself against the eroding effects of the capitalist market system.

Capitalism is an inherently anti-social system. By trying to treat
labour (people) and land (the environment) as commodities, it has to
break down communities and weaken eco-systems. This cannot but harm
those subject to it and, as a consequence, this leads to pressure on
government to intervene to mitigate the most damaging effects of
unrestrained capitalism. Therefore, on one side there is the historical
movement of the market, a movement that has not inherent limit and that
therefore threatens society's very existence. On the other there is
society's natural propensity to defend itself, and therefore to create
institutions for its protection. Combine this with a desire for justice
on behalf of the oppressed along with opposition to the worse
inequalities and abuses of power and wealth and we have the potential
for the state to act to combat the worse excesses of the system in order
to keep the system as a whole going. After all, the government *"cannot
want society to break up, for it would mean that it and the dominant
class would be deprived of the sources of exploitation."* [Malatesta,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 25]

Needless to say, the thrust for any system of social protection usually
comes from below, from the people most directly affected by the negative
effects of capitalism. In the face of mass protests the state may be
used to grant concessions to the working class in cases where not doing
so would threaten the integrity of the system as a whole. Thus, social
struggle is the dynamic for understanding many, if not all, of the
subsidiary functions acquired by the state over the years (this applies
to pro-capitalist functions as these are usually driven by the need to
bolster the profits and power of capitalists at the expense of the
working class).

State legislation to set the length of the working day is an obvious
example this. In the early period of capitalist development, the
economic position of the capitalists was secure and, consequently, the
state happily ignored the lengthening working day, thus allowing
capitalists to appropriate more surplus value from workers and increase
the rate of profit without interference. Whatever protests erupted were
handled by troops. Later, however, after workers began to organise on a
wider and wider scale, reducing the length of the working day became a
key demand around which revolutionary socialist fervour was developing.
In order to defuse this threat (and socialist revolution is the
worst-case scenario for the capitalist), the state passed legislation to
reduce the length of the working day.

Initially, the state was functioning purely as the protector of the
capitalist class, using its powers simply to defend the property of the
few against the many who used it (i.e. repressing the labour movement to
allow the capitalists to do as they liked). In the second period, the
state was granting concessions to the working class to eliminate a
threat to the integrity of the system as a whole. Needless to say, once
workers' struggle calmed down and their bargaining position reduced by
the normal workings of market (see [section B.4.3](secB4.html#secb43)),
the legislation restricting the working day was happily ignored and
became "dead laws."

This suggests that there is a continuing tension and conflict between
the efforts to establish, maintain, and spread the "free market" and the
efforts to protect people and society from the consequences of its
workings. Who wins this conflict depends on the relative strength of
those involved (as does the actual reforms agreed to). Ultimately, what
the state concedes, it can also take back. Thus the rise and fall of the
welfare state -- granted to stop more revolutionary change (see [section
D.1.3](secD1.html#secd13)), it did not fundamentally challenge the
existence of wage labour and was useful as a means of regulating
capitalism but was "reformed" (i.e. made worse, rather than better) when
it conflicted with the needs of the capitalist economy and the ruling
elite felt strong enough to do so.

Of course, this form of state intervention does not change the nature
nor role of the state as an instrument of minority power. Indeed, that
nature cannot help but shape how the state tries to implement social
protection and so if the state assumes functions it does so as much in
the immediate interest of the capitalist class as in the interest of
society in general. Even where it takes action under pressure from the
general population or to try and mend the harm done by the capitalist
market, its class and hierarchical character twists the results in ways
useful primarily to the capitalist class or itself. This can be seen
from how labour legislation is applied, for example. Thus even the
"good" functions of the state are penetrated with and dominated by the
state's hierarchical nature. As Malatesta forcefully put it:

> *"The basic function of government . . . is always that of oppressing
> and exploiting the masses, of defending the oppressors and the
> exploiters . . . It is true that to these basic functions . . . other
> functions have been added in the course of history . . . hardly ever
> has a government existed . . . which did not combine with its
> oppressive and plundering activities others which were useful . . . to
> social life. But this does not detract from the fact that government
> is by nature oppressive . . . and that it is in origin and by its
> attitude, inevitably inclined to defend and strengthen the dominant
> class; indeed it confirms and aggravates the position . . . [I]t is
> enough to understand how and why it carries out these functions to
> find the practical evidence that whatever governments do is always
> motivated by the desire to dominate, and is always geared to
> defending, extending and perpetuating its privileges and those of the
> class of which it is both the representative and defender."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, pp. 23-4]

This does not mean that these reforms should be abolished (the
alternative is often worse, as neo-liberalism shows), it simply
recognises that the state is not a neutral body and cannot be expected
to act as if it were. Which, ironically, indicates another aspect of
social protection reforms within capitalism: they make for good PR. By
appearing to care for the interests of those harmed by capitalism, the
state can obscure it real nature:

> *"A government cannot maintain itself for long without hiding its true
> nature behind a pretence of general usefulness; it cannot impose
> respect for the lives of the privileged if it does not appear to
> demand respect for all human life; it cannot impose acceptance of the
> privileges of the few if it does not pretend to be the guardian of the
> rights of all."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 24]

Obviously, being an instrument of the ruling elite, the state can hardly
be relied upon to control the system which that elite run. As we discuss
in the [next section](secB2.html#secb23), even in a democracy the state
is run and controlled by the wealthy making it unlikely that pro-people
legislation will be introduced or enforced without substantial popular
pressure. That is why anarchists favour direct action and
extra-parliamentary organising (see sections [J.2](secJ2.html) and
[J.5](secJ5.html) for details). Ultimately, even basic civil liberties
and rights are the product of direct action, of *"mass movements among
the people"* to *"wrest these rights from the ruling classes, who would
never have consented to them voluntarily."* [Rocker,
**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 75]

Equally obviously, the ruling elite and its defenders hate any
legislation it does not favour -- while, of course, remaining silent on
its own use of the state. As Benjamin Tucker pointed out about the "free
market" capitalist Herbert Spencer, *"amid his multitudinous
illustrations . . . of the evils of legislation, he in every instance
cites some law passed ostensibly at least to protect labour, alleviating
suffering, or promote the people's welfare. . . But never once does he
call attention to the far more deadly and deep-seated evils growing out
of the innumerable laws creating privilege and sustaining monopoly."*
[**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 45] Such hypocrisy is staggering,
but all too common in the ranks of supporters of "free market"
capitalism.

Finally, it must be stressed that none of these subsidiary functions
implies that capitalism can be changed through a series of piecemeal
reforms into a benevolent system that primarily serves working class
interests. To the contrary, these functions grow out of, and supplement,
the basic role of the state as the protector of capitalist property and
the social relations they generate -- i.e. the foundation of the
capitalist's ability to exploit. Therefore reforms may modify the
functioning of capitalism but they can never threaten its basis.

In summary, while the level and nature of statist intervention on behalf
of the employing classes may vary, it is always there. No matter what
activity it conducts beyond its primary function of protecting private
property, what subsidiary functions it takes on, the state always
operates as an instrument of the ruling class. This applies even to
those subsidiary functions which have been imposed on the state by the
general public -- even the most popular reform will be twisted to
benefit the state or capital, if at all possible. This is not to dismiss
all attempts at reform as irrelevant, it simply means recognising that
we, the oppressed, need to rely on our own strength and organisations to
improve our circumstances.

B.2.3 How does the ruling class maintain control of the state?
--------------------------------------------------------------

In some systems, it is obvious how economic dominant minorities control
the state. In feudalism, for example, the land was owned by the feudal
lords who exploited the peasantry directly. Economic and political power
were merged into the same set of hands, the landlords. Absolutism saw
the monarch bring the feudal lords under his power and the relative
decentralised nature of feudalism was replaced by a centralised state.

It was this centralised state system which the raising bourgeoisie took
as the model for their state. The King was replaced by a Parliament,
which was initially elected on a limited suffrage. In this initial form
of capitalist state, it is (again) obvious how the elite maintain
control of the state machine. As the vote was based on having a minimum
amount of property, the poor were effectively barred from having any
(official) say in what the government did. This exclusion was theorised
by philosophers like John Locke -- the working masses were considered to
be an object of state policy rather than part of the body of people
(property owners) who nominated the government. In this perspective the
state was like a joint-stock company. The owning class were the
share-holders who nominated the broad of directors and the mass of the
population were the workers who had no say in determining the management
personnel and were expected to follow orders.

As would be expected, this system was mightily disliked by the majority
who were subjected to it. Such a "classical liberal" regime was rule by
an alien, despotic power, lacking popular legitimacy, and utterly
unaccountable to the general population. It is quite evident that a
government elected on a limited franchise could not be trusted to treat
those who owned no real property with equal consideration. It was
predictable that the ruling elite would use the state they controlled to
further their own interests and to weaken potential resistance to their
social, economic and political power. Which is precisely what they did
do, while masking their power under the guise of "good governance" and
"liberty." Moreover, limited suffrage, like absolutism, was considered
an affront to liberty and individual dignity by many of those subject to
it.

Hence the call for universal suffrage and opposition to property
qualifications for the franchise. For many radicals (including Marx and
Engels) such a system would mean that the working classes would hold
*"political power"* and, consequently, be in a position to end the class
system once and for all. Anarchists were not convinced, arguing that
*"universal suffrage, considered in itself and applied in a society
based on economic and social inequality, will be nothing but a swindle
and snare for the people"* and *"the surest way to consolidate under the
mantle of liberalism and justice the permanent domination of the people
by the owning classes, to the detriment of popular liberty."*
Consequently, anarchists denied that it *"could be used by the people
for the conquest of economic and social equality. It must always and
necessarily be an instrument hostile to the people, one which supports
the **de facto** dictatorship of the bourgeoisie."* [Bakunin, **Bakunin
on Anarchism**, p. 224]

Due to popular mass movements form below, the vote was won by the male
working classes and, at a later stage, women. While the elite fought
long and hard to retain their privileged position they were defeated.
Sadly, the history of universal suffrage proven the anarchists right.
Even allegedly *"democratic"* capitalist states are in effect
dictatorships of the propertariat. The political history of modern times
can be summarised by the rise of capitalist power, the rise, due to
popular movements, of (representative) democracy and the continued
success of the former to undermine and control the latter.

This is achieved by three main processes which combine to effectively
deter democracy. These are the wealth barrier, the bureaucracy barrier
and, lastly, the capital barrier. Each will be discussed in turn and all
ensure that *"representative democracy"* remains an *"organ of
capitalist domination."* [Kropotkin, **Words of a Rebel**, p. 127]

The wealth barrier is the most obvious. It takes money to run for
office. In 1976, the total spent on the US Presidential election was
\$66.9 million. In 1984, it was \$103.6 million and in 1996 it was
\$239.9 million. At the dawn of the 21st century, these figures had
increased yet again. 2000 saw \$343.1 spent and 2004, \$717.9 million.
Most of this money was spent by the two main candidates. In 2000,
Republican George Bush spent a massive \$185,921,855 while his
Democratic rival Al Gore spent only \$120,031,205. Four years later,
Bush spent \$345,259,155 while John Kerry managed a mere \$310,033,347.

Other election campaigns are also enormously expensive. In 2000, the
average winning candidate for a seat in the US House of Representatives
spent \$816,000 while the average willing senator spent \$7 million.
Even local races require significant amounts of fundraising. One
candidate for the Illinois House raised over \$650,000 while another
candidate for the Illinois Supreme Court raised \$737,000. In the UK,
similarly prohibitive amounts were spent. In the 2001 general election
the Labour Party spent a total of £10,945,119, the Tories £12,751,813
and the Liberal Democrats (who came a distant third) just £1,361,377.

To get this sort of money, wealthy contributors need to be found and
wooed, in other words promised that that their interests will be
actively looked after. While, in theory, it is possible to raise large
sums from small contributions in practice this is difficult. To raise
\$1 million you need to either convince 50 millionaires to give you
\$20,000 or 20,000 people to fork out \$50. Given that for the elite
\$20,000 is pocket money, it is hardly surprising that politicians aim
for winning over the few, not the many. Similarly with corporations and
big business. It is far easier and more efficient in time and energy to
concentrate on the wealthy few (whether individuals or companies).

It is obvious: whoever pays the piper calls the tune. And in capitalism,
this means the wealthy and business. In the US corporate campaign
donations and policy paybacks have reached unprecedented proportions.
The vast majority of large campaign donations are, not surprisingly,
from corporations. Most of the wealthy individuals who give large
donations to the candidates are CEOs and corporate board members. And,
just to be sure, many companies give to more than one party.

Unsurprisingly, corporations and the rich expect their investments to
get a return. This can be seen from George W. Bush's administration. His
election campaigns were beholden to the energy industry (which has
backed him since the beginning of his career as Governor of Texas). The
disgraced corporation Enron (and its CEO Kenneth Lay) were among Bush's
largest contributors in 2000. Once in power, Bush backed numerous
policies favourable to that industry (such as rolling back environmental
regulation on a national level as he had done in Texas). His supporters
in Wall Street were not surprised that Bush tried to privatise Social
Security. Nor were the credit card companies when the Republicans
tighten the noose on bankrupt people in 2005. By funding Bush, these
corporations ensured that the government furthered their interests
rather than the people who voted in the election.

This means that as a *"consequence of the distribution of resources and
decision-making power in the society at large . . . the political class
and the cultural managers typically associate themselves with the
sectors that dominate the private economy; they are either drawn
directly from those sectors or expect to join them."* [Chomsky,
**Necessary Illusions**, p. 23] This can be seen from George W. Bush's
quip at an elite fund-raising gala during the 2000 Presidential
election: *"This is an impressive crowd -- the haves and the have-mores.
Some people call you the elites; I call you my base."* Unsurprisingly:

> *"In the real world, state policy is largely determined by those
> groups that command resources, ultimately by virtue of their ownership
> and management of the private economy or their status as wealthy
> professionals. The major decision-making positions in the Executive
> branch of the government are typically filled by representatives of
> major corporations, banks and investment firms, a few law firms that
> cater primarily to corporate interests and thus represent the broad
> interests of owners and managers rather than some parochial interest .
> . . The Legislative branch is more varied, but overwhelmingly, it is
> drawn from the business and professional classes."* [Chomsky, **On
> Power and Ideology**, pp. 116-7]

That is not the only tie between politics and business. Many politicians
also have directorships in companies, interests in companies, shares,
land and other forms of property income and so forth. Thus they are less
like the majority of constituents they claim to represent and more like
the wealthy few. Combine these outside earnings with a high salary (in
the UK, MP's are paid more than twice the national average) and
politicians can be among the richest 1% of the population. Thus not only
do we have a sharing of common interests the elite, the politicians are
part of it. As such, they can hardly be said to be representative of the
general public and are in a position of having a vested interest in
legislation on property being voted on.

Some defend these second jobs and outside investments by saying that it
keeps them in touch with the outside world and, consequently, makes them
better politicians. That such an argument is spurious can be seen from
the fact that such outside interests never involve working in McDonald's
flipping burgers or working on an assembly line. For some reason, no
politician seeks to get a feeling for what life is like for the average
person. Yet, in a sense, this argument **does** have a point. Such jobs
and income do keep politicians in touch with the world of the elite
rather than that of the masses and, as the task of the state is to
protect elite interests, it cannot be denied that this sharing of
interests and income with the elite can only aid that task!

Then there is the sad process by which politicians, once they leave
politics, get jobs in the corporate hierarchy (particularly with the
very companies they had previously claimed to regulate on behalf of the
public). This was termed "the revolving door." Incredibly, this has
changed for the worse. Now the highest of government officials arrive
directly from the executive offices of powerful corporations. Lobbyists
are appointed to the jobs whose occupants they once vied to influence.
Those who regulate and those supposed to be regulated have become almost
indistinguishable.

Thus politicians and capitalists go hand in hand. Wealth selects them,
funds them and gives them jobs and income when in office. Finally, once
they finally leave politics, they are often given directorships and
other jobs in the business world. Little wonder, then, that the
capitalist class maintains control of the state.

That is not all. The wealth barrier operates indirectly to. This takes
many forms. The most obvious is in the ability of corporations and the
elite to lobby politicians. In the US, there is the pervasive power of
Washington's army of 24,000 registered lobbyists -- and the influence of
the corporate interests they represent. These lobbyists, whose job it is
to convince politicians to vote in certain ways to further the interests
of their corporate clients help shape the political agenda even further
toward business interests than it already is. This Lobby industry is
immense -- and exclusively for big business and the elite. Wealth
ensures that the equal opportunity to garner resources to share a
perspective and influence the political progress is monopolised by the
few: *"where are the desperately needed countervailing lobbies to
represent the interests of average citizens? Where are the millions of
dollars acting in **their** interests? Alas, they are notably absent."*
[Joel Bakan, **The Corporation**, p. 107]

However, it cannot be denied that it is up to the general population to
vote for politicians. This is when the indirect impact of wealth kicks
in, namely the role of the media and the Public Relations (PR) industry.
As we discuss in [section D.3](secD3.html), the modern media is
dominated by big business and, unsurprisingly, reflects their interests.
This means that the media has an important impact on how voters see
parties and specific politicians and candidates. A radical party will,
at best, be ignored by the capitalist press or, at worse, subject to
smears and attacks. This will have a corresponding negative impact on
their election prospects and will involve the affected party having to
invest substantially more time, energy and resources in countering the
negative media coverage. The PR industry has a similar effect, although
that has the advantage of not having to bother with appearing to look
factual or unbiased. Add to this the impact of elite and corporation
funded *"think tanks"* and the political system is fatally skewed in
favour of the capitalist class (also see [section D.2](secD2.html)).

In a nutshell:

> *"The business class dominates government through its ability to fund
> political campaigns, purchase high priced lobbyists and reward former
> officials with lucrative jobs . . . [Politicians] have become wholly
> dependent upon the same corporate dollars to pay for a new
> professional class of PR consultants, marketeers and social scientists
> who manage and promote causes and candidates in essentially the same
> manner that advertising campaigns sell cars, fashions, drugs and other
> wares."* [John Stauber and Sheldon Rampton, **Toxic Sludge is Good for
> You**, p. 78]

That is the first barrier, the direct and indirect impact of wealth.
This, in itself, is a powerful barrier to deter democracy and, as a
consequence, it is usually sufficient in itself. Yet sometimes people
see through the media distortions and vote for reformist, even radical,
candidates. As we discuss in [section J.2.6](secJ2.html#secj26),
anarchists argue that the net effect of running for office is a general
**de**-radicalising of the party involved. Revolutionary parties become
reformist, reformist parties end up maintaining capitalism and
introducing polities the opposite of which they had promised. So while
it is unlikely that a radical party could get elected and remain radical
in the process, it is possible. If such a party did get into office, the
remaining two barriers kicks in: the bureaucracy barrier and the capital
barrier.

The existence of a state bureaucracy is a key feature in ensuring that
the state remains the ruling class's *"policeman"* and will be discussed
in greater detail in section J.2.2 ([Why do anarchists reject voting as
a means for change?](secJ2.html#secj22)). Suffice to say, the
politicians who are elected to office are at a disadvantage as regards
the state bureaucracy. The latter is a permanent concentration of power
while the former come and go. Consequently, they are in a position to
tame any rebel government by means of bureaucratic inertia, distorting
and hiding necessary information and pushing its own agenda onto the
politicians who are in theory their bosses but in reality dependent on
the bureaucracy. And, needless to say, if all else fails the state
bureaucracy can play its final hand: the military coup.

This threat has been applied in many countries, most obviously in the
developing world (with the aid of Western, usually US, imperialism). The
coups in Iran (1953) and Chile (1973) are just two examples of this
process. Yet the so-called developed world is not immune to it. The rise
of fascism in Italy, Germany, Portugal and Spain can be considered as
variations of a military coup (particularly the last one where fascism
was imposed by the military). Wealthy business men funded para-military
forces to break the back of the labour movement, forces formed by
ex-military people. Even the New Deal in America was threatened by such
a coup. [Joel Bakan, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 86-95] While such regimes do
protect the interests of capital and are, consequently, backed by it,
they do hold problems for capitalism. This is because, as with the
Absolutism which fostered capitalism in the first place, this kind of
government can get ideas above its station This means that a military
coup will only be used when the last barrier, the capital barrier, is
used and fails.

The capital barrier is obviously related to the wealth barrier insofar
as it relates to the power that great wealth produces. However, it is
different in how it is applied. The wealth barrier restricts who gets
into office, the capital barrier controls whoever does so. The capital
barrier, in other words, are the economic forces that can be brought to
bear on any government which is acting in ways disliked of by the
capitalist class.

We see their power implied when the news report that changes in
government, policies and law have been *"welcomed by the markets."* As
the richest 1% of households in America (about 2 million adults) owned
35% of the stock owned by individuals in 1992 -- with the top 10% owning
over 81% -- we can see that the *"opinion"* of the markets actually
means the power of the richest 1-5% of a countries population (and their
finance experts), power derived from their control over investment and
production. Given that the bottom 90% of the US population has a smaller
share (23%) of all kinds of investable capital that the richest 1/2%
(who own 29%), with stock ownership being even more concentrated (the
top 5% holding 95% of all shares), its obvious why Doug Henwood argues
that stock markets are *"a way for the very rich as a class to own an
economy's productive capital stock as a whole,"* are a source of
*"political power"* and a way to have influence over government policy.
[**Wall Street: Class Racket**]

The mechanism is simple enough. The ability of capital to disinvest
(capital flight) and otherwise adversely impact the economy is a
powerful weapon to keep the state as its servant. The companies and the
elite can invest at home or abroad, speculate in currency markets and so
forth. If a significant number of investors or corporations lose
confidence in a government they will simply stop investing at home and
move their funds abroad. At home, the general population feel the
results as demand drops, layoffs increase and recession kicks in. As
Noam Chomsky notes:

> *"In capitalist democracy, the interests that must be satisfied are
> those of capitalists; otherwise, there is no investment, no
> production, no work, no resources to be devoted, however marginally,
> to the needs of the general population."* [**Turning the Tide**, p.
> 233]

This ensures the elite control of government as government policies
which private power finds unwelcome will quickly be reversed. The power
which "business confidence" has over the political system ensures that
democracy is subservient to big business. As summarised by Malatesta:

> *"Even with universal suffrage -- we could well say even more so with
> universal suffrage -- the government remained the bourgeoisie's
> servant and **gendarme.** For were it to be otherwise with the
> government hinting that it might take up a hostile attitude, or that
> democracy could ever be anything but a pretence to deceive the people,
> the bourgeoisie, feeling its interests threatened, would by quick to
> react, and would use all the influence and force at its disposal, by
> reason of its wealth, to recall the government to its proper place as
> the bourgeoisie's **gendarme.**"* [**Anarchy**, p. 23]

It is due to these barriers that the state remains an instrument of the
capitalist class while being, in theory, a democracy. Thus the state
machine remains a tool by which the few can enrich themselves at the
expense of the many. This does not mean, of course, that the state is
immune to popular pressure. Far from it. As indicated in the [last
section](secB2.html#secb22), direct action by the oppressed can and has
forced the state to implement significant reforms. Similarly, the need
to defend society against the negative effects of unregulated capitalism
can also force through populist measures (particularly when the
alternative may be worse than the allowing the reforms, i.e.
revolution). The key is that such changes are **not** the natural
function of the state.

So due to their economic assets, the elites whose incomes are derived
from them -- namely, finance capitalists, industrial capitalists, and
landlords -- are able to accumulate vast wealth from those whom they
exploit. This stratifies society into a hierarchy of economic classes,
with a huge disparity of wealth between the small property-owning elite
at the top and the non-property-owning majority at the bottom. Then,
because it takes enormous wealth to win elections and lobby or bribe
legislators, the propertied elite are able to control the political
process -- and hence the state -- through the *"power of the purse."* In
summary:

> *"No democracy has freed itself from the rule by the well-to-do
> anymore than it has freed itself from the division between the ruler
> and the ruled . . . at the very least, no democracy has jeopardised
> the role of business enterprise. Only the wealthy and well off can
> afford to launch viable campaigns for public office and to assume such
> positions. Change in government in a democracy is a circulation from
> one elite group to another."* [Harold Barclay, **Op. Cit.**, p. 47]

In other words, elite control of politics through huge wealth
disparities insures the continuation of such disparities and thus the
continuation of elite control. In this way the crucial political
decisions of those at the top are insulated from significant influence
by those at the bottom. Finally, it should be noted that these barriers
do not arise accidentally. They flow from the way the state is
structured. By effectively disempowering the masses and centralising
power into the hands of the few which make up the government, the very
nature of the state ensures that it remains under elite control. This is
why, from the start, the capitalist class has favoured centralisation.
We discuss this in the next two sections.

(For more on the ruling elite and its relation to the state, see C.
Wright Mills, **The Power Elite** [Oxford, 1956]; cf. Ralph Miliband,
**The State in Capitalist Society** [Basic Books, 1969] and **Divided
Societies** [Oxford, 1989]; G. William Domhoff, **Who Rules America?**
[Prentice Hall, 1967]; and **Who Rules America Now? A View for the
'80s** [Touchstone, 1983]).\<.p\>

B.2.4 How does state centralisation affect freedom?
---------------------------------------------------

It is a common idea that voting every four or so years to elect the
public face of a highly centralised and bureaucratic machine means that
ordinary people control the state and, as a consequence, free. In
reality, this is a false idea. In any system of centralised power the
general population have little say in what affects them and, as a
result, their freedom is extremely limited.

Obviously, to say that this idea is false does not imply that there is
no difference between a liberal republic and a fascistic or monarchical
state. Far from it. The vote is an important victory wrested from the
powers that be. That, of course, is not to suggest that anarchists think
that libertarian socialism is only possible after universal suffrage has
been won or that it is achievable via it. Far from it. It is simply to
point out that being able to pick your ruler is a step forward from
having one imposed upon you. Moreover, those considered able to pick
their ruler is, logically, also able to do without one.

However, while the people are proclaimed to be sovereign in a democratic
state, in reality they alienate their power and hand over control of
their affairs to a small minority. Liberty, in other words, is reduced
to merely the possibility *"to pick rulers"* every four or five years
and whose mandate (sic!) is *"to legislate on any subject, and his
decision will become law."* [Kropotkin, **Words of a Rebel**, p. 122 and
p. 123]

In other words, representative democracy is not "liberty" nor
"self-government." It is about alienating power to a few people who then
(mis)rule in your name. To imply it is anything else is nonsense. So
while we get to pick a politician to govern in our name it does not
follow that they represent those who voted for them in any meaningful
sense. As shown time and time again, "representative" governments can
happily ignore the opinions of the majority while, at the same time,
verbally praising the "democracy" it is abusing (New Labour in the UK
during the run up to the invasion of Iraq was a classic example of
this). Given that politicians can do what they like for four or five
years once elected, it is clear that popular control via the ballot box
is hardly effective or even meaningful.

Indeed, such "democracy" almost always means electing politicians who
say one thing in opposition and do the opposite once in office.
Politicians who, at best, ignore their election manifesto when it suits
them or, at worse, introduce the exact opposite. It is the kind of
"democracy" in which people can protest in their hundreds of thousands
against a policy only to see their "representative" government simply
ignore them (while, at the same time, seeing their representatives bend
over backward ensuring corporate profits and power while speaking
platitudes to the electorate and their need to tighten their belts). At
best it can be said that democratic governments tend to be less
oppressive than others but it does not follow that this equates to
liberty.

State centralisation is the means to ensure this situation and the
debasement of freedom it implies.

All forms of hierarchy, even those in which the top officers are elected
are marked by authoritarianism and centralism. Power is concentrated in
the centre (or at the top), which means that society becomes *"a heap of
dust animated from without by a subordinating, centralist idea."* [P. J.
Proudhon, quoted by Martin Buber, **Paths in Utopia**, p. 29] For, once
elected, top officers can do as they please, and, as in all
bureaucracies, many important decisions are made by non-elected staff.
This means that the democratic state is a contradiction in terms:

> *"In the democratic state the election of rulers by alleged majority
> vote is a subterfuge which helps individuals to believe that they
> control the situation. They are selecting persons to do a task for
> them and they have no guarantee that it will be carried out as they
> desired. They are abdicating to these persons, granting them the right
> to impose their own wills by the threat of force. Electing individuals
> to public office is like being given a limited choice of your
> oppressors . . . Parliamentary democracies are essentially oligarchies
> in which the populace is led to believe that it delegates all its
> authority to members of parliament to do as they think best."* [Harold
> Barclay, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 46-7]

The nature of centralisation places power into the hands of the few.
Representative democracy is based on this delegation of power, with
voters electing others to govern them. This cannot help but create a
situation in which freedom is endangered -- universal suffrage *"does
not prevent the formation of a body of politicians, privileged in fact
though not in law, who, devoting themselves exclusively to the
administration of the nation's public affairs, end by becoming a sort of
political aristocracy or oligarchy."* [Bakunin, **The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 240]

This should not come as a surprise, for to *"create a state is to
institutionalise power in a form of machine that exists **apart** from
the people. It is to professionalise rule and policy making, to create a
distinct interest (be it of bureaucrats, deputies, commissars,
legislators, the military, the police, ad nauseam) that, however weak or
however well-intentioned it may be at first, eventually takes on a
corruptive power of its own."* [Murray Bookchin, *"The Ecological
Crisis, Socialism, and the need to remake society,"* pp. 1-10, **Society
and Nature**, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 7]

Centralism makes democracy meaningless, as political decision-making is
given over to professional politicians in remote capitals. Lacking local
autonomy, people are isolated from each other (atomised) by having no
political forum where they can come together to discuss, debate, and
decide among themselves the issues they consider important. Elections
are not based on natural, decentralised groupings and thus cease to be
relevant. The individual is just another "voter" in the mass, a
political "constituent" and nothing more. The amorphous basis of modern,
statist elections *"aims at nothing less than to abolish political life
in towns, communes and departments, and through this destruction of all
municipal and regional autonomy to arrest the development of universal
suffrage."* [Proudhon, quoted by Martin Buber, **Op. Cit.**, p. 29]

Thus people are disempowered by the very structures that claim to allow
them to express themselves. To quote Proudhon again, in the centralised
state *"the citizen divests himself of sovereignty, the town and the
Department and province above it, absorbed by central authority, are no
longer anything but agencies under direct ministerial control."* He
continues:

> *"The Consequences soon make themselves felt: the citizen and the town
> are deprived of all dignity, the state's depredations multiply, and
> the burden on the taxpayer increases in proportion. It is no longer
> the government that is made for the people; it is the people who are
> made for the government. Power invades everything, dominates
> everything, absorbs everything."* [**The Principle of Federation**, p.
> 59]

As intended, as isolated people are no threat to the powers that be.
This process of marginalisation can be seen from American history, for
example, when town meetings were replaced by elected bodies, with the
citizens being placed in passive, spectator roles as mere "voters" (see
[next section](secB2.html#secb25)). Being an atomised voter is hardly an
ideal notion of "freedom," despite the rhetoric of politicians about the
virtues of a "free society" and "The Free World" -- as if voting once
every four or five years could ever be classed as "liberty" or even
"democracy."

Marginalisation of the people is the key control mechanism in the state
and authoritarian organisations in general. Considering the European
Community (EC), for example, we find that the *"mechanism for
decision-making between EC states leaves power in the hands of officials
(from Interior ministries, police, immigration, customs and security
services) through a myriad of working groups. Senior officials . . .
play a critical role in ensuring agreements between the different state
officials. The EC Summit meetings, comprising the 12 Prime Ministers,
simply rubber-stamp the conclusions agreed by the Interior and Justice
Ministers. It is only then, in this intergovernmental process, that
parliaments and people are informed (and them only with the barest
details)."* [Tony Bunyon, **Statewatching the New Europe**, p. 39]

As well as economic pressures from elites, governments also face
pressures within the state itself due to the bureaucracy that comes with
centralism. There is a difference between the state and government. The
state is the permanent collection of institutions that have entrenched
power structures and interests. The government is made up of various
politicians. It's the institutions that have power in the state due to
their permanence, not the representatives who come and go. As Clive
Ponting (an ex-civil servant himself) indicates, *"the function of a
political system in any country . . . is to regulate, but not to alter
radically, the existing economic structure and its linked power
relationships. The great illusion of politics is that politicians have
the ability to make whatever changes they like."* [quoted in
**Alternatives**, no.5, p. 19]

Therefore, as well as marginalising the people, the state also ends up
marginalising "our" representatives. As power rests not in the elected
bodies, but in a bureaucracy, popular control becomes increasingly
meaningless. As Bakunin pointed out, *"liberty can be valid only when .
. . [popular] control [of the state] is valid. On the contrary, where
such control is fictitious, this freedom of the people likewise becomes
a mere fiction."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 212] State centralisation ensures
that popular control is meaningless.

This means that state centralism can become a serious source of danger
to the liberty and well-being of most of the people under it. *"The
bourgeois republicans,"* argued Bakunin, *"do not yet grasp this simple
truth, demonstrated by the experience of all times and in all lands,
that every organised power standing above and over the people
necessarily excludes the freedom of peoples. The political state has no
other purpose than to protect and perpetuate the exploitation of the
labour of the proletariat by the economically dominant classes, and in
so doing the state places itself against the freedom of the people."*
[**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 416]

Unsurprisingly, therefore, *"whatever progress that has been made . . .
on various issues, whatever things have been done for people, whatever
human rights have been gained, have not been gained through the calm
deliberations of Congress or the wisdom of presidents or the ingenious
decisions of the Supreme Court. Whatever progress has been made . . .
has come because of the actions of ordinary people, of citizens, of
social movements. Not from the Constitution."* That document has been
happily ignored by the official of the state when it suits them. An
obvious example is the 14th Amendment of the US Constitution, which
*"didn't have any meaning until black people rose up in the 1950s and
1960s in the South in mass movements . . . They made whatever words
there were in the Constitution and the 14th Amendment have some meaning
for the first time."* [Howard Zinn, **Failure to Quit**, p. 69 and p.
73]

This is because the *"fact that you have got a constitutional right
doesn't mean you're going to get that right. Who has the power on the
spot? The policeman on the street. The principal in the school. The
employer on job. The Constitution does not cover private employment. In
other words, the Constitution does not cover most of reality."* Thus our
liberty is not determined by the laws of the state. Rather *"the source
and solution of our civil liberties problems are in the situations of
every day . . . Our actual freedom is determined not by the Constitution
or the Court, but by the power the policeman has over us on the street
or that of the local judge behind him; by the authority of our
employers; . . . by the welfare bureaucrats if we are poor; . . . by
landlords if we are tenants."* Thus freedom and justice *"are determined
by power and money"* rather than laws. This points to the importance of
popular participation, of social movements, for what those do are *"to
create a countervailing power to the policeman with a club and a gun.
That's essentially what movements do: They create countervailing powers
to counter the power which is much more important than what is written
down in the Constitution or the laws."* [Zinn, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 84-5,
pp. 54-5 and p. 79]

It is precisely this kind of mass participation that centralisation
kills. Under centralism, social concern and power are taken away from
ordinary citizens and centralised in the hands of the few. This results
in any formally guaranteed liberties being effectively ignored when
people want to use them, if the powers at be so decide. Ultimately,
isolated individuals facing the might of a centralised state machine are
in a weak position. Which is way the state does what it can to undermine
such popular movements and organisations (going so far as to violate its
own laws to do so).

As should be obvious, by centralisation anarchists do not mean simply a
territorial centralisation of power in a specific central location (such
as in a nation state where power rests in a central government located
in a specific place). We also mean the centralisation of **power** into
a few hands. Thus we can have a system like feudalism which is
territorially decentralised (i.e. made up on numerous feudal lords
without a strong central state) while having power centralised in a few
hands locally (i.e. power rests in the hands of the feudal lords, not in
the general population). Or, to use another example, we can have a
laissez-faire capitalist system which has a weak central authority but
is made up of a multitude of autocratic workplaces. As such, getting rid
of the central power (say the central state in capitalism or the monarch
in absolutism) while retaining the local authoritarian institutions (say
capitalist firms and feudal landlords) would not ensure freedom.
Equally, the abolition of local authorities may simply result in the
strengthening of central power and a corresponding weakening of freedom.

B.2.5 Who benefits from centralisation?
---------------------------------------

No social system would exist unless it benefited someone or some group.
Centralisation, be it in the state or the company, is no different. In
all cases, centralisation directly benefits those at the top, because it
shelters them from those who are below, allowing the latter to be
controlled and governed more effectively. Therefore, it is in the direct
interests of bureaucrats and politicians to support centralism.

Under capitalism, however, various sections of the business class also
support state centralism. This is the symbiotic relationship between
capital and the state. As will be discussed later (in [section
F.8](secF8.html)), the state played an important role in "nationalising"
the market, i.e. forcing the "free market" onto society. By centralising
power in the hands of representatives and so creating a state
bureaucracy, ordinary people were disempowered and thus became less
likely to interfere with the interests of the wealthy. *"In a
republic,"* writes Bakunin, *"the so-called people, the legal people,
allegedly represented by the State, stifle and will keep on stifling the
actual and living people"* by *"the bureaucratic world"* for *"the
greater benefit of the privileged propertied classes as well as for its
own benefit."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 211]

Examples of increased political centralisation being promoted by wealthy
business interests by can be seen throughout the history of capitalism.
*"In revolutionary America, 'the nature of city government came in for
heated discussion,' observes Merril Jensen . . . Town meetings . . .
'had been a focal point of revolutionary activity'. The anti-democratic
reaction that set in after the American revolution was marked by efforts
to do away with town meeting government . . . Attempts by conservative
elements were made to establish a 'corporate form (of municipal
government) whereby the towns would be governed by mayors and councils'
elected from urban wards . . . [T]he merchants 'backed incorporation
consistently in their efforts to escape town meetings.'"* [Murray
Bookchin, **Towards an Ecological Society**, p. 182]

Here we see local policy making being taken out of the hands of the many
and centralised in the hands of the few (who are always the wealthy).
France provides another example:

> *"The Government found. . .the folkmotes [of all households] 'too
> noisy', too disobedient, and in 1787, elected councils, composed of a
> mayor and three to six syndics, chosen among the wealthier peasants,
> were introduced instead."* [Peter Kropotkin, **Mutual Aid**, pp.
> 185-186]

This was part of a general movement to disempower the working class by
centralising decision making power into the hands of the few (as in the
American revolution). Kropotkin indicates the process at work:

> "[T]he middle classes, who had until then had sought the support of
> the people, in order to obtain constitutional laws and to dominate the
> higher nobility, were going, now that they had seen and felt the
> strength of the people, to do all they could to dominate the people,
> to disarm them and to drive them back into subjection.
>
> [. . .]
>
> "[T]hey made haste to legislate in such a way that the political power
> which was slipping out of the hand of the Court should not fall into
> the hands of the people. Thus . . . [it was] proposed . . . to divide
> the French into two classes, of which one only, the **active**
> citizens, should take part in the government, whilst the other,
> comprising the great mass of the people under the name of **passive**
> citizens, should be deprived of all political rights . . . [T]he
> [National] Assembly divided France into departments . . . always
> maintaining the principle of excluding the poorer classes from the
> Government . . . [T]hey excluded from the primary assemblies the mass
> of the people . . . who could no longer take part in the primary
> assemblies, and accordingly had no right to nominate the electors [who
> chose representatives to the National Assembly], or the municipality,
> or any of the local authorities . . .
>
> "And finally, the **permanence** of the electoral assemblies was
> interdicted. Once the middle-class governors were appointed, these
> assemblies were not to meet again. Once the middle-class governors
> were appointed, they must not be controlled too strictly. Soon the
> right even of petitioning and of passing resolutions was taken away --
> 'Vote and hold your tongue!'
>
> "As to the villages . . . the general assembly of the inhabitants . .
> . [to which] belonged the administration of the affairs of the commune
> . . . were forbidden by the . . . law. Henceforth only the well-to-do
> peasants, the **active** citizens, had the right to meet, **once a
> year**, to nominate the mayor and the municipality, composed of three
> or four middle-class men of the village.
>
> "A similar municipal organisation was given to the towns. . .
>
> "[Thus] the middle classes surrounded themselves with every precaution
> in order to keep the municipal power in the hands of the well-to-do
> members of the community." [**The Great French Revolution**, vol. 1,
> pp. 179-186]

Thus centralisation aimed to take power away from the mass of the people
and give it to the wealthy. The power of the people rested in popular
assemblies, such as the *"Sections"* and *"Districts"* of Paris
(expressing, in Kropotkin's words, *"the principles of anarchism"* and
*"practising . . . Direct Self-Government"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 204 and p.
203]) and village assemblies. However, the National Assembly *"tried all
it could to lessen the power of the districts . . . [and] put an end to
those hotbeds of Revolution . . . [by allowing] **active** citizens only
. . . to take part in the electoral and administrative assemblies."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 211] Thus the *"central government was steadily
endeavouring to subject the sections to its authority"* with the state
*"seeking to centralise everything in its own hands . . . [I]ts
depriving the popular organisations . . . all . . . administrative
functions . . . and its subjecting them to its bureaucracy in police
matters, meant the death of the sections."* [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 2, p.
549 and p. 552]

As can be seen, both the French and American revolutions saw a similar
process by which the wealthy centralised power into their own hands
(volume one of Murray Bookchin's **The Third Revolution** discusses the
French and American revolutions in some detail). This ensured that
working class people (i.e. the majority) were excluded from the decision
making process and subject to the laws and power of a few. Which, of
course, benefits the minority class whose representatives have that
power. This was the rationale for the centralisation of power in every
revolution. Whether it was the American, French or Russian, the
centralisation of power was the means to exclude the many from
participating in the decisions that affected them and their communities.

For example, the founding fathers of the American State were quite
explicit on the need for centralisation for precisely this reason. For
James Madison the key worry was when the *"majority"* gained control of
*"popular government"* and was in a position to *"sacrifice to its
ruling passion or interest both the public good and the rights of other
citizens."* Thus the *"public good"* escaped the *"majority"* nor was
it, as you would think, what the public thought of as good (for some
reason left unexplained, Madison considered the majority able to pick
those who **could** identify the public good). To safeguard against
this, he advocated a republic rather than a democracy in which the
citizens *"assemble and administer the government in person . . . have
ever been found incompatible with personal security or the rights of
property."* He, of course, took it for granted that *"[t]hose who hold
and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests
in society."* His schema was to ensure that private property was
defended and, as a consequence, the interests of those who held
protected. Hence the need for *"the delegation of the government . . .
to a small number of citizens elected by the rest."* This centralisation
of power into a few hands locally was matched by a territorial
centralisation for the same reason. Madison favoured *"a large over a
small republic"* as a *"rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts,
for an equal division of property, or for any other improper or wicked
project, will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the Union than a
particular member of it."* [contained in **Voices of a People's History
of the United States**, Howard Zinn and Anthony Arnove (eds.), pp.
109-113] This desire to have a formal democracy, where the masses are
mere spectators of events rather than participants, is a recurring theme
in capitalism (see the chapter *"Force and Opinion"* in Noam Chomsky's
**Deterring Democracy** for a good overview).

On the federal and state levels in the US after the Revolution,
centralisation of power was encouraged, since *"most of the makers of
the Constitution had some direct economic interest in establishing a
strong federal government."* Needless to say, while the rich elite were
well represented in formulating the principles of the new order, four
groups were not: *"slaves, indentured servants, women, men without
property."* Needless to say, the new state and its constitution did not
reflect their interests. Given that these were the vast majority,
*"there was not only a positive need for strong central government to
protect the large economic interests, but also immediate fear of
rebellion by discontented farmers."* [Howard Zinn, **A People's History
of the United States**, p. 90] The chief event was Shay's Rebellion in
western Massachusetts. There the new Constitution had raised property
qualifications for voting and, therefore, no one could hold state office
without being wealthy. The new state was formed to combat such
rebellions, to protect the wealthy few against the many.

Moreover, state centralisation, the exclusion of popular participation,
was essential to mould US society into one dominated by capitalism:

> *"In the thirty years leading up to the Civil War, the law was
> increasingly interpreted in the courts to suit capitalist development.
> Studying this, Morton Horwitz (**The Transformation of American Law**)
> points out that the English common-law was no longer holy when it
> stood in the way of business growth . . . Judgements for damages
> against businessmen were taken out of the hands of juries, which were
> unpredictable, and given to judges . . . The ancient idea of a fair
> price for goods gave way in the courts to the idea of caveat emptor
> (let the buyer beware) . . . contract law was intended to discriminate
> against working people and for business . . . The pretence of the law
> was that a worker and a railroad made a contract with equal bargaining
> power . . . 'The circle was completed; the law had come simply to
> ratify those forms of inequality that the market system had
> produced.'"* [Zinn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 234]

The US state was created on elitist liberal doctrine and actively aimed
to reduce democratic tendencies (in the name of "individual liberty").
What happened in practice (unsurprisingly enough) was that the wealthy
elite used the state to undermine popular culture and common right in
favour of protecting and extending their own interests and power. In the
process, US society was reformed in their own image:

> *"By the middle of the nineteenth century the legal system had been
> reshaped to the advantage of men of commerce and industry at the
> expense of farmers, workers, consumers, and other less powerful groups
> in society. . . it actively promoted a legal distribution of wealth
> against the weakest groups in society."* [Morton Horwitz, quoted by
> Zinn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 235]

In more modern times, state centralisation and expansion has gone hand
in glove with rapid industrialisation and the growth of business. As
Edward Herman points out, *"[t]o a great extent, it was the growth in
business size and power that elicited the countervailing emergence of
unions and the growth of government. Bigness **beyond** business was to
a large extent a response to bigness **in** business."* [**Corporate
Control, Corporate Power**, p. 188 -- see also, Stephen Skowronek,
**Building A New American State: The Expansion of National
Administrative Capacities, 1877-1920**] State centralisation was
required to produce bigger, well-defined markets and was supported by
business when it acted in their interests (i.e. as markets expanded, so
did the state in order to standardise and enforce property laws and so
on). On the other hand, this development towards "big government"
created an environment in which big business could grow (often
encouraged by the state by subsidies and protectionism - as would be
expected when the state is run by the wealthy) as well as further
removing state power from influence by the masses and placing it more
firmly in the hands of the wealthy. It is little wonder we see such
developments, for *"[s]tructures of governance tend to coalesce around
domestic power, in the last few centuries, economic power."* [Noam
Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p. 178]

State centralisation makes it easier for business to control government,
ensuring that it remains their puppet and to influence the political
process. For example, the European Round Table (ERT) *"an elite lobby
group of . . . chairmen or chief executives of large multi-nationals
based mainly in the EU . . . [with] 11 of the 20 largest European
companies [with] combined sales [in 1991] . . . exceeding \$500 billion,
. . . approximately 60 per cent of EU industrial production,"* makes
much use of the EU. As two researchers who have studied this body note,
the ERT *"is adept at lobbying . . . so that many ERT proposals and
'visions' are mysteriously regurgitated in Commission summit
documents."* The ERT *"claims that the labour market should be more
'flexible,' arguing for more flexible hours, seasonal contracts, job
sharing and part time work. In December 1993, seven years after the ERT
made its suggestions [and after most states had agreed to the Maastricht
Treaty and its "social chapter"], the European Commission published a
white paper . . . [proposing] making labour markets in Europe more
flexible."* [Doherty and Hoedeman, *"Knights of the Road,"* **New
Statesman**, 4/11/94, p. 27]

The current talk of globalisation, NAFTA, and the Single European Market
indicates an underlying transformation in which state growth follows the
path cut by economic growth. Simply put, with the growth of
transnational corporations and global finance markets, the bounds of the
nation-state have been made economically redundant. As companies have
expanded into multi-nationals, so the pressure has mounted for states to
follow suit and rationalise their markets across *"nations"* by creating
multi-state agreements and unions.

As Noam Chomsky notes, G7, the IMF, the World Bank and so forth are a
*"de facto world government,"* and *"the institutions of the
transnational state largely serve other masters [than the people], as
state power typically does; in this case the rising transnational
corporations in the domains of finance and other services,
manufacturing, media and communications."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 179]

As multi-nationals grow and develop, breaking through national
boundaries, a corresponding growth in statism is required. Moreover, a
*"particularly valuable feature of the rising de facto governing
institutions is their immunity from popular influence, even awareness.
They operate in secret, creating a world subordinated to the needs of
investors, with the public 'put in its place', the threat of democracy
reduced"* [Chomsky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 178].

This does not mean that capitalists desire state centralisation for
everything. Often, particularly for social issues, relative
decentralisation is often preferred (i.e. power is given to local
bureaucrats) in order to increase business control over them. By
devolving control to local areas, the power which large corporations,
investment firms and the like have over the local government increases
proportionally. In addition, even middle-sized enterprise can join in
and influence, constrain or directly control local policies and set one
workforce against another. Private power can ensure that *"freedom"* is
safe, **their** freedom.

No matter which set of bureaucrats are selected, the need to centralise
social power, thus marginalising the population, is of prime importance
to the business class. It is also important to remember that capitalist
opposition to *"big government"* is often financial, as the state feeds
off the available social surplus, so reducing the amount left for the
market to distribute to the various capitals in competition.

In reality, what capitalists object to about "big government" is its
spending on social programs designed to benefit the poor and working
class, an "illegitimate" function which "wastes" part of the surplus
that might go to capital (and also makes people less desperate and so
less willing to work cheaply). Hence the constant push to reduce the
state to its "classical" role as protector of private property and the
system, and little else. Other than their specious quarrel with the
welfare state, capitalists are the staunchest supports of government
(and the "correct" form of state intervention, such as defence
spending), as evidenced by the fact that funds can always be found to
build more prisons and send troops abroad to advance ruling-class
interests, even as politicians are crying that there is "no money" in
the treasury for scholarships, national health care, or welfare for the
poor.

State centralisation ensures that *"as much as the equalitarian
principles have been embodied in its political constitutions, it is the
bourgeoisie that governs, and it is the people, the workers, peasants
included, who obey the laws made by the bourgeoisie"* who *"has in fact
if not by right the exclusive privilege of governing."* This means that
*"political equality . . . is only a puerile fiction, an utter lie."* It
takes a great deal of faith to assume that the rich, *"being so far
removed from the people by the conditions of its economic and social
existence"* can *"give expression in the government and in the laws, to
the feelings, the ideas, and the will of the people."* Unsurprisingly,
we find that *"in legislation as well as in carrying on the government,
the bourgeoisie is guided by its own interests and its own instincts
without concerning itself much with the interests of the people."* So
while *"on election days even the proudest bourgeois who have any
political ambitions are forced to court . . . The Sovereign People."*
But on the *"day after the elections every one goes back to their daily
business"* and the politicians are given carte blanche to rule in the
name of the people they claim to represent." [Bakunin, **The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 218 and p. 219]

B.2.6 Can the state be an independent power within society?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Yes it can. Given the power of the state machine, it would be hard to
believe that it could always be simply a tool for the economically
dominant minority in a society. Given its structure and powers, it can
use them to further its own interests. Indeed, in some circumstances it
can be the ruling class itself.

However, in normal times the state is, as we discussed in [section
B.2.1](secB2.html#secb21), a tool of the capitalist class. This, it must
be stressed, does not mean that they always see *"eye to eye."* Top
politicians, for example, are part of the ruling elite, but they are in
competition with other parts of it. In addition, different sectors of
the capitalist class are competing against each other for profits,
political influence, privileges, etc. The bourgeoisie, argued Malatesta,
*"are always at war among themselves . . . Thus the games of the swings,
the manoeuvres, the concessions and withdrawals, the attempts to find
allies among the people against the conservatives, and among the
conservatives against the people."* [**Anarchy**, p. 25] This means that
different sections of the ruling class will cluster around different
parties, depending on their interests, and these parties will seek to
gain power to further those interests. This may bring them into conflict
with other sections of the capitalist class. The state is the means by
which these conflicts can be resolved.

Given that the role of the state is to ensure the best conditions for
capital **as a whole,** this means that, when necessary, it can and does
work against the interests of certain parts of the capitalist class. To
carry out this function the state needs to be above individual
capitalists or companies. This is what can give the state the appearance
of being a neutral social institution and can fool people into thinking
that it represents the interests of society as a whole. Yet this
sometime neutrality with regards to individual capitalist companies
exists only as an expression of its role as an instrument of capital in
general. Moreover, without the tax money from successful businesses the
state would be weakened and so the state is in competition with
capitalists for the surplus value produced by the working class. Hence
the anti-state rhetoric of big business which can fool those unaware of
the hand-in-glove nature of modern capitalism to the state.

As Chomsky notes:

> *"There has always been a kind of love-hate relationship between
> business interests and the capitalist state. On the one hand, business
> wants a powerful state to regulate disorderly markets, provide
> services and subsidies to business, enhance and protect access to
> foreign markets and resources, and so on. On the other hand, business
> does not want a powerful competitor, in particular, one that might
> respond to different interests, popular interests, and conduct
> policies with a redistributive effect, with regard to income or
> power."* [**Turning the Tide**, p. 211]

As such, the state is often in conflict with sections of the capitalist
class, just as sections of that class use the state to advance their own
interests within the general framework of protecting the capitalist
system (i.e. the interests of the ruling class **as a class**). The
state's role is to resolve such disputes within that class peacefully.
Under modern capitalism, this is usually done via the *"democratic"*
process (within which we get the chance of picking the representatives
of the elite who will oppress us least).

Such conflicts sometimes give the impression of the state being a
"neutral" body, but this is an illusion -- it exists to defend class
power and privilege -- but exactly which class it defends can change.
While recognising that the state protects the power and position of the
economically dominant class within a society anarchists also argue that
the state has, due to its hierarchical nature, interests of its own.
Thus it cannot be considered as simply the tool of the economically
dominant class in society. States have their own dynamics, due to their
structure, which generate their own classes and class interests and
privileges (and which allows them to escape from the control of the
economic ruling class and pursue their own interests, to a greater or
lesser degree). As Malatesta put it *"the government, though springing
from the bourgeoisie and its servant and protector, tends, as with every
servant and every protector, to achieve its own emancipation and to
dominate whoever it protects."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 25]

Thus, even in a class system like capitalism, the state can act
independently of the ruling elite and, potentially, act against their
interests. As part of its role is to mediate between individual
capitalists/corporations, it needs sufficient power to tame them and
this requires the state to have some independence from the class whose
interests it, in general, defends. And such independence can be used to
further its own interests, even to the detriment of the capitalist
class, if the circumstances allow. If the capitalist class is weak or
divided then the state can be in a position to exercise its autonomy
vis-à-vis the economically dominant elite, using against the capitalists
as a whole the tools it usually applies to them individually to further
its own interests and powers.

This means that the state it not just *"the guardian of capital"* for it
*"has a vitality of its own and constitutes . . . a veritable social
class apart from other classes . . . ; and this class has its own
particular parasitical and usurious interests, in conflict with those of
the rest of the collectivity which the State itself claims to represent
. . . The State, being the depository of society's greatest physical and
material force, has too much power in its hands to resign itself to
being no more than the capitalists' guard dog."* [Luigi Fabbri, quoted
by David Berry, **A History of the French Anarchist Movement,
1917-1945**, p. 39]

Therefore the state machine (and structure), while its modern form is
intrinsically linked to capitalism, cannot be seen as being a tool
usable by the majority. This is because the *"State, any State -- even
when it dresses-up in the most liberal and democratic form -- is
essentially based on domination, and upon violence, that is upon
despotism -- a concealed but no less dangerous despotism."* The State
*"denotes power, authority, domination; it presupposes inequality in
fact."* [**The Political Philosophy of Michael Bakunin**, p. 211 and p.
240] The state, therefore, has its own specific logic, its own
priorities and its own momentum. It constitutes its own locus of power
which is not merely a derivative of economic class power. Consequently,
the state can be beyond the control of the economically dominant class
and it need not reflect economic relations.

This is due to its hierarchical and centralised nature, which empowers
the few who control the state machine -- *"[e]very state power, every
government, by its nature places itself outside and over the people and
inevitably subordinates them to an organisation and to aims which are
foreign to and opposed to the real needs and aspirations of the
people."* If *"the whole proletariat . . . [are] members of the
government . . . there will be no government, no state, but, if there is
to be a state there will be those who are ruled and those who are
slaves."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 328 and p. 330]

In other words, the state bureaucracy is itself directly an oppressor
and can exist independently of an economically dominant class. In
Bakunin's prophetic words:

> *"What have we seen throughout history? The State has always been the
> patrimony of some privileged class: the sacerdotal class, the
> nobility, the bourgeoisie -- and finally, when all other classes have
> exhausted themselves, the class of the bureaucracy enters the stage
> and then the State falls, or rises, if you please, to the position of
> a machine."* [**The Political Philosophy of Michael Bakunin**, p. 208]

This is unsurprising. For anarchists, *"the State organisation . . .
[is] the force to which minorities resorted for establishing and
organising their power over the masses."* It does not imply that these
minorities need to be the economically dominant class in a society. The
state is *"a superstructure built to the advantage of Landlordism,
Capitalism, and Officialism."* [**Evolution and Environment**, p. 82 and
p. 105] Consequently, we cannot assume that abolishing one or even two
of this unholy trinity will result in freedom nor that all three share
exactly the same interests or power in relation to the others. Thus, in
some situations, the landlord class can promote its interests over those
of the capitalist class (and vice versa) while the state bureaucracy can
grow at the expense of both.

As such, it is important to stress that the minority whose interests the
state defends need not be an economically dominant one (although it
usually is). Under some circumstances a priesthood can be a ruling
class, as can a military group or a bureaucracy. This means that the
state can also effectively **replace** the economically dominant elite
as the exploiting class. This is because anarchists view the state as
having (class) interests of its own.

As we discuss in more detail in [section H.3.9](secH3.html#sech39), the
state cannot be considered as merely an instrument of (economic) class
rule. History has shown numerous societies were the state **itself** was
the ruling class and where no other dominant economic class existed. The
experience of Soviet Russia indicates the validity of this analysis. The
reality of the Russian Revolution contrasted starkly with the Marxist
claim that a state was simply an instrument of class rule and,
consequently, the working class needed to build its own state within
which to rule society. Rather than being an instrument by which working
class people could run and transform society in their own interests, the
new state created by the Russian Revolution soon became a power over the
class it claimed to represent (see [section H.6](secH6.html) for more on
this). The working class was exploited and dominated by the new state
and its bureaucracy rather than by the capitalist class as previously.
This did not happen by chance. As we discuss in [section
H.3.7](secH3.html#sech37), the state has evolved certain characteristics
(such as centralisation, delegated power and so on) which ensure its
task as enforcer of minority rule is achieved. Keeping those
characteristics will inevitably mean keeping the task they were created
to serve.

Thus, to summarise, the state's role is to repress the individual and
the working class as a whole in the interests of economically dominant
minorities/classes and in its own interests. It is *"a society for
mutual insurance between the landlord, the military commander, the
judge, the priest, and later on the capitalist, in order to support such
other's authority over the people, and for exploiting the poverty of the
masses and getting rich themselves."* Such was the *"origin of the
State; such was its history; and such is its present essence."*
[Kropotkin, **Evolution and Environment**, p. 94]

So while the state is an instrument of class rule it does **not**
automatically mean that it does not clash with sections of the class it
represents nor that it has to be the tool of an economically dominant
class. One thing is sure, however. The state is not a suitable tool for
securing the emancipation of the oppressed.
