Section B - Why do anarchists oppose the current system?
========================================================

This section of the FAQ presents an analysis of the basic social
relationships of modern society and the structures which create them,
particularly those aspects of society that anarchists want to change.

Anarchism is, essentially, a revolt against capitalism. As a political
theory it was born at the same time as capitalism and in opposition to
it. As a social movement it grew in strength and influence as capitalism
colonised more and more parts of society. Rather than simply express
opposition to the state, as some so-called experts assert, anarchism has
always been opposed to other forms of authority and the oppression they
create, in particular capitalism and its particular form of private
property. It is no coincidence that Proudhon, the first person to
declare themselves an anarchist, did so in a book entitled **What is
Property?** (and gave the answer ***"It is theft!"***). From Proudhon
onwards, anarchism has opposed both the state and capitalism (indeed, it
is the one thing such diverse thinkers as Benjamin Tucker and Peter
Kropotkin both agreed on). Needless to say, since Proudhon anarchism has
extended its critique of authority beyond these two social evils. Other
forms of social hierarchy, such as sexism, racism and homophobia, have
been rejected as limitations of freedom and equality. So this section of
the FAQ summarises the key ideas behind anarchism's rejection of the
current system we live under.

This, of course, does not mean that anarchistic ideas have not existed
within society before the dawn of capitalism. Far from it. Thinkers
whose ideas can be classified as anarchist go back thousands of years
and are found many diverse cultures and places. Indeed, it would be no
exaggeration to say that anarchism was born the moment the state and
private property were created. However, as Kropotkin noted, while *"from
all times there have been Anarchists and Statists"* in our times
*"Anarchy was brought forth by the same critical and revolutionary
protest that gave rise to Socialism in general."* However, unlike other
socialists, anarchists have not stopped at the *"negation of Capitalism
and of society based on the subjection of labour to capital"* and went
further to *"declare themselves against what constitutes the real
strength of Capitalism: the State and its principle supports --
centralisation of authority, law, always made by a minority for its own
profit, and a form of justice whose chief aim is to protect Authority
and Capitalism."* So anarchism was *"not only against Capitalism, but
also against these pillars of Capitalism: Law, Authority, and the
State."* [**Evolution and Environment**, p. 16 and p. 19]

In other words, anarchism as it exists today, as a social movement with
a long history of struggle and with a political theory and set of ideas,
is the product of the transformation of society which accompanied the
creation of the modern (nation-) state and capital and (far more
importantly) the reaction, resistance and opposition of those subject to
these new social relationships and institutions. As such, the analysis
and critique presented in this section of the FAQ will concentrate on
modern, capitalist, society.

Anarchists realise that the power of governments and other forms of
hierarchy depends upon the agreement of the governed. Fear is not the
whole answer, it is far more *"because they [the oppressed] subscribe to
the same values as their governors. Rulers and ruled alike believe in
the principle of authority, of hierarchy, of power."* [Colin Ward,
**Anarchy in Action**, p. 15] With this in mind, we present in this
section of the FAQ our arguments to challenge this "consensus," to
present the case why we should become anarchists, why authoritarian
social relationships and organisations are not in our interests.

Needless to say, this task is not easy. No ruling class could survive
unless the institutions which empower it are generally accepted by those
subject to them. This is achieved by various means -- by propaganda, the
so-called education system, by tradition, by the media, by the general
cultural assumptions of a society. In this way the dominant ideas in
society are those of the dominant elite. This means that any social
movement needs to combat these ideas before trying to end them:

> *"People often do not even recognise the existence of systems of
> oppression and domination. They have to try to struggle to gain their
> rights within the systems in which they live before they even perceive
> that there is repression. Take a look at the women's movement. One of
> the first steps in the development of the women's movement was
> so-called 'consciousness raising efforts.' Try to get women to
> perceive that it is not the natural state of the world for them to be
> dominated and controlled. My grandmother couldn't join the women's
> movement, since she didn't feel any oppression, in some sense. That's
> just the way life was, like the sun rises in the morning. Until people
> can realise that it is not like the sun rising, that it can be
> changed, that you don't have to follow orders, that you don't have to
> be beaten, until people can perceive that there is something wrong
> with that, until that is overcome, you can't go on. And one of the
> ways to do that is to try to press reforms within the existing systems
> of repression, and sooner or later you find that you will have to
> change them."* [Noam Chomsky, **Anarchism Interview**]

This means, as Malatesta stressed, that anarchists *"first task
therefore must be to persuade people."* This means that we *"must make
people aware of the misfortunes they suffer and of their chances to
destroy them . . . To those who are cold and hungry we will demonstrate
how possible and easy it would be to assure everybody their material
needs. To those who are oppressed and despised we shall show how it is
possible to live happily in a world of people who are free and equal . .
. And when we will have succeeded in arousing the sentiment of rebellion
in the minds of men [and women] against the avoidable and unjust evils
from which we suffer in society today, and in getting them to understand
how they are caused and how it depends on human will to rid ourselves of
them"* then we will be able to unite and change them for the better.
[**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, pp. 185-6]

So we must explain **why** we want to change the system. From this
discussion, it will become apparent why anarchists are dissatisfied with
the very limited amount of freedom in modern society and why they want
to create a truly free society. In the words of Noam Chomsky, the
anarchist critique of modern society means:

> *"to seek out and identify structures of authority, hierarchy, and
> domination in every aspect of life, and to challenge them; unless a
> justification for them can be given, they are illegitimate, and should
> be dismantled, to increase the scope of human freedom. That includes
> political power, ownership and management, relations among men and
> women, parents and children, our control over the fate of future
> generations (the basic moral imperative behind the environmental
> movement. . .), and much else. Naturally this means a challenge to the
> huge institutions of coercion and control: the state, the
> unaccountable private tyrannies that control most of the domestic and
> international economy [i.e. capitalist corporations and companies],
> and so on. But not only these."* [**Marxism, Anarchism, and
> Alternative Futures**, p. 775]

This task is made easier by the fact that the *"dominating class"* has
**not** *"succeeded in reducing all its subjects to passive and
unconscious instruments of its interests."* This means that where there
is oppression and exploitation there is also resistance -- and hope.
Even when those oppressed by hierarchical social relations generally
accept it, those institutions cannot put out the spark of freedom
totally. Indeed, they help produce the spirit of revolt by their very
operation as people finally say enough is enough and stand up for their
rights. Thus hierarchical societies *"contain organic contradictions and
[these] are like the germs of death"* from which *"the possibility of
progress"* springs. [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 186-7]

Anarchists, therefore, combine their critique of existing society with
active participation in the on-going struggles which exist in any
hierarchical struggle. As we discuss in [section J](secJcon.html), we
urge people to take ***direct action*** to fight oppression. Such
struggles change those who take part in them, breaking the social
conditioning which keeps hierarchical society going and making people
aware of other possibilities, aware that other worlds are possible and
that we do not have to live like this. Thus struggle is the practical
school of anarchism, the means by which the preconditions of an
anarchist society are created. Anarchists seek to learn from such
struggles while, at the same time, propagating our ideas within them and
encouraging them to develop into a general struggle for social
liberation and change.

Thus the natural resistance of the oppressed to their oppression
encourages this process of justification Chomsky (and anarchism) calls
for, this critical evaluation of authority and domination, this
undermining of what previously was considered "natural" or
"common-sense" **until we started to question it.** As noted above, an
essential part of this process is to encourage direct action by the
oppressed against their oppressors as well as encouraging the
anarchistic tendencies and awareness that exist (to a greater or lesser
degree) in any hierarchical society. The task of anarchists is to
encourage such struggles and the questioning their produce of society
and the way it works. We aim to encourage people to look at the root
causes of the social problems they are fighting, to seek to change the
underlying social institutions and relationships which produce them. We
seek to create an awareness that oppression can not only be fought, but
ended, and that the struggle against an unjust system creates the seeds
of the society that will replace it. In other words, we seek to
encourage hope and a positive vision of a better world.

However, this section of the FAQ is concerned directly with the critical
or "negative" aspect of anarchism, the exposing of the evil inherent in
all authority, be it from state, property or whatever and why,
consequently, anarchists seek *"the destruction of power, property,
hierarchy and exploitation."* [Murray Bookchin, **Post-Scarcity
Anarchism**, p. 11] Later sections will indicate how, after analysing
the world, anarchists plan to change it constructively, but some of the
constructive core of anarchism will be seen even in this section. After
this broad critique of the current system, we move onto more specific
areas. [Section C](secCcon.html) explains the anarchist critique of the
economics of capitalism. [Section D](secDcon.html) discusses how the
social relationships and institutions described in this section impact
on society as a whole. [Section E](secEcon.html) discusses the causes
(and some suggested solutions) to the ecological problems we face.
