C.8 Is state control of money the cause of the business cycle?
==============================================================

As explained in the [last section](secC7.html), capitalism will suffer
from a boom-and-bust cycle due to objective pressures on profit
production even if we ignore the subjective revolt against authority by
working class people. It is this two-way pressure on profit rates, the
subjective and objective, which causes the business cycle and such
economic problems as *"stagflation."* However, for supporters of the
free market, this conclusion is unacceptable and so they usually try to
explain the business cycle in terms of **external** influences rather
than those generated by the way capitalism works. Most pro-"free market"
capitalists blame government intervention in the market, particularly
state control over money, as the source of the business cycle. This
analysis is defective, as will be shown below.

First it should be noted that many supporters of capitalism ignore the
"subjective" pressures on capitalism that we discussed in [section
C.7.1](secC7.html#secc71). In addition, the problems associated with
rising capital investment (as highlighted in [section
C.7.3](secC7.html#secc73)) are also usually ignored, because they
usually consider capital to be "productive" and so cannot see how its
use could result in crises. This leaves them with the problems
associated with the price mechanism, as discussed in [section
C.7.2](secC7.html#secc72). It is here, in the market for credit and
money, that the role of the state comes into play, distorting the
natural workings of the market and causing the ups and downs of
business.

In pre-Keynesian bourgeois economics, the reason why Say's Law is
applicable in a money economy is the interest rate. As we discussed in
[section C.2.6](secC2.html#secc26), this is claimed to reflect the
*"time preference"* of individuals. While it is possible for sales not
to be turned into purchases in the market, the money involved is not
withdrawn from the economy. Rather, it is saved and made available to
investors. The interest rate is the means by which savings and
investment come into line. This means that Say's Law is maintained as
savings are used to purchase capital goods and so demand and supply
match. As long as interest rates are working as they should, the
possibility of a general crisis is impossible. The problem is that the
credit system does not work exactly as it claimed and this lies with the
banks who introduce fractional reserve banking. This allows them to loan
out more money than they have in savings in order to increase their
profits. This lowers the rate of interest below its *"natural"* (or
equilibrium) rate and thus firms get price signals which do not reflect
the wishes of consumers for future goods rather than current ones. This
causes over-investment and, ultimately, a crisis. This is because,
eventually, interest rates must rise and projects which were profitable
at the lower rate of interest will no longer be so. The moral of the
theory is that if the actual rate of interest equalled the *"natural"*
rate then a situation of *"neutral"* money would be achieved and so
misdirections of production would be avoided, so ending the business
cycle.

As far as capitalist economics had a theory of the business cycle, this
was it and it was the dominant ideological position within the
profession until publication of Keynes' **The General Theory of
Employment, Interest and Money** in 1936. Politically, it was very
useful as it recommended that the state should do nothing during the
crisis and this was the preferred position of right-wing governments in
America and Britain. It was forcefully argued by "Austrian" economist
Frederick von Hayek during the early 1930s, who was repeating the
earlier arguments of his mentor Ludwig von Mises and has been repeated
by their followers ever since. Yet, for some strange reason, they almost
always fail to mention that Hayek was roundly defeated in the
theoretical battles of the time by Keynesians. In fact, his former
students (including John Hicks and Nicholas Kaldor) showed how Hayek's
theory was flawed and he gave up business cycle research in the early
1940s for other work. Kaldor's first critique (*"Capital Intensity and
the Trade Cycle"*), for example, resulted in Hayek completed rewriting
his theory while Kaldor's second article (*"Professor Hayek and the
Concertina-effect"*) showed that Hayek's Ricardo Effect was only
possible under some very special circumstances and so highly unlikely.
[Kaldor, **Essays on Economic Stability and Growth**, pp. 120-147 and
pp. 148-176]

Kaldor's critique was combined with an earlier critique by Piero Sraffa
who noted that Hayek's desire for *"neutral"* money was simply
impossible in any real capitalist economy for *"a state of things in
which money is 'neutral' is identical with a state in which there is no
money at all."* Hayek *"completely ignored"* the fact that *"money is
not only the medium of exchange, but also a store of value"* which
*"amounts to assuming away the very object of the inquiry."* Sraffa also
noted that the starting point of Hayek's theory was flawed: *"An
essential confusion . . . is the belief that the divergence of rates is
a characteristic of a money economy . . . If money did not exist, and
loans were made in terms of all sorts of commodities, there would be a
single rate which satisfies the conditions of equilibrium, but there
might be at any moment as many 'natural' rates of interest as there are
commodities, though they would not be 'equilibrium' rates. The
'arbitrary' action of the banks is by no means a necessary condition for
the divergence; if loans were made in wheat and farmers (or for that
matter the weather) 'arbitrarily changed' the quantity of wheat
produced, the actual rate of interes on loans in terms of wheat would
diverge from the rate on other commodities and there would be no single
equilibrium rate."* [*"Dr. Hayek on Money and Capital,"* pp. 42-53,
**The Economic Journal**, vol. 42, no. 165, p. 42, pp. 43-4 and p. 49]
Hayek admitted that this was a possibility, to which Sraffa replied:

> *"only under conditions of equilibrium would there be a single rate,
> and that when saving was in progress there would be at any one moment
> be many 'natural' rates, possibly as many as there are commodities; so
> that it would be not merely difficult in practice, but altogether
> inconceivable, that the money rate would be equal to 'the' natural
> rate . . . Dr. Hayek now acknowledges the multiplicity of the
> 'natural' rates, but he has nothing more to say on this specific point
> than that they 'all would be equilibrium rates.' The only meaning (if
> it be a meaning) I can attach to this is that his maxim of policy now
> requires that the money rate should be equal to all these divergent
> natural rates."* [*"A Rejoinder,"* pp. 249-251, **Op. Cit.** Vol. 42,
> No. 166, p. 251]

Then there was the practical suggestions that flowed from the analysis,
namely do nothing. It also implied that the best thing to do in a
recession or depression is not to spend, but rather to save as this will
bring the savings and loans back into the equilibrium position.
Economist R. F. Kahn recounted when Hayek presented his theory at a
seminar in Cambridge University. His presentation was followed by
silence. Then Kahn asked the obvious question: *"Is it your view that if
I went out tomorrow and bought a new overcoat, that would increase
unemployment?"* All that Hayek could offer in reply was the unconvincing
claim that to show why would require a complicated mathematical
argument. The notion that reducing consumption in a depression was the
best thing to do convinced few people and the impact of such saving
should be obvious, namely a collapse in demand for goods and services.
Any savings would, in the circumstances of a recession, be unlikely to
be used for investing. After all, which company would start increasing
its capital stock facing a fall in demand and which capitalist would
venture to create a new company during a depression? Unsurprisingly, few
economists thought that advocating a deflationary policy in the midst of
the most severe economic crisis in history made much sense. It may have
been economic orthodoxy but making the depression worse in order to make
things better would have ensured either the victory of fascism or
some-sort of socialist revolution.

Given these practical considerations and the devastating critiques
inflicted upon it, Keynesian theory became the dominant theme in
economics (particularly once it had been lobotomised of any ideas which
threatened neo-classical supremacy -- see [section
C.8.1](secC8.html#secc81)). This has not, as noted, stopped Hayek's
followers repeating his theory to this day (nor has its roots in
equilibrium theory bothered them -- see [section
C.1.6](secC1.html#secc16)). Bearing this in mind, it is useful to
discuss this theory because it reflects the pre-Keynesian orthodoxy
although we must stress that our discussion of "Austrian" economics here
should not be taken as suggesting that they are a significant school of
thought or that their influence is large. Far from it -- they still
remain on the sidelines of economics where they were pushed after von
Hayek's defeat in the 1930s. We use them simply because they are the
only school of thought which still subscribes fully to the pre-Keynesian
position. Most modern neo-classical economists pay at least lip-service
to Keynes.

Take, for example, "Austrian" economist W. Duncan Reekie's argument that
the business cycle *"is generated by monetary expansion and contraction
. . . When new money is printed it appears as if the supply of savings
has increased. Interest rates fall and businessmen are misled into
borrowing additional funds to finance extra investment activity."* This
would be of *"no consequence"* if it had been the outcome of genuine
saving *"but the change was government induced . . . Capital goods
industries will find their expansion has been in error and
malinvestments have been incurred"* and so there has been *"wasteful
mis-investment due to government interference with the market."*
[**Markets, Entrepreneurs and Liberty**, pp. 68-9]

Yet the government does **not** force banks to make excessive loans and
this is the first, and most obvious, fallacy of argument. After all,
what Reekie is actually complaining about when he argues that *"state
action"* creates the business cycle by creating excess money is that the
state **allows** bankers to meet the demand for credit by creating it.
This makes sense, for how could the state force bankers to expand credit
by loaning more money than they have savings? This is implicitly
admitted when Reekie argues that *"[o]nce fractional reserve banking is
introduced, however, the supply of money substitutes will include
fiduciary media. The ingenuity of bankers, other financial
intermediaries and the endorsement and **guaranteeing of their
activities by governments and central banks** has ensured that the
quantity of fiat money is immense."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 73] As we will
discuss in detail below what is termed *"credit money"* (created by
banks) is an essential part of capitalism and would exist without a
system of central banks. This is because money is created from within
the system, in response to the needs of capitalists. In a word, the
money supply is endogenous.

The second fallacy of this theory of the business cycle lies with the
assumption that the information provided by the interest rate itself is
sufficient in itself to ensure rational investment decisions, it that
provides companies and individuals with accurate information about how
price changes will affect future trends in production. Specifically, the
claim is that changes in interest rates (i.e. changes in the demand and
supply of credit) indirectly inform companies of the responses of their
competitors. As John O'Neill argues, the argument assumes *"that
information about the panned responses of producers in competition is
indirectly distributed by changes in interest rates: the planned
increase in production by separate producers is reflected in an
increased demand for credit, and hence a rise in interest rates."*
[**The Market**, p. 135]

For example, if the price of tin rises, this will lead to an expansion
in investment in the tin industry to reap the higher profits this
implies. This would lead to a rise in interest rates as more credit is
demanded. This rise in interest rates lowers anticipated profits and
dampens the expansion. The expansion of credit stops this process by
distorting the interest rate and so stops it performing its economic
function. This results in overproduction as interest rates do not
reflect **real** savings and so capitalists over-invest in new capital,
capital which appears profitable only because the interest rate is
artificially low. When the rate inevitably adjusts upwards towards its
"natural" value, the invested capital becomes unprofitable and so
over-investment appears. Hence, according to the argument, by
eliminating state control of money these negative effects of capitalism
would disappear as the credit system, if working correctly, will
communicate all the relevant information required by capitalists.

*"However,"* argues O'Neil, *"this argument is flawed. It is not clear
that the relevant information is communicated by changes in interest
rates."* This is because interest rates reflect the general aggregate
demand for credit in an economy. However, the information which a
**specific** company requires *"if the over-expansion in the production
of some good is to be avoided is not the general level of demand for
credit, but the level of demand amongst competitors."* It does not
provide the relative demands in different industries (the parallels with
Sraffa's critique should be obvious). *"An increase in the planned
production of some good by a group of competitors will be reflected in a
proportional change in interest rates only if it is assumed that the
change in demand for credit by that group is identical with that found
in the economy as a whole, i.e. if rates of change in the demand for
credit are even throughout an economy. However, there is no reason to
suppose such an assumption is true, given the different production
cycles of different industries."* This will produce differing needs for
credit (in both terms of amount and of intensity). *"Assuming uneven
changes in the demand for credit"* between industries reflecting uneven
changes in their requirements it is quite possible for over-investment
(and so over-production) to occur *"even if the credit system is working
'satisfactorily'"* (i.e., as it should in theory. The credit system,
therefore, *"does not communicate the relevant information"* and for
this reason *"it is not the case that we must look to a departure from
an ideal credit system to explain the business cycle."* [**Op. Cit.**,
pp. 135-6]

Another underlying assumption in this argument is that the economy is
close to equilibrium (a concept which "Austrian" economists claim to
reject). After all, rising interest rates will cause debt-servicing to
become harder even if it reflects the *"natural"* rate. Equally, it also
suggests that both banks and firms are capable of seeing into the
future. For even **if** the credit market is working as postulated in
the theory it does not mean that firms and banks do not make mistakes
nor experience unexpected market situations. In such circumstances,
firms may find it impossible to repay loans, credit chains may start to
break as more and more firms find themselves in economic difficulties.
Just because actual interest rates somehow equal the natural rate does
not make the future any more certain nor does it ensure that credit is
invested wisely. Crucially, it does not ensure that credit is not used
to inflate a bubble or add to over-investment in a specific sector of
the economy. To assume otherwise suggests the firms and banks rarely
make mistakes and that the accumulative impact of all decisions move an
economy always towards, and never away from, equilibrium. As
Post-Keynesian Paul Davidson dryly noted, *"Austrian subjectivists
cannot have it both ways -- they cannot argue for the importance of
time, uncertainty, and money, and simultaneously presume that plan or
pattern co-ordination must exist and is waiting to be discovered."*
[*"The economics of ignorance or the ignorance of economics?"*, pp.
467-87, **Critical Review**, vol. 3, no. 3-4, p. 468]

In other words, the notion that if the actual interest rate somehow
equalled the *"natural"* one is not only rooted in equilibrium but also
the neo-classical notion of perfect knowledge of current and future
events -- all of which "Austrian" economists are meant to reject. This
can be seen when Murray Rothbard states that entrepreneurs *"are trained
to forecast the market correctly; they only make mass errors when
governmental or bank intervention distorts the 'signals' of the
market."* He even attacks Joseph Schumpeter's crisis theory because, in
effect, Schumpeter does not show how entrepreneurs cannot predict the
future (*"There is no explanation offered on the lack of accurate
forecasting . . . why were not the difficulties expected and
discounted?"*). [**America's Great Depression**, p. 48 and p. 70]
Rothbard does not ponder why bankers, who are surely entrepreneurs as
well, make **their** errors nor why the foresight of business people in
an uncertain and complex economy seems to fail them in the face of
repeated actions of banks (which they could, surely, have *"expected and
discounted"*). This means that the argument concerning distortions of
the interest rate does not, as such, explain the occurrence of
over-investment (and so the business cycle). Therefore, it cannot be
claimed that removing state interference in the market for money will
also remove the business-cycle.

However, these arguments do have an element of truth in them. Expansion
of credit above the *"natural"* level which equates it with savings can
and does allow capital to expand further than it otherwise would and so
**encourages** over-investment (i.e. it builds upon trends already
present rather than **creating** them). While we have ignored the role
of credit expansion in our comments above to stress that credit is not
fundamental to the business cycle, it is useful to discuss this as it is
an essential factor in real capitalist economies. Indeed, without it
capitalist economies would not have grown as fast as they have. Credit
is fundamental to capitalism and this is the last fallacy in the
pre-Keynesian argument. In a real economy, it is the most important.
Even assuming that the actual rate of interest **could** always equal
the equilibrium rate and that it reflected the natural rate of all
commodities and all industries, it would not matter as banks would
always seek to make profits by extending credit and so artificially
lower the actual interest rate during booms. To understand why, we need
to explain the flaws in the main laissez-faire approaches to money.

There are three main approaches to the question of eliminating state
control of money in "free market" capitalist economics -- Monetarism,
the 100% gold reserve limit for banks and what is often called "free
banking." All three are associated with the right and all three are
wrong. The first two are easy to dismiss. Monetarism has been tried and
has failed spectacularly in the early 1980s. As it was a key aspect of
the neo-liberal war on working class people at this time we will discuss
its limitations as part of our account of this period in [section
C.8.3](secC8.html#secc83).

The second option, namely imposing a 100% gold reserve limit for banks
is highly interventionist and so not remotely laissez-faire (why should
the banking industry be subject to state regulation unlike the rest?).
Its logic is simple, namely to ensure that banks do not make loans
unless they have sufficient savings to cover them all. In other words,
it seeks to abolish the credit cycle by abolishing credit by making
banks keep 100% gold reserves against notes. This, in effect, abolishes
banking as an industry. Simply put (and it seems strange to have to
point this out to supporters of capitalism) banks seek to make a profit
and do so by providing credit. This means that any capitalist system
will be, fundamentally, one with credit money as banks will always seek
to make a profit on the spread between loan and deposit rates. It is a
necessity for the banking system and so non-fractional banking is simply
not possible. The requirement that banks have enough cash on hand to
meet all depositors demand amounts to the assertion that banks do not
lend any money. A 100% reserve system is not a reformed or true banking
system. It is the abolition of the banking system. Without fractional
reserves, banks cannot make any loans of any kind as they would not be
in a position to give their clients their savings if they have made
loans. Only someone completely ignorant of a real capitalist economy
could make such a suggestion and, unsurprisingly, this position is held
by members of the "Austrian" school (particularly its minimum state
wing).

This leaves "free banking." This school of thought is, again, associated
with the "Austrian" school of economics and right-wing "libertarians" in
general. It is advocated by those who seek to eliminate fractional
reserve banking but balk by the regulations required by a 100% gold
standard (Rothbard gets round this by arguing this standard *"would be
part and parcel of the general libertarian legal prohibition against
fraud."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 32]). It is based on totally privatising the
banking system and creating a system in which banks and other private
companies compete on the market to get their coins and notes accepted by
the general population. This position, it must be stressed, is not the
same as anarchist mutual banking as it is seen not as a way of reducing
usury to zero but rather as a means of ensuring that interest rates work
as they are claimed to do in capitalist theory.

The "free banking" school argues that under competitive pressures, banks
would maintain a 100% ratio between the credit they provide and the
money they issue with the reserves they actually have. They argue that
under the present system, banks can create more credit than they have
funds/reserves available as the state exists as lender of last resort
and so banks will count on it to bail them out in bad times. Market
forces would ensure the end of fractional reserve banking and stop them
pushing the rate of interest below its "natural rate." So if banks were
subject to market forces, it is argued, then they would not generate
credit money, interest rates would reflect the real rate and so
over-investment, and so crisis, would be a thing of the past. Knowing
that the state would not step in to save them will also force banks to
be prudent in their activities.

This analysis, however, is flawed. We have noted one flaw above, namely
the problem that interest rates do not provide sufficient or correct
information for investment decisions. Thus relative over-investment
could still occur. Another problem is the endogenous nature of money and
credit and the pressures this puts on banks. As Steve Keen notes,
Austrian economists think that *"the current system of State money means
that the money supply is entirely exogenous and under the control of the
State authorities. They then attribute much of the cyclical behaviour of
the economy to government meddling with the money supply and the rate of
interest."* In contrast, Post-Keynesian economists argue that *"though
it may appear that the State controls the money supply, the complex
chain of causation in the finance sector actually works backwards"* with
*"private banks and other credit-generating institutions largely
forc[ing] the State's hand. Thus the money supply is largely
endogenously determined by the market economy, rather than imposed upon
it exogenously by the State."* He notes that the *"empirical record
certainly supports Post-Keynesians rather than Austrians on this point.
Statistical evidence about the leads and lags between the
State-determined component of money supply and broad credit show that
the latter 'leads' the former."* [**Debunking Economics**, p. 303]
Moreover, as our discussion of the failure of Monetarism will show,
central banks could **not** control the money supply when they tried.

To understand why, we need to turn to the ideas of the noted
Post-Keynesian economist Hyman Minsky. He created an analysis of the
finance and credit markets which gives an insight into why it is
doubtful that even a "free banking" system would resist the temptation
to create credit money (i.e. loaning more money than available savings).
This model is usually called *"The Financial Instability Hypothesis."*

Let us assume that the economy is going into the recovery period after a
crash. Initially firms would be conservative in their investment while
banks would lend within their savings limit and to low-risk investments.
In this way the banks do ensure that the interest rate reflects the
"natural" rate. However, this combination of a growing economy and
conservatively financed investment means that most projects succeed and
this gradually becomes clear to managers/capitalists and bankers. As a
result, both managers and bankers come to regard the present risk
premium as excessive. New investment projects are evaluated using less
conservative estimates of future cash flows. This is the foundation of
the new boom and its eventual bust. In Minsky's words, *"stability is
destabilising."*

As the economy starts to grow, companies increasingly turn to external
finance and these funds are forthcoming because the banking sector
shares the increased optimism of investors. Let us not forget that banks
are private companies too and so seek profits as well. As Minsky argues,
*"bankers live in the same expectational climate as businessmen"* and so
*"profit-seeking bankers will find ways of accommodating their customers
. . . Banks and bankers are not passive managers of money to lend or to
invest; they are in business to maximise profits."* [quoted by L.
Randall Wray, **Money and Credit in Capitalist Economies**, p. 85]
Providing credit is the key way of doing this and so credit expansion
occurs. If they did not, the boom would soon turn into slump as
investors would have no funds available for them and interest rates
would increase, thus forcing firms to pay more in debt repayment, an
increase which many firms may not be able to do or find difficult. This
in turn would suppress investment and so production, generating
unemployment (as companies cannot "fire" investments as easily as they
can fire workers), so reducing consumption demand along with investment
demand, so deepening the slump.

To avoid this and to take advantage of the rising economy, bankers
accommodate their customers and generate credit rather than rise
interest rates. In this way they accept liability structures both for
themselves and for their customers *"that, in a more sober expectational
climate, they would have rejected."* [Minsky, **Inflation, Recession and
Economic Policy**, p. 123] The banks innovate their financial products,
in other words, in line with demand. Firms increase their indebtedness
and banks are more than willing to allow this due to the few signs of
financial strain in the economy. The individual firms and banks increase
their financial liability, and so the whole economy moves up the
liability structure. Like other businesses, banks operate in an
uncertain environment and have no way of knowing whether their actions
will increase the fragility within the economy or push it into crisis.

The central banks, meanwhile, accommodate the banks activity. They do
not and cannot force them to create credit. Alan Holmes, a senior vice
president at the New York Federal Reserve, put the process this way:

> *"In the real world, banks extend credit, creating deposits in the
> process, and look for the reserves later. The question then becomes
> one of whether and how the Federal Reserve will accommodate the demand
> for reserves. In the very short run, the Federal Reserve has little or
> no choice about accommodating that demand, over time, its influence
> can obviously be felt."* [quoted by Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p.
> 220]

As long as profits exceed debt servicing requirements, the system will
continue to work. Eventually, though, interest rates rise as the
existing extension of credit appears too high to the banks or the
central bank. This affects all firms, from the most conservatively
financed to the most speculative, and "pushes" them up even higher up
the liability structure. Refinancing existing debts is made at the
higher rate of interest, increasing cash outflows and reducing demand
for investment as the debt burden increases. Conservatively financed
firms can no longer can repay their debts easily, less conservative ones
fail to pay them and so on. The margin of error narrows and firms and
banks become more vulnerable to unexpected developments, such a new
competitors, strikes, investments which do not generate the expected
rate of return, credit becoming hard to get, interest rates increase and
so on. In the end, the boom turns to slump and firms and banks fail. The
state then intervenes to try and stop the slump getting worse (with
varying degrees of success and failure).

Thus the generation of credit is a spontaneous process rooted in the
nature of capitalism and is fundamentally endogenous in nature. This
means that the business cycle is an inherent part of capitalism even if
we assume that it is caused purely by disequilibrium in the credit
market. In other words, it is more than likely that the credit market
will be in disequilibrium like every other market in any real capitalist
economy -- and for the same reasons. As such, the natural rate of
interest relies on concepts of equilibrium that are not only
inconsistent with reality but also with the broader principles of
"Austrian" economic ideology.

The "free banking" school reject this claim and argue that private banks
in competition would **not** do this as this would make them appear less
competitive on the market and so customers would frequent other banks
(this is the same process by which inflation would be solved). However,
it is **because** the banks are competing that they innovate -- if they
do not, another bank or company would in order to get more profits.
Keynesian economist Charles P. Kindleburger comments:

> *"As a historical generalisation, it can be said that every time the
> authorities stabilise or control some quantity of money. . . in
> moments of euphoria more will be produced. Or if the definition of
> money is fixed in terms of particular assets, and the euphoria happens
> to 'monetise' credit in new ways that are excluded from the
> definition, the amount of money defined in the old way will not grow,
> but its velocity will increase . . . fix any [definition of money] and
> the market will create new forms of money in periods of boom to get
> round the limit."* [**Manias, Panics and Crashes**, p. 48]

This can be seen from the fact that *"[b]ank notes . . . and bills of
exchange . . . were initially developed because of an inelastic supply
of coin."* Thus monetary expansion *"is systematic and endogenous rather
than random and exogenous."* [Kindleburger, **Op. Cit.**, p. 51 and p.
150] This means that *"any shortage of commonly-used types [of money] is
bound to lead to the emergence of new types; indeed, this is how,
historically, first bank notes and the chequing account emerged."* If
the state tries to regulate one form of money, *"lending and borrowing
is diverted to other sources."* [Nicholas Kaldor, *"The New
Monetarism"*, **The Essential Kaldor**, p. 481 and p. 482] This means
that the notion that abolishing central banking will result in the use
of gold and 100% reverses and so eliminate the business cycle is
misplaced:

> *"This view overlooks the fact that the **emergence** of
> money-substitutes -- whether in the form of bank notes, bank accounts,
> or credit cards -- was a spontaneous process, not planned or regulated
> 'from above' by some central authority, and for that reason alone it
> is impossible to treat some arbitrary definition of money (which
> included specific forms of such money-substitutes in the definition of
> money) as an exogenous variable. The emergence of surrogate money was
> a spontaneous process resulting from the development of the banking
> system; this development brought a steady increase in the ratio of
> money substitutes of 'real' money."* [Nicholas Kaldor, **The Scourge
> of Monetarism**, p. 44f]

This process can be seen at work in Adam Smith's time. Then Scotland was
based on a competitive banking system in which baking firms issued their
own money and maintained their own reverse of gold. Yet, as Smith notes,
they issued more money than was available in the banks coffers:

> *"Though some of those notes [the banks issued] are continually coming
> back for payment, part of them continue to circulate for months and
> years together. Though he [the banker] has generally in circulation,
> therefore, notes to the extent of a hundred thousand pounds, twenty
> thousand pounds in gold and silver may frequently be a sufficient
> provision for answering occasional demands."* [**The Wealth of
> Nations**, pp. 257-8]

In other words, the competitive banking system did not, in fact,
eliminate fractional reserve banking. Ironically enough, Smith noted
that *"the Bank of England paid very dearly, not only for its own
imprudence, but for the much greater imprudence of almost all of the
Scotch [sic!] banks."* Thus the central bank was more conservative in
its money and credit generation than the banks under competitive
pressures! Indeed, Smith argues that the banking companies did not, in
fact, act in line with their interests as assumed by the "free banking"
school for *"had every particular banking company always understood and
attended to its own particular interest, the circulation never could
have been overstocked with paper money. But every particular baking
company has not always understood and attended to its own particular
interest, and the circulation has frequently been overstocked with paper
money."* Thus we have reserve banking plus bankers acting in ways
opposed to their *"particular interest"* (i.e. what economists consider
to be their actual self-interest rather than what the bankers actually
thought was their self-interest!) in a system of competitive banking.
Why could this be the case? Smith mentions, in passing, a possible
reason. He notes that *"the high profits of trade afforded a great
temptation to over-trading"* and that while a *"multiplication of
banking companies . . . increases the security of the public"* by
forcing them *"to be more circumspect in their conduct"* it also
*"obliges all bankers to be more liberal in their dealings with their
customers, lest their rivals should carry them away."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
269, p. 267, p. 274 and p. 294]

Thus the banks were pulled in two directions at once, to accommodate
their loan customers and make more profits while being circumspect in
their activities to maintain sufficient reserves for the demands of
their savers. Which factor prevails would depend on the state of the
economy, with up-swings provoking liberal lending (as described by
Minsky). Moreover, given that credit generation is meant to produce the
business cycle, it is clear from the case of Scotland that competitive
banking would not, in fact, stop either. This also was the case with
19th century America, which did not have a central bank for most of that
period and that *"left the volatile US financial system without any kind
of lender of last resort, but in booms all kinds of funny money
passed."* This lead to *"thousands of decentralised banks . . . hoarding
reserves"* and so *"starving the system of liquidity precisely at the
moment it was most badly needed"* while *"the up cycles were also
extraordinary, powered by loose credit and kinky currencies (like
privately issued banknotes)."* [Doug Henwood, **Op. Cit.**, p. 93 and p.
94]

As Nicholas Kaldor argued, *"the essential function of banks in the
creation of 'finance' (or credit) was well understood by Adam Smith, who
. . . regarded branch-banking as a most important invention for the
enrichment of society. He described how, as a result of the finance
banks were able to place at the disposal of producers, the real income
of Scotland doubled or trebled in a remarkably short time. Expressed in
Keynesian terms, the 'finance' provided by banks made it possible to
increase investments ahead of income or savings, and to provide the
savings counterpart of the investment out of the additional income
generated through a multiplier process by the additional spending."*
This process, however, was unstable which naturally lead to the rise of
central banks. *"Since the notes issued by some banks were found more
acceptable than those of others, giving rise to periodic payments crises
and uncertainty, it was sooner or later everywhere found necessary to
concentrate the right of issuing bank notes in the hands of a single
institution."* [*"How Monetarism Failed,"* **Further Essays on Economic
Theory and Policy**, p. 181] In addition, from an anarchist perspective,
no ruling class wants economic instability to undermine its wealth and
income generating ability (Doug Henwood provides a useful summary of
this process, and the arguments used to justify it within the American
ruling class, for the creation of the US Federal Reserve at the start of
the 20th century. [**Wall Street**, pp. 92-5]). Nor would any ruling
class want too easy credit undermining its power over the working class
by holding down unemployment too long (or allowing working class people
to create their own financial institutions).

Thus the over supply of credit, rather than being the **cause** of the
crisis is actually a symptom. Competitive investment drives the business
cycle expansion, which is allowed and encouraged by the competition
among banks in supplying credit. Such expansion complements -- and thus
amplifies -- other objective tendencies towards crisis, such as
over-investment and disportionalities. In other words, a pure "free
market" capitalism would still have a business cycle as this cycle is
caused by the nature of capitalism, not by state intervention. In
reality (i.e. in "actually existing" capitalism), state manipulation of
money (via interest rates) is essential for the capitalist class as it
allows indirect profit-generating activity, such as ensuring a "natural"
level of unemployment to keep profits up, an acceptable level of
inflation to ensure increased profits, and so forth, as well as
providing a means of tempering the business cycle, organising bailouts
and injecting money into the economy during panics. Ultimately, if state
manipulation of money caused the problems of capitalism, we would not
have seen the economic successes of the post-war Keynesian experiment or
the business cycle in pre-Keynesian days and in countries which had a
more free banking system (for example, nearly half of the late 19th
century in the US was spent in periods of recession and depression,
compared to a fifth since the end of World War II).

It is true that all crises have been preceded by a
speculatively-enhanced expansion of production and credit. This does not
mean, however, that crisis **results** from speculation and the
expansion of credit. The connection is not causal in free market
capitalism. The expansion and contraction of credit is a mere symptom of
the periodic changes in the business cycle, as the decline of
profitability contracts credit just as an increase enlarges it. So while
there are some similarities in the pre-Keynesian/"Austrian" theory and
the radical one outlined here, the key differences are two-fold.
Firstly, the pro-capitalist theory argues that it is possible for
capitalist banks **not** to act, well, like capitalists if subject to
competition (or regulated enough). This seems highly unlikely and fits
as badly into their general theories as the notion that disequilibrium
in the credit market is the root of the business cycle. Secondly, the
radical position stresses that the role of credit reflect deeper causes.
Paul Mattick gives the correct analysis:

> *"[M]oney and credit policies can themselves change nothing with
> regard to profitability or insufficient profits. Profits come only
> from production, from the surplus value produced by workers . . . The
> expansion of credit has always been taken as a sign of a coming
> crisis, in the sense that it reflected the attempt of individual
> capital entities to expand despite sharpening competition, and hence
> survive the crisis. . . Although the expansion of credit has staved
> off crisis for a short time, it has never prevented it, since
> ultimately it is the real relationship between total profits and the
> needs of social capital to expand in value which is the decisive
> factor, and that cannot be altered by credit."* [**Economics, Politics
> and the Age of Inflation**, pp. 17-18]

In short, the apologists of capitalism confuse the symptoms for the
disease.

The cyclical movements on the real side of the economy will be enhanced
(both upwards and downwards) by events in its financial side and this
may result in greater amplitudes in the cycle but the latter does not
create the former. Where there *"is no profit to be had, credit will not
be sought."* While extension of the credit system *"can be a factor
deferring crisis, the actual outbreak of crisis makes it into an
aggravating factor because of the larger amount of capital that must be
devalued."* [Paul Mattick, **Economic Crisis and Crisis Theory**, p.
138] But this is also a problem facing competing private companies using
the gold standard. The money supply reflects the economic activity
within a country and if that supply cannot adjust, interest rates rise
and provoke a crisis. Thus the need for a flexible money supply (as
desired, for example, by Mutualists and the US Individualist
Anarchists).

It must always be remembered that a loan is not like other commodities.
Its exchange value is set by its use value. As its use value lies in
investing and so generating a stream of income, the market rate of
interest is governed by the average expectations of profits for the
capitalist class. Thus credit is driven by its **perceived** use-value
rather than its cost of production or the amount of money a bank has.
Its possible use value reflects the prospective exchange-values (prices
and profits) it can help produce. This means that uncertainty and
expectations play a key role in the credit and financial markets and
these impact on the real economy. This means that money can **never** be
neutral and so capitalism will be subject to the business cycle and so
unemployment will remain a constant threat over the heads of working
class people. In such circumstances, the notion that capitalism results
in a level playing field for classes is simply not possible and so,
except in boom times, working class will be at a disadvantage on the
labour market.

To sum up, *"[i]t is not credit but only the increase in production made
possible by it that increases surplus value. It is then the rate of
exploitation which determines credit expansion."* [Paul Mattick,
**Economics, Politics and the Age of Inflation**, p. 18] Hence credit
money would increase and decrease in line with capitalist profitability,
as predicted in capitalist economic theory. But this could not affect
the business cycle, which has its roots in production for capital (i.e.
profit) and capitalist authority relations, to which the credit supply
would obviously reflect, and not vice versa.

C.8.1 Does this mean that Keynesianism works?
---------------------------------------------

If state interference in credit generation does not cause the business
cycle, does that mean Keynesianism capitalism can work? Keynesian
economics, as opposed to free market capitalism, maintains that the
state can and should intervene in the economy in order to stop economic
crises from occurring. Can it work? To begin to answer that question, we
must first quickly define what is meant by Keynesianism as there are
different kinds of Keynesianist policies and economics.

As far as economics goes, Keynes' co-worker Joan Robinson coined the
phrase *"Bastard Keynesianism"* to describe the vulgarisation of his
economics and its stripping of all aspects which were incompatible with
the assumptions of neo-classical economics. Thus the key notion of
uncertainty was eliminated and his analysis of the labour market reduced
to the position he explicitly rejected, namely that unemployment was
caused by price rigidities. This process was aided by the fact that
Keynes retained significant parts of the neo-classical position in his
analysis and argued that the role of the state was limited to creating
the overall conditions necessary to allow the neo-classical system to
come *"into its own again"* and allow capitalism *"to realise the full
potentialities of production."* [**The General Theory**, pp. 378-9]
Unlike many of his more radical followers, Keynes was blind to real
nature of capitalism as a class based system and so failed to understand
the functional role that unemployment plays within it (see [section
C.1.5](secC5.html#secc15)).

However, the context in which Keynes worked explains much. Faced with
the dire situation capitalism faced during the 1930s, he presented a new
theoretical analysis of capitalism that both explained the crisis and
suggested policies that would, without interfering with its general
principles, end it. Keynes' work was aided both by the practical failure
of traditional solutions and growing fear of revolution and so even the
most died-in-the-wool neo-classical economists could not keep his theory
from being tried. When it appeared to work that, on one level, ended the
argument. However, at a deeper level, at the level of theory, the
struggle was just beginning. As the neo-classical (and Austrian)
tradition is axiom-led rather than empirically-led (otherwise their
axioms would have been abandoned long ago), the mere fact that
capitalism was in crisis and that Keynes had presented a theory more in
line with the reality was not enough to change mainstream economics.
From the start, neo-classical economists began their counter-attack. Led
by Paul Samuelson in the US and John Hicks in the UK, they set about
making Keynes' theories safe for neo-classical economics. They did this
by using mathematics on a part of his theory, leaving out all those bits
that were inconsistent with neo-classical axioms. This bowdlerised
version of Keynes soon became the standard in undergraduate courses.

The fate of Keynes reinforces the comment of French revolutionary Louis
de Saint-Just that *"those who make revolution half way only dig their
own graves."* Keynes ideas were only a partial break with the
neo-classical orthodoxy and, as such, allowed the basis for the
neo-classical-Keynesian synthesis which dominated post-war economics
until the mid-1970s as well as giving the Monetarist counter-revolution
space to grow. Perhaps this partial break is understandable, given the
dominance of neo-classical ideas in the economics profession it may have
been too much to expect them to renounce all their dogmas yet it ensured
that any developments towards an economics based on science rather than
ideology would be resigned to the sidelines.

It is important to stress that Keynes was, first and foremost, a
supporter of capitalism. He aimed to save it, not to end it. As he put
it the *"**class war** will find me on the side of the educated
bourgeoisie."* [quoted by Henwood, **Wall Street**, p. 212] That he
presented a more accurate picture of capitalism and exposed some of the
contradictions within neo-classical economics is part of the reason he
was and is so hated by many on the right, although his argument that the
state should limit some of the power of individual firms and capitalists
and redistribute some income and wealth was a far more important source
of that hatred. That he helped save capitalism from itself (and secure
their fortunes) did not seem to concern his wealthy detractors. They
failed to understand Keynes often sounded more radical than he actually
was. Doug Henwood gives a good overview of Keynes' ideas (and
limitations) in chapter 5 of his book **Wall Street**.

What of Keynesian policies? The *"Bastard Keynesianism"* of the post-war
period (for all its limitations) did seem to have some impact on
capitalism. This can be seen from comparing Keynesianism with what came
before. The more laissez-faire period was nowhere near as stable as
modern day supporters of free(r) market capitalists like to suggest.
There were continual economic booms and slumps. The last third of the
19th century (often considered as the heyday of private enterprise) was
a period of profound instability and anxiety as it *"was characterised
by violent booms and busts, in nearly equal measure, since almost half
the period was one of panic and depression."* American spent nearly half
of the late 19th century in periods of recession and depression. By way
of comparison, since the end of world war II, only about a fifth of the
time has been. [Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p. 94 and p. 54] Between
1867 and 1900 there were 8 complete business cycles. Over these 396
months, the economy expanded during 199 months and contracted during
197. Hardly a sign of great stability. Overall, the economy went into a
slump, panic or crisis in 1807, 1817, 1828, 1834, 1837, 1854, 1857,
1873, 1882, and 1893 (in addition, 1903 and 1907 were also crisis
years).

Then there is what is often called the *"Golden Age of Capitalism,"* the
boom years of (approximately) 1945 to 1975. This post-war boom presents
compelling evidence that Keynesianism can effect the business cycle for
the better by reducing its tendency to develop into a full depression.
By intervening in the economy, the state would reduce uncertainty for
capitalists by maintaining overall demand which will, in turn, ensure
conditions where they will invest their money rather than holding onto
it (what Keynes termed *"liquidity-preference"*). In other words, to
create conditions where capitalists will desire to invest and ensure the
willingness on the part of capitalists to act as capitalists.

This period of social Keynesianism after the war was marked by reduced
inequality, increased rights for working class people, less
unemployment, a welfare state you could actually use and so on. Compared
to present-day capitalism, it had much going for it. However, Keynesian
capitalism is still capitalism and so is still based upon oppression and
exploitation. It was, in fact, a more refined form of capitalism, within
which the state intervention was used to protect capitalism from itself
while trying to ensure that working class struggle against it was
directed, via productivity deals, into keeping the system going. For the
population at large, the general idea was that the welfare state
(especially in Europe) was a way for society to get a grip on capitalism
by putting some humanity into it. In a confused way, the welfare state
was promoted as an attempt to create a society in which the economy
existed for people, not people for the economy.

While the state has always had a share in the total surplus value
produced by the working class, only under Keynesianism is this share
increased and used actively to manage the economy. Traditionally,
placing checks on state appropriation of surplus value had been one of
the aims of classical capitalist thought (simply put, cheap government
means more surplus value available for capitalists to compete for). But
as capital has accumulated, so has the state increased and its share in
social surplus (for control over the domestic enemy has to be expanded
and society protected from the destruction caused by free market
capitalism). It must be stressed that state intervention was not
**totally** new for *"[f]rom its origins, the United States had relied
heavily on state intervention and protection for the development of
industry and agriculture, from the textile industry in the early
nineteenth century, through the steel industry at the end of the
century, to computers, electronics, and biotechnology today.
Furthermore, the same has been true of every other successful industrial
society."* [Noam Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p. 101] The
difference was that such state action was directed to social goals as
well as bolstering capitalist profits (much to the hatred of the right).

The roots of the new policy of higher levels and different forms of
state intervention lie in two related factors. The Great Depression of
the 1930s had lead to the realisation that attempts to enforce
widespread reductions in money wages and costs (the traditional means to
overcome depression) simply did not work. As Keynes stressed, cutting
wages reduced prices and so left real wages unaffected. Worse, it
reduced aggregate demand and lead to a deepening of the slump (see
[section C.9.1](secC9.html#secc91) for details). This meant that leaving
the market to solve its own problems would make things a lot worse
before they became better. Such a policy would, moreover, be impossible
because the social and economic costs would have been too expensive.
Working class people simply would not tolerate more austerity imposed on
them and increasingly took direct action to solve their problems. For
example, America saw a militant strike wave involving a half million
workers in 1934, with factory occupations and other forms of militant
direct action commonplace. It was only a matter of time before
capitalism was either ended by revolution or saved by fascism, with
neither prospect appealing to large sections of the ruling class.

So instead of attempting the usual class war (which may have had
revolutionary results), sections of the capitalist class thought a new
approach was required. This involved using the state to manipulate
demand in order to increase the funds available for capital. By means of
demand bolstered by state borrowing and investment, aggregate demand
could be increased and the slump ended. In effect, the state acts to
encourage capitalists to act like capitalists by creating an environment
when they think it is wise to invest again. As Paul Mattick points out,
the *"additional production made possible by deficit financing does
appear as additional demand, but as demand unaccompanied by a
corresponding increase in total profits. . . [this] functions
immediately as an increase in demand that stimulates the economy as a
whole and can become the point for a new prosperity"* if objective
conditions allow it. [**Economic Crisis and Crisis Theory**, p. 143]

State intervention can, in the short term, postpone crises by
stimulating production. This can be seen from the in 1930s New Deal
period under Roosevelt when the economy grew five years out of seven
compared to it shrinking every year under the pro-laissez-faire
Republican President Herbert Hoover (under Hoover, the GNP shrank an
average of -8.4 percent a year, under Roosevelt it grew by 6.4 percent).
The 1938 slump after 3 years of growth under Roosevelt was due to a
decrease in state intervention:

> *"The forces of recovery operating within the depression, as well as
> the decrease in unemployment via public expenditures, increased
> production up to the output level of 1929. This was sufficient for the
> Roosevelt administration to drastically reduce public works . . . in a
> new effort to balance the budget in response to the demands of the
> business world. . . The recovery proved to be short-lived. At the end
> of 1937 the Business Index fell from 110 to 85, bringing the economy
> back to the state in which it had found itself in 1935 . . . Millions
> of workers lost their jobs once again."* [Paul Mattick, **Economics,
> Politics and the Age of Inflation**, p. 138]

The rush to war made Keynesian policies permanent. With the success of
state intervention during the second world war, Keynesianism was seen as
a way of ensuring capitalist survival. The resulting boom is well known,
with state intervention being seen as the way of ensuring prosperity for
all sections of society. It had not fully recovered from the Great
Depression and the boom economy during the war had obviously contrasted
deeply with the stagnation of the 1930s. Plus, of course, a militant
working class, which had put up with years of denial in the struggle
against fascist-capitalism would not have taken lightly to a return to
mass unemployment and poverty. Capitalism had to turn to continued state
intervention as it is not a viable system. So, politically and
economically a change was required. This change was provided by the
ideas of Keynes, a change which occurred under working class pressure
but in the interests of the ruling class.

So there is no denying that for a considerable time, capitalism has been
able to prevent the rise of depressions which so plagued the pre-war
world and that this was accomplished by government interventions. This
is because Keynesianism can serve to initiate a new prosperity and
postpone crisis by state intervention to bolster demand and encourage
profit investment. This can mitigate the conditions of crisis, since one
of its short-term effects is that it offers private capital a wider
range of action and an improved basis for its own efforts to escape the
shortage of profits for accumulation. In addition, Keynesianism can fund
Research and Development in new technologies and working methods (such
as automation) which can increase profits, guarantee markets for goods
as well as transferring wealth from the working class to capital via
indirect taxation and inflation. In the long run, however, Keynesian
*"management of the economy by means of monetary and credit policies and
by means of state-induced production must eventually find its end in the
contradictions of the accumulation process."* [Paul Mattick, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 18] This is because it cannot stop the tendency to (relative)
over-investment, disproportionalities and profits squeeze we outlined in
[section C.7](secC7.html). In fact, due to its maintenance of full
employment it increases the possibility of a crisis arising due to
increased workers' power at the point of production.

So, these interventions did not actually set aside the underlying causes
of economic and social crisis. The modifications of the capitalist
system could not totally countermand the subjective and objective
limitations of a system based upon wage slavery and social hierarchy.
This can be seen when the rosy picture of post-war prosperity changed
drastically in the 1970s when economic crisis returned with a vengeance,
with high unemployment occurring along with high inflation. This soon
lead to a return to a more "free market" capitalism with, in Chomsky's
words, *"state protection and public subsidy for the rich, market
discipline for the poor."* This process and its aftermath are discussed
in the [next section](secC8.html#secc82).

C.8.2 What happened to Keynesianism in the 1970s?
-------------------------------------------------

Basically, the subjective and objective limitations to Keynesianism we
highlighted in the [last section](secC8.html#secc81) were finally
reached in the early 1970s. It, in effect, came into conflict with the
reality of capitalism as a class and hierarchical system. It faced
either revolution to increase popular participation in social, political
and economic life (and so eliminate capitalist power), an increase in
social democratic tendencies (and so become some kind of democratic
state capitalist regime) or a return to free(r) market capitalist
principles by increasing unemployment and so placing a rebellious people
in its place. Under the name of fighting inflation, the ruling class
unsurprisingly picked the latter option.

The 1970s are a key time in modern capitalism. In comparison to the two
previous decades, it suffered from high unemployment and high inflation
rates (the term stagflation is usually used to describe this). This
crisis was reflected in mass strikes and protests across the world.
Economic crisis returned, with the state interventions that for so long
kept capitalism healthy either being ineffective or making the crisis
worse. In other words, a combination of social struggle and a lack of
surplus value available to capital resulted in the breakdown of the
successful post-war consensus. Both subjected the *"Bastard
Keynesianism"* of the post-war period to serious political and
ideological challenges. This lead to a rise in neo-classical economic
ideology and the advocating of free(r) market capitalism as the solution
to capitalism's problems. This challenge took, in the main, the form of
Milton Friedman's Monetarism.

The roots and legacy of this breakdown in Keynesianism are informative
and worth analysing. The post-war period marked a distinct change for
capitalism, with new, higher levels of state intervention. The mix of
intervention obviously differed from country to country, based upon the
needs and ideologies of the ruling parties and social elites as well as
the impact of social movements and protests. In Europe, nationalisation
was widespread as inefficient capital was taken over by the state and
reinvigorated by state funding while social spending was more important
as Social Democratic parties attempted to introduce reforms. Chomsky
describes the process in the USA:

> *"Business leaders recognised that social spending could stimulate the
> economy, but much preferred the military Keynesian alternative -- for
> reasons having to do with privilege and power, not 'economic
> rationality.' This approach was adopted at once, the Cold War serving
> as the justification. . . . The Pentagon system was considered ideal
> for these purposes. It extends well beyond the military establishment,
> incorporating also the Department of Energy. . . and the space agency
> NASA, converted by the Kennedy administration to a significant
> component of the state-directed public subsidy to advanced industry.
> These arrangements impose on the public a large burden of the costs of
> industry (research and development, R&D) and provide a guaranteed
> market for excess production, a useful cushion for management
> decisions. Furthermore, this form of industrial policy does not have
> the undesirable side-effects of social spending directed to human
> needs. Apart from unwelcome redistributive effects, the latter
> policies tend to interfere with managerial prerogatives; useful
> production may undercut private gain, while state-subsidised waste
> production. . . is a gift to the owner and manager, to whom any
> marketable spin-offs will be promptly delivered. Social spending may
> also arouse public interest and participation, thus enhancing the
> threat of democracy. . . The defects of social spending do not taint
> the military Keynesian alternative. For such reasons, **Business
> Week** explained, 'there's a tremendous social and economic difference
> between welfare pump-priming and military pump-priming,' the latter
> being far preferable."* [**World Orders, Old and New**, pp. 100-1]

Over time, social Keynesianism took increasing hold even in the USA,
partly in response to working class struggle, partly due to the need for
popular support at elections and partly due to *"[p]opular opposition to
the Vietnam war [which] prevented Washington from carrying out a
national mobilisation . . . which might have made it possible to
complete the conquest without harm to the domestic economy. Washington
was forced to fight a 'guns-and-butter' war to placate the population,
at considerable economic cost."* [Chomsky, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 157-8]

Social Keynesianism directs part of the total surplus value to workers
and unemployed while military Keynesianism transfers surplus value from
the general population to capital and from capital to capital. This
allows R&D and capital to be publicly subsidised, as well as essential
but unprofitable capital to survive. As long as real wages did not
exceed a rise in productivity, Keynesianism would continue. However,
both functions have objective limits as the transfer of profits from
successful capital to essential, but less successful, or long term
investment can cause a crisis is there is not enough profit available to
the system as a whole. The surplus value producing capital, in this
case, would be handicapped due to the transfers and cannot respond to
economic problems as freely as before. This was compounded by the world
becoming economically "tripolar," with a revitalised Europe and a
Japan-based Asian region emerging as major economic forces. This placed
the USA under increased pressure, as did the Vietnam War. Increased
international competition meant the firms were limited in how they could
adjust to the increased pressures they faced in the class struggle.

This factor, class struggle, cannot be underestimated. In fact, the main
reason for the 1970s breakdown was social struggle by working people.
The only limit to the rate of growth required by Keynesianism to
function is the degree to which final output consists of consumption
goods for the presently employed population instead of investment. As
long as wages rise in line with productivity, capitalism does well and
firms invest (indeed, investment is the most basic means by which work,
i.e. capitalist domination, is imposed). However, faced with a workforce
which is able to increase its wages and resist the introduction of new
technologies then capitalism will face a crisis. The net effect of full
employment was the increased rebellious of the working class (both
inside and outside the workplace). This struggle was directed against
hierarchy in general, with workers, students, women, ethnic groups,
anti-war protesters and the unemployed all organising successful
struggles against authority. This struggle attacked the hierarchical
core of capitalism as well as increasing the amount of income going to
labour, resulting in a profit squeeze (see [section C.7](secC7.html)).
By the 1970s, capitalism and the state could no longer ensure that
working class struggles could be contained within the system.

This profits squeeze reflected the rise in inflation. While it has
become commonplace to argue that Keynesianism did not predict the
possibility of exploding inflation, this is not entirely true. While
Keynes and the mainstream Keynesians failed to take into account the
impact of full employment on class relations and power, his left-wing
followers did not. Influenced by Michal Kalecki, the argued that full
employment would impact on power at the point of production and,
consequently, prices. To quote Joan Robinson from 1943:

> "The first function of unemployment (which has always existed in open
> or disguised forms) is that it maintains the authority of master over
> man. The master has normally been in a position to say: 'If you don't
> want the job, there are plenty of others who do.' When the man can
> say: 'If you don't want to employ me, there are plenty of others who
> will', the situation is radically altered. One effect of such a change
> might be to remove a number of abuses to which the workers have been
> compelled to submit in the past . . . [Another is that] the absence of
> fear of unemployment might go further and have a disruptive effect
> upon factory discipline . . . [He may] us[e] his newly-found freedom
> from fear to snatch every advantage that he can . . .
> "The change in the workers' bargaining position which would follow
> from the abolition of unemployment would show itself in another and
> more subtle way. Unemployment . . . has not only the function of
> preserving discipline in industry, but also indirectly the function of
> preserving the value of money . . . there would be a constant upward
> pressure upon money wage-rates . . . the vicious spiral of wages and
> prices might become chronic . . . if it moved too fast, it might
> precipitate a violent inflation." [**Collected Economic Papers**, vol.
> 1, pp. 84-5]

Thus left-wing Keynesians (who later founded the Post-Keynesian school
of economics) recognised that capitalists *"could recoup themselves for
rising costs by raising prices."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 85] This perspective
was reflected in a watered-down fashion in mainstream economics by means
of the Philips Curve. When first suggested in the 1958, this was taken
to indicate a stable relationship between unemployment and inflation. As
unemployment fell, inflation rose. This relationship fell apart in the
1970s, as inflation rose as unemployment rose.

Neo-classical (and other pro-"free market" capitalist) economics usually
argues that inflation is purely a monetary phenomenon, the result of
there being more money in circulation than is needed for the sale of the
various commodities on the market. This was the position of Milton
Friedman and his Monetarist school during the 1960s and 1970s. However,
this is not true. In general, there is no relationship between the money
supply and inflation. The amount of money can increase while the rate of
inflation falls, for example (as we will discuss in the [next
section](secC8.html#secc83), Monetarism itself ironically proved there
is no relationship). Inflation has other roots, namely it is *"an
expression of inadequate profits that must be offset by price and money
policies . . . Under any circumstances, inflation spells the need for
higher profits."* [Paul Mattick, **Economics, Politics and the Age of
Inflation**, p. 19] Inflation leads to higher profits by making labour
cheaper. That is, it reduces *"the real wages of workers. . . [which]
directly benefits employers. . . [as] prices rise faster than wages,
income that would have gone to workers goes to business instead."* [J.
Brecher and T. Costello, **Common Sense for Hard Times**, p. 120]

Inflation, in other words, is a symptom of an on-going struggle over
income distribution between classes. It is caused when capitalist profit
margins are reduced (for whatever reason, subjective or objective) and
the bosses try to maintain them by increasing prices, i.e. by passing
costs onto consumers. This means that it would be wrong to conclude that
wage increases "cause" inflation as such. To do so ignores the fact that
workers do not set prices, capitalists do. Any increase in costs could,
after all, be absorbed by lowering profits. Instead working class people
get denounced for being "greedy" and are subjected to calls for
"restraint" -- in order for their bosses to make sufficient profits! As
Joan Robinson put it, while capitalist economies denies it (unlike,
significantly, Adam Smith) there is an *"inflationary pressure that
arises from an increase in the share of gross profits in gross income.
How are workers to be asked to accept 'wage restraint' unless there is a
restraint on profits? . . . unemployment is the problem. If it could be
relived by tax cuts, generating purchasing power, would not a general
cut in profit margins be still more effective? These are the questions
that all the rigmarole about marginal productivity is designed to
prevent us from discussing."* [**Collected Economic Papers**, vol. 4, p.
134]

Inflation and the response by the capitalist class to it, in their own
ways, shows the hypocrisy of capitalism. After all, wages are increasing
due to "natural" market forces of supply and demand. It is the
**capitalists** who are trying to buck the market by refusing to accept
lower profits caused by conditions on it. Obviously, to use Benjamin
Tucker's expression, under capitalism market forces are good for the
goose (labour) but bad for the gander (capital). The so-called "wages
explosion" of the late 1960s was a symptom of this shift in class power
away from capital and to labour which full employment had created. The
growing expectations and aspirations of working class people led them
not only to demand more of the goods they produced, it had start many
questioning why social hierarchies were needed in the first place.
Rather than accept this as a natural outcome of the eternal laws of
supply and demand, the boss class used the state to create a more
favourable labour market environment (as, it should be stressed, it has
always done).

This does not mean that inflation suits all capitalists equally (nor,
obviously, does it suit those social layers who live on fixed incomes
and who thus suffer when prices increase but such people are irrelevant
in the eyes of capital). Far from it -- during periods of inflation,
lenders tend to lose and borrowers tend to gain. The opposition to high
levels of inflation by many supporters of capitalism is based upon this
fact and the division within the capitalist class it indicates. There
are two main groups of capitalists, finance capitalists and industrial
capitalists. The latter can and do benefit from inflation (as indicated
above) but the former sees high inflation as a threat. When inflation is
accelerating it can push the real interest rate into negative territory
and this is a horrifying prospect to those for whom interest income is
fundamental (i.e. finance capital). In addition, high levels of
inflation can also fuel social struggle, as workers and other sections
of society try to keep their income at a steady level. As social
struggle has a politicising effect on those involved, a condition of
high inflation could have serious impacts on the political stability of
capitalism and so cause problems for the ruling class.

How inflation is viewed in the media and by governments is an expression
of the relative strengths of the two sections of the capitalist class
and of the level of class struggle within society. For example, in the
1970s, with the increased international mobility of capital, the balance
of power came to rest with finance capital and inflation became the
source of all evil. This shift of influence to finance capital can be
seen from the rise of rentier income. The distribution of US
manufacturing profits indicate this process -- comparing the periods
1965-73 to 1990-96, we find that interest payments rose from 11% to 24%,
dividend payments rose from 26% to 36% while retained earnings fell from
65% to 40%. Given that retained earnings are the most important source
of investment funds, the rise of finance capital helps explain why, in
contradiction to the claims of the right-wing, economic growth has
become steadily worse as markets have been liberalised -- funds that
could have been resulted in real investment have ended up in the finance
machine. In addition, the waves of strikes and protests that inflation
produced had worrying implications for the ruling class as they showed a
working class able and willing to contest their power and, perhaps,
start questioning **why** economic and social decisions were being made
by a few rather than by those affected by them. However, as the
underlying reasons for inflation remained (namely to increase profits)
inflation itself was only reduced to acceptable levels, levels that
ensured a positive real interest rate and acceptable profits.

Thus, Keynesianism sowed the seeds of its own destruction. Full
employment had altered the balance of power in the workplace and economy
from capital to labour. The prediction of socialist economist Michal
Kalecki that full employment would erode social discipline had become
true (see [section B.4.4](secB4.html#secb44)). Faced with rising direct
and indirect costs due to this, firms passed them on to consumers. Yet
consumers are also, usually, working class and this provoked more direct
action to increase real wages in the face of inflation. Within the
capitalist class, finance capital was increasing in strength at the
expense of industrial capital. Facing the erosion of their loan income,
states were subject to economic pressures to place fighting inflation
above maintaining full employment. While Keynes had hoped that *"the
rentier aspect of capitalism [was] a transitional phase"* and his ideas
would lead to *"the euthanasia of the rentier,"* finance capital was not
so willing to see this happen. [**The General Theory**, p. 376] The
1970s saw the influence of an increasingly assertive finance capital
rise at a time when significant numbers within ranks of industrial
capitalists were sick of full employment and wanted compliant workers
again. The resulting recessions may have harmed individual capitalists
(particularly smaller ones) but the capitalist class as a whole did very
well of them (and, as we noted in [section B.2](secB2.html), one of the
roles of the state is to manage the system in the interests of the
capitalist class **as a whole** and this can lead it into conflict with
**some** members of that class). Thus the maintenance of sufficiently
high unemployment under the mantra of fighting inflation as the de facto
state policy from the 1980s onwards (see [section C.9](secC9.html)).
While industrial capital might want a slightly stronger economy and a
slightly lower rate of unemployment than finance capital, the
differences are not significant enough to inspire major conflict. After
all, bosses in any industry *"like slack in the labour market"* as it
*"makes for a pliant workforce"* and, of course, *"many non-financial
corporations have heavy financial interests."* [Doug Henwood, **Wall
Street**, pp. 123-4 and p. 135]

It was these processes and pressures which came to a head in the 1970s.
In other words, post-war Keynesianism failed simply because it could
not, in the long term, stop the subjective and objective pressures which
capitalism always faces. In the 1970s, it was the subjective pressure
which played the key role, namely social struggle was the fundamental
factor in economic developments. The system could not handle the
struggle of human beings against the oppression, exploitation, hierarchy
and alienation they are subject to under capitalism.

C.8.3 How did capitalism adjust to the crisis in Keynesianism?
--------------------------------------------------------------

Basically by using, and then managing, the 1970s crisis to discipline
the working class in order to reap increased profits and secure and
extend the ruling classes' power. It did this using a combination of
crisis, free(r) markets and adjusted Keynesianism as part of a ruling
elite lead class war against labour.

In the face of crisis in the 1970s, Keynesianist redirection of profits
between capitals and classes had become a burden to capital as a whole
and had increased the expectations and militancy of working people to
dangerous levels. The crisis of the 1970s and early 1980s helped control
working class power and unemployment was utilised as a means of saving
capitalism and imposing the costs of free(r) markets onto society as
whole. The policies implemented were ostensibly to combat high
inflation. However, as left-wing economist Nicholas Kaldor summarised,
inflation may have dropped but this lay *"in their success in
transforming the labour market from a twentieth-century sellers' market
to a nineteenth-century buyers' market, with wholesome effects on
factory discipline, wage claims, and proneness to strike."* [**The
Scourge of Monetarism**, p. xxiii] Another British economist described
this policy memorably as *"deliberately setting out to base the
viability of the capitalist system on the maintenance of a large
'industrial reserve army' [of the unemployed] . . . [it is] the incomes
policy of Karl Marx."* [Thomas Balogh, **The Irrelevance of Conventional
Economics**, pp. 177-8] The aim, in summary, was to swing the balance of
social, economic and political power back to capital and ensure the road
to (private) serfdom was followed. The rationale was fighting inflation.

Initially the crisis was used to justify attacks on working class people
in the name of the free market. And, indeed, capitalism was made more
market based, although with a "safety net" and "welfare state" for the
wealthy. We have seen a partial return to *"what economists have called
freedom of industry and commerce, but which really meant the relieving
of industry from the harassing and repressive supervision of the State,
and the giving to it full liberty to exploit the worker, whom was still
to be deprived of his freedom."* The *"crisis of democracy"* which so
haunted the ruling class in the 1960s and 1970s was overcome and
replaced with, to use Kropotkin's words, the *"liberty to exploit human
labour without any safeguard for the victims of such exploitation and
the political power organised as to assure freedom of exploitation to
the middle-class."* [Kropotkin, **The Great French Revolution**, vol.1,
p. 28 and p. 30]

Fighting inflation, in other words, was simply code used by the ruling
class for fighting the class war and putting the working class back in
its place in the social hierarchy. *"Behind the economic concept of
inflation was a fear among elites that they were losing control"* as the
*"sting of unemployment was lessened and workers became progressively
less docile."* [Doug Henwood, **After the New Economy**, p. 204] Milton
Friedman's Monetarism was the means by which this was achieved. While
(deservedly) mostly forgotten now, Monetarism was very popular in the
1970s and was the economic ideology of choice of both Reagan and
Thatcher. This was the economic justification for the restructuring of
capitalism and the end of social Keynesianism. Its legacy remains to
some degree in the overriding concern over inflation which haunts the
world's central banks and other financial institutions, but its specific
policy recommendations have been dropped in practice after failing
spectacularly when applied (a fact which, strangely, was not mentioned
in the eulogies from the right that marked Friedman's death).

According to Monetarism, the problem with capitalism was money related,
namely that the state and its central bank printed too much money and,
therefore, its issue should be controlled. Friedman stressed, like most
capitalist economists, that monetary factors are **the** most important
feature in explaining such problems of capitalism as the business cycle,
inflation and so on. This is unsurprising, as it has the useful
ideological effect of acquitting the inner-workings of capitalism of any
involvement in such developments. Slumps, for example, may occur, but
they are the fault of the state interfering in the economy. Inflation
was a purely monetary phenomenon caused by the state printing more money
than required by the growth of economic activity (for example, if the
economy grew by 2% but the money supply increased by 5%, inflation would
rise by 3%). This analysis of inflation is deeply flawed, as we will
see. This was how Friedman explained the Great Depression of the 1930s
in the USA, for example (see, for example, his *"The Role of Monetary
Policy"* [**American Economic Review**, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 1-17]).

Thus Monetarists argued for controlling the money supply, of placing the
state under a *"monetary constitution"* which ensured that the central
banks be required by law to increase the quantity of money at a constant
rate of 3-5% a year. This would ensure that inflation would be banished,
the economy would adjust to its natural equilibrium, the business cycle
would become mild (if not disappear) and capitalism would finally work
as predicted in the economics textbooks. With the *"monetary
constitution"* money would become *"depoliticised"* and state influence
and control over money would be eliminated. Money would go back to being
what it is in neo-classical theory, essentially neutral, a link between
production and consumption and capable of no mischief on its own. Hence
the need for a *"legislated rule"* which would control *"the behaviour
of the stock of money"* by *"instructing the monetary authority to
achieve a specified rate of growth in the stock of money."*
[**Capitalism and Freedom**, p. 54]

Unfortunately for Monetarism, its analysis was simply wrong. It cannot
be stressed enough how deeply flawed and ideological Friedman's
arguments were. As one critique noted, his assumptions have *"been shown
to be fallacious and the empirical evidence questionable if not totally
misinterpreted."* Moreover, *"none of the assumptions which Friedman
made to reach his extraordinary conclusions bears any relation to
reality. They were chosen precisely because they led to the desired
conclusion, that inflation is a purely monetary phenomenon, originating
solely in excess monetary demand."* [Thomas Balogh, **Op. Cit.**, p. 165
and p. 167] For Kaldor, Friedman's claims that empirical evidence
supported his ideology were false. *"Friedman's assertions lack[ed] any
factual foundation whatsoever."* He stressed, *"They ha[d] no basis in
fact, and he seems to me have invented them on the spur of the moment."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 26] There was no relationship between the money supply
and inflation.

Even more unfortunately for both the theory and (far more importantly)
vast numbers of working class people, it was proven wrong not only
theoretically but also empirically. Monetarism was imposed on both the
USA and the UK in the early 1980s, with disastrous results. As the
Thatcher government in 1979 applied Monetarist dogma the most
whole-heartedly we will concentrate on that regime (the same basic
things occurred under Reagan as well but he embraced military
Keynesianism sooner and so mitigated its worse effects. [Michael
Stewart, **Keynes and After**, p. 181] This did not stop the right
proclaiming the Reagan boom as validation of "free market" economics!).

Firstly, the attempt to control the money supply failed, as predicted by
Nicholas Kaldor (see his 1970 essay *"The New Monetarism"*). This is
because the money supply, rather than being set by the central bank or
the state (as Friedman claimed), is a function of the demand for credit,
which is itself a function of economic activity. To use economic
terminology, Friedman had assumed that the money supply was "exogenous"
and so determined outside the economy by the state when, in fact, it is
"endogenous" in nature (i.e. comes from **within** the economy). [**The
Essential Kaldor**, p. 483] This means that any attempt by the central
bank to control the money supply, as desired by Friedman, will fail.

The experience of the Thatcher and Reagan regimes indicates this well.
The Thatcher government could not meet the money controls it set. It
took until 1986 before the Tory government stopped announcing monetary
targets, persuaded no doubt by the embarrassment caused by its inability
to hit them. In addition, the variations in the money supply showed that
Friedman's argument on what caused inflation was also wrong. According
to his theory, inflation was caused by the money supply increasing
faster than the economy, yet inflation **fell** as the money supply
increased. Between 1979 and 1981-2, its growth rose and was still higher
in 1982-3 than it had been in 1978-9 yet inflation was down to 4.6% in
1983. As the moderate conservative MP Ian Gilmore pointed out, *"[h]ad
Friedmanite monetarism. . . been right, inflation would have been about
16 per cent in 1982-3, 11 per cent in 1983-4, and 8 per cent in 1984-5.
In fact . . . in the relevant years it never approached the levels
infallibly predicted by monetarist doctrine."* [Ian Gilmore, **Dancing
With Dogma**, p. 57 and pp. 62-3] So, as Henwood summarises, *"even the
periods of recession and recovery disprove monetarist dogma."* [**Wall
Street**, p. 202]

However, the failed attempt to control the money supply had other, more
important effects, namely exploding interest and unemployment rates.
Being unable to control the supply of money, the government did the next
best thing: it tried to control the demand for money by rising interest
rates. Unfortunately for the Tories their preferred measure for the
money supply included interest-bearing bank deposits. This meant, as the
government raised interest rates in its attempts to control the money
supply, it was profitable for people to put more money on deposit. Thus
the rise in interest rates promoted people to put money in the bank, so
increasing the particular measure of the money supply the government
sought to control which, in turn, lead them to increase interest rates.
[Michael Stewart, **Keynes in the 1990s**, p. 50]

The exploding interest rates used in a vain attempt to control the money
supply was the last thing Britain needed in the early 1980s. The economy
was already sliding into recession and government attempts to control
the money supply deepened it. While Milton Friedman predicted *"only a
modest reduction in output and employment"* as a *"side effect of
reducing inflation to single figures by 1982,"* in fact Britain
experienced its deepest recession since the 1930s. [quoted by Michael
Stewart, **Keynes and After**, p. 179] As Michael Stewart dryly notes,
it *"would be difficult to find an economic prediction that that proved
more comprehensively inaccurate."* Unemployment rose from around 5% in
1979 to 13% in the middle of 1985 (and would have been even higher but
for a change in the method used for measuring it, a change implemented
to knock numbers off of this disgraceful figure). In 1984 manufacturing
output was still 10% lower than it had been in 1979. [**Op. Cit.**, p.
180] Little wonder Kaldor stated that Monetarism was *"a terrible curse,
a visitation of evil spirits, with particularly unfortunate, one could
almost say devastating, effects on"* Britain. [*"The Origins of the New
Monetarism,"* pp. 160-177, **Further Essays on Economic Theory and
Policy**, p. 160]

Eventually, inflation did fall. From an anarchist perspective, however,
this fall in inflation was the result of the high unemployment of this
period as it weakened labour, so allowing profits to be made in
production rather than in circulation (see [last
section](secC8.html#secc82) for this aspect of inflation). With no need
for capitalists to maintain their profits via price increases, inflation
would naturally decrease as labour's bargaining position was weakened by
the fear mass unemployment produced in the workforce. Rather than being
a purely monetary phenomena as Friedman claimed, inflation was a product
of the profit needs of capital and the state of the class struggle. The
net effect of the deep recession of the early 1980s and mass
unemployment during the 1980s (and 1990s) was to control working class
people by putting the fear of being fired back. The money supply had
nothing to do with it and attempts to control it would, of necessity,
fail and the only tool available to governments would be raising
interest rates. This would reduce inflation only by depressing
investment, generating unemployment, and so (eventually) slowing the
growth in wages as workers bear the brunt of the recessions by lowering
their real income (i.e., paying higher prices on the same wages). Which
is what happened in the 1980s.

It is also of interest to note that even in Friedman's own test case of
his basic contention, the Great Depression of 1929-33, he got it wrong.
For Friedman, the *"fact is that the Great Depression, like most other
periods of severe unemployment, was produced by government mismanagement
rather than by any inherent instability of the private economy."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 54] Kaldor pointed out that *"[a]ccording to Friedman's own
figures, the amount of 'high-powered money'. . . in the US increased,
not decreased, throughout the Great Contraction: in July 1932, it was
more than 10 per cent higher than in July, 1929 . . . The Great
Contraction of the money supply . . . occurred **despite** this increase
in the monetary base."* [*"The New Monetarism"*, **The Essential
Kaldor**, pp. 487-8] Other economists also investigated Friedman's
claims, with similar result. Peter Temin, for example, critiqued them
from a Keynesian point of view, asking whether the decline in spending
resulted from a decline in the money supply or the other way round. He
noted that while the Monetarist *"narrative is long and complex"* it
*"offers far less support for [its] assertions than appears at first. In
fact, it assumes the conclusion and describes the Depression in terms of
it; it does not test or prove it at all."* He examined the changes in
the real money balances and found that they increased between 1929 and
1931 from between 1 and 18% (depending on choice of money aggregate used
and how it was deflated). Overall, the money supply not only did not
decline but actually increased 5% between August 1929 and August 1931.
Temin concluded that there is no evidence that money caused the
depression after the stock market crash. [**Did Monetary Forces Cause
the Great Depression?**, pp. 15-6 and p. 141]

There is, of course, a slight irony about Friedman's account of the
Great Depression. Friedman suggested that the Federal Reserve actually
caused the Great Depression, that it was in some sense a demonstration
of the evils of government intervention. In his view, the US monetary
authorities followed highly deflationary policies and so the money
supply fell because they forced or permitted a sharp reduction in the
monetary base. In other words, because they failed to exercise the
responsibilities assigned to them. This is the core of his argument. Yet
it is important to stress that by this he did not, in fact, mean that it
happened because the government had intervened in the market.
Ironically, Friedman argued it happened because the government did
**not** intervene fast or far enough thus making a bad situation much
worse. In other words, it was not interventionist enough!

This self-contradictory argument arises because Friedman was an
ideologue for capitalism and so sought to show that it was a stable
system, to exempt capitalism from any systemic responsibility for
recessions. That he ended up arguing that the state caused the Great
Depression by doing nothing (which, ironically, was what Friedman
usually argued it should do) just shows the power of ideology over logic
or facts. Its fleeting popularity was due to its utility in the class
war for the ruling class at that time. Given the absolute failure of
Monetarism, in both theory and practice, it is little talked about now.
That in the 1970s it was the leading economic dogma of the right
explains why this is the case. Given that the right usually likes to
portray itself as being strong on the economy it is useful to indicate
that this is **not** the case -- unless you think causing the deepest
recessions since the 1930s in order to create conditions where working
class people are put in their place so the rich get richer is your
definition of sound economic policy. As Doug Henwood summarises, there
*"can be no doubt that monetarism . . . throughout the world from the
Chilean coup onward, has been an important part of a conscious policy to
crush labour and redistribute income and power toward capital."* [**Wall
Street**, pp. 201-2]

For more on Monetarism, the work of its greatest critic, Nicholas
Kaldor, is essential reading (see for example, *"Origins of the new
Monetarism"* and *"How Monetarism Failed"* in **Further Essays on
Economic Theory and Policy**, *"The New Monetarism"* in **The Essential
Kaldor** and **The Scourge of Monetarism**).

So under the rhetoric of "free market" capitalism, Keynesianism was used
to manage the crisis as it had previously managed the prosperity.
"Supply Side" economics (combined with neo-classical dogma) was used to
undercut working class power and consumption and so allow capital to
reap more profits off working class people by a combination of reduced
regulation for the capitalist class and state intervention to control
the working class. Unemployment was used to discipline a militant
workforce and as a means of getting workers to struggle **for** work
instead of **against** wage labour. With the fear of job loss hanging
over their heads, workers put up with speedups, longer hours, worse
conditions and lower wages and this increased the profits that could be
extracted directly from workers as well as reducing business costs by
allowing employers to reduce on-job safety and protection and so on. The
labour "market" was fragmented to a large degree into powerless,
atomised units with unions fighting a losing battle in the face of a
recession made much worse by government policy (and justified by
economic ideology). In this way capitalism could successfully change the
composition of demand from the working class to capital.

Needless to say, we still living under the legacy of this process. As we
indicated in [section C.3](secC3.html), there has been a significant
shift in income from labour to capital in the USA. The same holds true
in the UK, as does rising inequality and higher rates of poverty. While
the economy is doing well for the few, the many are finding it harder to
make ends meet and, as a result, are working harder for longer and
getting into debt to maintain their income levels (in a sense, it could
be argued that aggregate demand management has been partially privatised
as so many working class people are in debt). Unsurprisingly 70% of the
recent gain in per capita income in the Reagan-Bush years went to the
top 1% of income earners (while the bottom lost absolutely). Income
inequality increased, with the income of the bottom fifth of the US
population falling by 18% while that of the richest fifth rose by 8%.
[Noam Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p. 141] Combined with
bubbles in stocks and housing, the illusion of a good economy is
maintained while only those at the top are doing well (see [section
B.7](secB7.html) on rising inequality). This disciplining of the working
class has been successful, resulting in the benefits of rising
productivity and growth going to the elite. Unemployment and
underemployment are still widespread, with most newly created jobs being
part-time and insecure.

Indirect means of increasing capital's share in the social income were
also used, such as reducing environment regulations, so externalising
pollution costs onto current and future generations. In Britain, state
owned monopolies were privatised at knock-down prices allowing private
capital to increase its resources at a fraction of the real cost.
Indeed, some nationalised industries were privatised **as monopolies**
for a period allowing monopoly profits to be extracted from consumers
before the state allowed competition in those markets. Indirect taxation
also increased, reducing working class consumption by getting us to foot
the bill for capitalist restructuring as well as military-style
Keynesianism. Internationally, the exploitation of under-developed
nations increased with \$418 billion being transferred to the developed
world between 1982 and 1990 [Chomsky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 130] Capital also
became increasingly international in scope, as it used advances in
technology to move capital to third world countries where state
repression ensured a less militant working class. This transfer had the
advantage of increasing unemployment in the developed world, so placing
more pressures upon working class resistance.

This policy of capital-led class war, a response to the successful
working class struggles of the 1960s and 1970s, obviously reaped the
benefits it was intended to for capital. Income going to capital has
increased and that going to labour has declined and the "labour market"
has been disciplined to a large degree (but not totally we must add).
Working people have been turned, to a large degree, from participants
into spectators, as required for any hierarchical system. The human
impact of these policies cannot be calculated. Little wonder, then, the
utility of neo-classical dogma to the elite -- it could be used by rich,
powerful people to justify the fact that they are pursuing social
policies that create poverty and force children to die. As Chomsky
argues, *"one aspect of the internationalisation of the economy is the
extension of the two-tiered Third World mode to the core countries.
Market doctrine thus becomes an essential ideological weapon at home as
well, its highly selective application safely obscured by the doctrinal
system. Wealth and power are increasingly concentrated. Service for the
general public - education, health, transportation, libraries, etc. --
become as superfluous as those they serve, and can therefore be limited
or dispensed with entirely."* [**Year 501**, p. 109]

The state managed recession has had its successes. Company profits are
up as the *"competitive cost"* of workers is reduced due to fear of job
losses. The Wall Street Journal's review of economic performance for the
last quarter of 1995 is headlined *"Companies' Profits Surged 61% on
Higher Prices, Cost Cuts."* After-tax profits rose 62% from 1993, up
from 34% for the third quarter. While working America faces stagnant
wages, Corporate America posted record profits in 1994. **Business
Week** estimated 1994 profits to be up *"an enormous 41% over [1993],"*
despite a bare 9% increase in sales, a *"colossal success,"* resulting
in large part from a *"sharp"* drop in the *"share going to labour,"*
though *"economists say labour will benefit -- eventually."* [quoted by
Noam Chomsky, *"Rollback III"*, **Z Magazine**, April 1995] Labour was
still waiting over a decade later.

Moreover, for capital, Keynesianism is still goes on as before, combined
(as usual) with praises to market miracles. For example, Michael Borrus,
co-director of the Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy (a
corporate-funded trade and technology research institute), cites a 1988
Department of Commerce study that states that *"five of the top six
fastest growing U.S. industries from 1972 to 1988 were sponsored or
sustained, directly or indirectly, by federal investment."* He goes on
to state that the *"winners [in earlier years were] computers,
biotechnology, jet engines, and airframes"* all *"the by-product of
public spending."* [quoted by Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p.
109] As James Midgley points out, *"the aggregate size of the public
sector did not decrease during the 1980s and instead, budgetary policy
resulted in a significant shift in existing allocations from social to
military and law enforcement."* [*"The radical right, politics and
society"*, **The Radical Right and the Welfare State**, Howard
Glennerster and James Midgley (eds.), p. 11] Indeed, the US state funds
one third of all civil R&D projects, and the UK state provides a similar
subsidy. [Chomsky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 107] And, of course, the state
remains waiting to save the elite from their own market follies (for
example, after the widespread collapse of Savings and Loans Associations
in deregulated corruption and speculation, the 1980s pro-"free market"
Republican administration happily bailed them out, showing that market
forces were only for one class).

The corporate owned media attacks social Keynesianism, while remaining
silent or justifying pro-business state intervention. Combined with
extensive corporate funding of right-wing "think-tanks" which explain
why (the wrong sort of) social programmes are counter-productive, the
corporate state system tries to fool the population into thinking that
there is no alternative to the rule by the market while the elite enrich
themselves at the public's expense. This means that state intervention
has not ended as such. We are still in the age of Keynes, but social
Keynesianism has been replaced by military Keynesianism cloaked beneath
the rhetoric of "free market" dogma. This is a mix of free(r) markets
(for the many) and varying degrees of state intervention (for the select
few), while the state has become stronger and more centralised
(*"prisons also offer a Keynesian stimulus to the economy, both to the
construction business and white collar employment; the fastest growing
profession is reported to be security personnel."* [Chomsky, **Year
501**, p. 110]). In other words, pretty much the same situation that has
existed since the dawn of capitalism (see [section D.1](secD1.html)) --
free(r) markets supported by ready use of state power as and when
required.

The continued role of the state means that it is unlikely that a repeat
of the Great Depression is possible. The large size of state consumption
means that it stabilises aggregate demand to a degree unknown in 1929 or
in the 19th century period of free(r) market capitalism. This is **not**
to suggest that deep recessions will not happen (they have and will). It
is simply to suggest that they will **not** turn into a deep depression.
Unless, of course, ideologues who believe the "just-so" stories of
economic textbooks and the gurus of capitalism gain political office and
start to dismantle too much of the modern state. As Thatcher showed in
1979, it is possible to deepen recessions considerably if you subscribe
to flawed economic theory (ideology would be a better word) and do not
care about the impact it is having on the general public -- and, more
importantly, if the general public cannot stop you).

However, as we discuss in [section C.10](secC10.html) the net effect of
this one-sided class war has not been as good as has been suggested by
the ideologues of capitalism and the media. Faced with the re-imposition
of hierarchy, the quality of life for the majority has fallen
(consumption, i.e. the quantity of life, may not but that is due to a
combination of debt, increased hours at work and more family members
taking jobs to make ends meet). This, in turn, has lead to a fetish over
economic growth. As Joan Robinson put it in the 1970s when this process
started the *"economists have relapsed into the slogans of laisser faire
-- what is profitable promotes growth; what is most profitable is best.
But people have began to notice that the growth of statistical GNP is
not the same thing as an increase in welfare."* [**Collected Economic
Papers**, vol. 4, p. 128] Yet even here, the post-1970s experience is
not great. A quarter century of top heavy growth in which the vast
majority of economic gains have gone to the richest 10% of the
population has not produced the rate of GDP growth promised for it. In
fact, the key stimulus for growth in the 1990s and 2000s was bubbles,
first in the stock market and then in the housing market. Moreover,
rising personal debt has bolstered the economy in a manner which are as
unsustainable as the stock and housing bubbles which, in part, supported
it. How long the system will stagger on depends, ultimately, on how long
working class people will put up with it and having to pay the costs
inflicted onto society and the environment in the pursuit of increasing
the wealth of the few.

While working class resistance continues, it is largely defensive, but,
as in the past, this can and will change. Even the darkest night ends
with the dawn and the lights of working class resistance can be seen
across the globe. For example, the anti-Poll Tax struggle in Britain
against the Thatcher Government was successful as have been many
anti-cuts struggles across the USA and Western Europe, the Zapatista
uprising in Mexico was inspiring as was the Argentine revolt against
neo-liberalism and its wave of popular assemblies and occupied
workplaces. In France, the anti-CPE protests showed a new generation of
working class people know not only how to protest but also nonsense when
they hear it. In general, there has been continual strikes and protests
across the world. Even in the face of state repression and managed
economic recession, working class people are still fighting back. The
job for anarchists to is encourage these sparks of liberty and help them
win.
