Section C - What are the myths of capitalist economics?
=======================================================

Within capitalism, economics plays an important ideological role.
Economics has been used to construct a theory from which exploitation
and oppression are excluded, by definition. We will attempt here to
explain why capitalism is deeply exploitative. Elsewhere, in [section
B](secBcon.html), we have indicated why capitalism is oppressive and
will not repeat ourselves here.

In many ways economics plays the role within capitalism that religion
played in the Middle Ages, namely to provide justification for the
dominant social system and hierarchies. *"The priest keeps you docile
and subjected,"* argued Malatesta, *"telling you everything is God's
will; the economist say it's the law of nature."* They *"end up saying
that no one is responsible for poverty, so there's no point rebelling
against it."* [**Fra Contadini**, p. 21] Even worse, they usually argue
that collective action by working class people is counterproductive and,
like the priest, urge us to tolerate current oppression and exploitation
with promises of a better future (in heaven for the priest, for the
economist it is an unspecified "long run"). It would be no
generalisation to state that if you want to find someone to rationalise
and justify an obvious injustice or form of oppression then you should
turn to an economist (preferably a "free market" one).

That is not the only similarity between the "science" of economics and
religion. Like religion, its basis in science is usually lacking and its
theories more based upon "leaps of faith" than empirical fact. Indeed,
it is hard to find a "science" more unconcerned about empirical evidence
or building realistic models than economics. Just looking at the
assumptions made in "perfect competition" shows that (see [section
C.1](secC1.html) for details). This means that economics is immune to
such trivialities as evidence and fact, although that does not stop
economics being used to rationalise and justify certain of these facts
(such as exploitation and inequality). A classic example is the various
ways economists have sought to explain what anarchists and other
socialists have tended to call ***"surplus value"*** (i.e. profits,
interest and rent). Rather than seek to explain its origin by an
empirical study of the society it exists in (capitalism), economists
have preferred to invent "just-so" stories, little a-historic parables
about a past which never existed is used to illustrate (and so defend) a
present class system and its inequalities and injustices. The lessons of
a fairy tale about a society that has never existed are used as a guide
for one which does and, by some strange co-incidence, they happen to
justify the existing class system and its distribution of income. Hence
the love of Robinson Crusoe in economics.

Ironically, this favouring of theory (ideology would be a better term)
is selective as their exposure as fundamentally flawed does not stop
them being repeated. As we discuss in [section C.2](secC2.html), the
neoclassical theory of capital was proven to be incorrect by left-wing
economists. This was admitted by their opponents: *"The question that
confronts us is not whether the Cambridge Criticism is theoretically
valid. It is. Rather the question is an empirical or econometric one: is
there sufficient substitutability within the system to establish
neo-classical results?"* Yet this did not stop this theory being taught
to this day and the successful critique forgotten. Nor has econometrics
successfully refuted the analysis, as capital specified in terms of
money cannot reflect a theoretical substance (neo-classical "capital")
which could not exist in reality. However, that is unimportant for
*"[u]ntil the econometricians have the answer for us, placing reliance
upon neo-classical economic theory is a matter of faith,"* which, of
course, he had [C. E. Ferguson, **The Neo-classical Theory of Production
and Distribution**, p. 266 and p. xvii]

Little wonder that Joan Robinson, one of the left-wing economists who
helped expose the bankruptcy of the neo-classical theory of capital,
stated that economics was *"back where it was, a branch of theology."*
[**Collected Economic Papers**, Vol. 4, p. 127] It remains there more
than thirty years later:

> *"Economics is not a science. Many economists -- particularly those
> who believe that decisions on whether to get married can be reduced to
> an equation -- see the world as a complex organism that can be
> understood using the right differential calculus. Yet everything we
> know about economics suggests that it is a branch and not a
> particularly advanced one, of witchcraft."* [Larry Elliot and Dan
> Atkinson, **The Age of Insecurity**, p. 226]

The weakness of economics is even acknowledged by some within the
profession itself. According to Paul Ormerod, *"orthodox economics is in
many ways an empty box. Its understanding of the world is similar to
that of the physical sciences in the Middle Ages. A few insights have
been obtained which stand the test of time, but they are very few
indeed, and the whole basis of conventional economics is deeply
flawed."* Moreover, he notes the *"overwhelming empirical evidence
against the validity of its theories."* It is rare to see an economist
be so honest. The majority of economists seem happy to go on with their
theories, trying to squeeze life into the Procrustean bed of their
models. And, like the priests of old, make it hard for non-academics to
question their dogmas as *"economics is often intimidating. Its
practitioners . . . have erected around the discipline a barrier of
jargon and mathematics which makes the subject difficult to penetrate
for the non-initiated."* [**The Death of Economics**, p. ix, p. 67 and
p. ix]

So in this section of our FAQ, we will try to get to the heart of modern
capitalism, cutting through the ideological myths that supporters of the
system have created around it. This will be a difficult task, as the
divergence of the reality of capitalism and the economics that is used
to explain (justify, more correctly) it is large. For example, the
preferred model used in neo-classical economics is that of "perfect
competition" which is based on a multitude of small firms producing
homogenous products in a market which none of them are big enough to
influence (i.e. have no market power). This theory was developed in the
late 19th century when the real economy was marked by the rise of big
business, a dominance which continues to this day. Nor can it be said
that even small firms produce identical products -- product
differentiation and brand loyalty are key factors for any business. In
other words, the model reflected (and still reflects) the exact opposite
of reality.

In spite of the theoretical models of economics having little or no
relation to reality, they are used to both explain and justify the
current system. As for the former, the truly staggering aspect of
economics for those who value the scientific method is the immunity of
its doctrines to empirical refutation (and, in some cases, theoretical
refutation). The latter is the key to not only understanding why
economics is in such a bad state but also why it stays like that. While
economists like to portray themselves as objective scientists, merely
analysing the system, the development of their "science" has always been
marked with apologetics, with rationalising the injustices of the
existing system. This can be seen best in attempts by economists to show
that Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) of firms, capitalists and landlords
all deserve their riches while workers should be grateful for what they
get. As such, economics has never been value free simply because what it
says affects people and society. This produces a market for economic
ideology in which those economists who supply the demand will prosper.
Thus we find many *"fields of economics and economic policy where the
responses of important economic professionals and the publicity given
economic findings are correlated with the increased market demand for
specific conclusions and a particular ideology."* [Edward S. Herman,
*"The Selling of Market Economics,"* pp. 173-199, **New Ways of
Knowing**, Marcus G. Raskin and Herbert J. Bernstein (eds.), p.192]

Even if we assume the impossible, namely that economists and their
ideology can truly be objective in the face of market demand for their
services, there is a root problem with capitalist economics. This is
that it the specific social relations and classes produced by capitalism
have become embedded into the theory. Thus, as an example, the concepts
of the marginal productivity of land and capital are assumed to
universal in spite the fact that neither makes any sense outside an
economy where one class of people owns the means of life while another
sells their labour to them. Thus in an artisan/peasant society or one
based around co-operatives, there would be no need for such concepts for
in such societies, the distinction between wages and profits has no
meaning and, as a result, there is no income to the owners of machinery
and land and no need to explain it in terms of the "marginal
productivity" of either. Thus mainstream economics takes the class
structure of capitalism as a natural, eternal, fact and builds up from
there. Anarchists, like other socialists, stress the opposite, namely
that capitalism is a specific historical phase and, consequently, there
are no universal economic laws and if you change the system the laws of
economics change. Unless you are a capitalist economist, of course, when
the same laws apply no matter what.

In our discussion, it is important to remember that capitalist economics
is **not** the same as the capitalist economy. The latter exists quite
independently of the former (and, ironically, usually flourishes best
when the policy makers ignore it). Dissident economist Steve Keen
provides a telling analogy between economics and meteorology. Just as
*"the climate would exist even if there were no intellectual discipline
of meteorology, the economy itself would exist whether or not the
intellectual pursuit of economics existed."* Both share *"a fundamental
raison d'etre,"* namely *"that of attempting to understand a complex
system."* However, there are differences. Like weather forecasters,
*"economists frequently get their forecasts of the economic future
wrong. But in fact, though weather forecasts are sometimes incorrect,
overall meteorologists have an enviable record of accurate prediction --
whereas the economic record is tragically bad."* This means it is
impossible to ignore economics (*"to treat it and its practitioners as
we these days treat astrologers"*) as it is a social discipline and so
what we *"believe about economics therefore has an impact upon human
society and the way we relate to one another."* Despite *"the abysmal
predictive record of their discipline,"* economists *"are forever
recommending ways in which the institutional environment should be
altered to make the economy work better."* By that they mean make the
real economy more like their models, as *"the hypothetical pure market
performs better than the mixed economy in which we live."* [**Debunking
Economics**, pp. 6-8] Whether this actually makes the world a better
place is irrelevant (indeed, economics has been so developed as to make
such questions irrelevant as what happens on the market is, by
definition, for the best).

Here we expose the apologetics for what they are, expose the ideological
role of economics as a means to justify, indeed ignore, exploitation and
oppression. In the process of our discussion we will often expose the
ideological apologetics that capitalist economics create to defend the
status quo and the system of oppression and exploitation it produces. We
will also attempt to show the deep flaws in the internal inconsistencies
of mainstream economics. In addition, we will show how important reality
is when evaluating the claims of economics.

That this needs to be done can be seen by comparing the promise of
economics with its actual results when applied in reality. Mainstream
economics argues that it is based on the idea of "utility" in
consumption, i.e. the subjective pleasure of individuals. Thus
production is, it is claimed, aimed at meeting the demands of consumers.
Yet for a system supposedly based on maximising individual happiness
("utility"), capitalism produces a hell of a lot of unhappy people. Some
radical economists have tried to indicate this and have created an
all-embracing measure of well-being called the Index of Sustainable
Economic Welfare (ISEW). Their conclusions, as summarised by Elliot and
Atkinson, are significant:

> *"In the 1950s and 1960s the ISEW rose in tandem with per capita GDP.
> It was a time not just of rising incomes, but of greater social
> equity, low crime, full employment and expanding welfare states. But
> from the mid-1970s onwards the two measures started to move apart. GDP
> per head continued its inexorable rise, but the ISEW started to
> decline as a result of lengthening dole queues, social exclusion, the
> explosion in crime, habitat loss, environmental degradation and the
> growth of environment- and stress-related illness. By the start of the
> 1990s, the ISEW was almost back to the levels at which it started in
> the early 1950s."* [Larry Elliot and Dan Atkinson, **Op. Cit.**, p.
> 248]

So while capitalism continues to produce more and more goods and,
presumably, maximises more and more individual utility, actual real
people are being "irrational" and not realising they are, in fact,
better off and happier. Ironically, when such unhappiness is pointed out
most defenders of capitalism dismiss people's expressed woe's as
irrelevant. Apparently **some** subjective evaluations are considered
more important than others!

Given that the mid-1970s marked the start of neo-liberalism, the
promotion of the market and the reduction of government interference in
the economy, this is surely significant. After all, the *"global economy
of the early 21st century looks a lot more like the economic textbook
ideal that did the world of the 1950s . . . All these changes have
followed the advance of economists that the unfettered market is the
best way to allocate resources, and that well-intentioned interventions
which oppose market forces will actually do more harm than good."* As
such, *"[w]ith the market so much more in control of the global economy
now than fifty years ago, then if economists are right, the world
**should be** a manifestly better place: it should be growing faster,
with more stability, and income should go to those who deserve it."*
However, *"[u]nfortunately, the world refuses to dance the expected
tune. In particularly, the final ten years of the 20th century were
marked, not by tranquil growth, but by crises."* [Steve Keen, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 2]

These problems and the general unhappiness with the way society is going
is related to various factors, most of which are impossible to reflect
in mainstream economic analysis. They flow from the fact that capitalism
is a system marked by inequalities of wealth and power and so how it
develops is based on them, not the subjective evaluations of atomised
individuals that economics starts with. This in itself is enough to
suggest that capitalist economics is deeply flawed and presents a
distinctly flawed picture of capitalism and how it actually works.

Anarchists argue that this is unsurprising as economics, rather than
being a science is, in fact, little more than an ideology whose main aim
is to justify and rationalise the existing system. We agree with
libertarian Marxist Paul Mattick's summation that economics is
*"actually no more than a sophisticated apology for the social and
economic **status quo**"* and hence the *"growing discrepancy between
[its] theories and reality."* [**Economics, Politics and the Age of
Inflation**, p. vii] Anarchists, unsurprisingly, see capitalism as a
fundamentally exploitative system rooted in inequalities of power and
wealth dominated by hierarchical structures (capitalist firms). In the
sections that follow, the exploitative nature of capitalism is explained
in greater detail. We would like to point out that for anarchists,
exploitation is not more important than domination. Anarchists are
opposed to both equally and consider them to be two sides of the same
coin. You cannot have domination without exploitation nor exploitation
without domination. As Emma Goldman pointed out, under capitalism:

> *"wealth means power; the power to subdue, to crush, to exploit, the
> power to enslave, to outrage, to degrade . . . Nor is this the only
> crime . . . Still more fatal is the crime of turning the producer into
> a mere particle of a machine, with less will and decision than his
> master of steel and iron. Man is being robbed not merely of the
> products of his labour, but of the power of free initiative, of
> originality, and the interest in, or desire for, the things he is
> making."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, pp. 66-7]

Needless to say, it would be impossible to discuss or refute **every**
issue covered in a standard economics book or every school of economics.
As economist Nicholas Kaldor notes, *"[e]ach year new fashions sweep the
'politico-economic complex' only to disappear again with equal
suddenness . . . These sudden bursts of fashion are a sure sign of the
'pre-scientific' stage [economics is in], where any crazy idea can get a
hearing simply because nothing is known with sufficient confidence to
rule it out."* [**The Essential Kaldor**, p. 377] We will have to
concentrate on key issues like the flaws in mainstream economics, why
capitalism is exploitative, the existence and role of economic power,
the business cycle, unemployment and inequality.

Nor do we wish to suggest that all forms of economics are useless or
equally bad. Our critique of capitalist economics does not suggest that
no economist has contributed worthwhile and important work to social
knowledge or our understanding of the economy. Far from it. As Bakunin
put it, property *"is a god"* and has *"its metaphysics. It is the
science of the bourgeois economists. Like any metaphysics it is a sort
of twilight, a compromise between truth and falsehood, with the latter
benefiting from it. It seeks to give falsehood the appearance of truth
and leads truth to falsehood."* [**The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, p. 179] How far this is true varies form school to school,
economist to economist. Some have a better understanding of certain
aspects of capitalism than others. Some are more prone to apologetics
than others. Some are aware of the problems of modern economics and
*"some of the most committed economists have concluded that, if
economics is to become less of a religion and more of a science, then
the foundations of economics should be torn down and replaced"*
(although, *"left to [their] own devices"*, economists *"would continue
to build an apparently grand edifice upon rotten foundations."*). [Keen,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 19]

As a rule of thumb, the more free market a particular economist or
school of economics is, the more likely they will be prone to
apologetics and unrealistic assumptions and models. Nor are we
suggesting that if someone has made a positive contribution in one or
more areas of economic analysis that their opinions on other subjects
are correct or compatible with anarchist ideas. It is possible to
present a correct analysis of capitalism or capitalist economics while,
at the same time, being blind to the problems of Keynesian economics or
the horrors of Stalinism. As such, our quoting of certain critical
economists does not imply agreement with their political opinions or
policy suggestions.

Then there is the issue of what do we mean by the term "capitalist
economics"? Basically, any form of economic theory which seeks to
rationalise and defend capitalism. This can go from the extreme of free
market capitalist economics (such as the so-called "Austrian" school and
Monetarists) to those who advocate state intervention to keep capitalism
going (Keynesian economists). We will not be discussing those economists
who advocate state capitalism. As a default, we will take "capitalist
economics" to refer to the mainstream "neoclassical" school as this is
the dominant form of the ideology and many of its key features are
accepted by the others. This seems applicable, given that the current
version of capitalism being promoted is neo-liberalism where state
intervention is minimised and, when it does happen, directed towards
benefiting the ruling elite.

Lastly, one of the constant refrains of economists is the notion that
the public is ignorant of economics. The implicit assumption behind this
bemoaning of ignorance by economists is that the world should be run
either by economists or on their recommendations. In [section
C.11](secC11.html) we present a case study of a nation, Chile, unlucky
enough to have that fate subjected upon it. Unsurprisingly, this rule by
economists could only be imposed as a result of a military coup and
subsequent dictatorship. As would be expected, given the biases of
economics, the wealthy did very well, workers less so (to put it
mildly), in this experiment. Equally unsurprising, the system was
proclaimed an economic miracle -- before it promptly collapsed.

So this section of the FAQ is our modest contribution to making
economists happier by making working class people less ignorant of their
subject. As Joan Robinson put it:

> *"In short, no economic theory gives us ready-made answers. Any theory
> that we follow blindly will lead us astray. To make good use of an
> economic theory, we must first sort out the relations of the
> propagandist and the scientific elements in it, then by checking with
> experience, see how far the scientific element appears convincing, and
> finally recombine it with our own political views. The purpose of
> studying economics is not to acquire a set of ready-made answers to
> economic questions, but to learn how to avoid being deceived by
> economists."* [**Contributions to Modern Economics**, p. 75]
