C.4 Why does the market become dominated by Big Business?
=========================================================

As noted in [section C.1.4](secC1.html#secc14), the standard capitalist
economic model assumes an economy made up of a large number of small
firms, none of which can have any impact on the market. Such a model has
no bearing to reality:

> *"The facts show . . . that capitalist economies tend over time and
> with some interruptions to become more and more heavily
> concentrated."* [M.A. Utton, **The Political Economy of Big
> Business**, p. 186]

As Bakunin argued, capitalist production *"must ceaselessly expand at
the expense of the smaller speculative and productive enterprises
devouring them."* Thus *"[c]ompetition in the economic field destroys
and swallows up the small and even medium-sized enterprises, factories,
land estates, and commercial houses for the benefit of huge capital
holdings."* [**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 182] The
history of capitalism has proven him right. while the small and medium
firm has not disappeared, economic life under capitalism is dominated by
a few big firms.

This growth of business is rooted in the capitalist system itself. The
dynamic of the "free" market is that it tends to becomes dominated by a
few firms (on a national, and increasingly, international, level),
resulting in oligopolistic competition and higher profits for the
companies in question (see [next section](secC4.html#secc41) for details
and evidence). This occurs because only established firms can afford the
large capital investments needed to compete, thus reducing the number of
competitors who can enter or survive in a given the market. Thus, in
Proudhon's words, *"competition kills competition."* [**System of
Economical Contradictions**, p. 242] In other words, capitalist markets
evolve toward oligopolistic concentration.

This *"does not mean that new, powerful brands have not emerged [after
the rise of Big Business in the USA after the 1880s]; they have, but in
such markets. . . which were either small or non-existent in the early
years of this century."* The dynamic of capitalism is such that the
*"competitive advantage [associated with the size and market power of
Big Business], once created, prove[s] to be enduring."* [Paul Ormerod,
**The Death of Economics**, p. 55]

For people with little or no capital, entering competition is limited to
new markets with low start-up costs (*"In general, the industries which
are generally associated with small scale production. . . have low
levels of concentration"* [Malcolm C. Sawyer, **The Economics of
Industries and Firms**, p. 35]). Sadly, however, due to the dynamics of
competition, these markets usually in turn become dominated by a few big
firms, as weaker firms fail, successful ones grow and capital costs
increase (*"Each time capital completes its cycle, the individual grows
smaller in proportion to it."* [Josephine Guerts, **Anarchy: A Journal
of Desire Armed** no. 41, p. 48]).

For example, between 1869 and 1955 *"there was a marked growth in
capital per person and per number of the labour force. Net capital per
head rose. . . to about four times its initial level . . . at a rate of
about 17% per decade."* The annual rate of gross capital formation rose
*"from \$3.5 billion in 1869-1888 to \$19 billion in 1929-1955, and to
\$30 billion in 1946-1955. This long term rise over some three quarters
of a century was thus about nine times the original level"* (in
constant, 1929, dollars). [Simon Kuznets, **Capital in the American
Economy**, p. 33 and p. 394] To take the steel industry as an
illustration: in 1869 the average cost of steel works in the USA was
\$156,000, but by 1899 it was \$967,000 -- a 520% increase. From 1901 to
1950, gross fixed assets increased from \$740,201 to \$2,829,186 in the
steel industry as a whole, with the assets of Bethlehem Steel increasing
by 4,386.5% from 1905 (\$29,294) to 1950 (\$1,314,267). These increasing
assets are reflected both in the size of workplaces and in the
administration levels in the company as a whole (i.e. **between**
individual workplaces).

The reason for the rise in capital investment is rooted in the need for
capitalist firms to gain a competitive edge on their rivals. As noted in
[section C.2](secC2.html), the source of profit is the unpaid labour of
workers and this can be increased by one of two means. The first is by
making workers work longer for less on the same machinery (the
generation of absolute surplus value, to use Marx's term). The second is
to make labour more productive by investing in new machinery (the
generation of relative surplus value, again using Marx's terminology).
The use of technology drives up the output per worker relative to their
wages and so the workforce is exploited at a higher rate (how long
before workers force their bosses to raise their wages depends on the
balance of class forces as we noted in the [last section](secC3.html)).
This means that capitalists are driven by the market to accumulate
capital. The first firm to introduce new techniques reduces their costs
relative to the market price, so allowing them to gain a surplus profit
by having a competitive advantage (this addition profit disappears as
the new techniques are generalised and competition invests in them).

As well as increasing the rate of exploitation, this process has an
impact on the structure of the economy. With the increasing ratio of
capital to worker, the cost of starting a rival firm in a given,
well-developed, market prohibits all but other large firms from doing so
(and here we ignore advertising and other distribution expenses, which
increase start-up costs even more -- *"advertising raises the capital
requirements for entry into the industry"* [Sawyer, **Op. Cit.**, p.
108]). J. S. Bain (in **Barriers in New Competition**) identified three
main sources of entry barrier: economies of scale (i.e. increased
capital costs and their more productive nature); product differentiation
(i.e. advertising); and a more general category he called *"absolute
cost advantage."*

This last barrier means that larger companies are able to outbid smaller
companies for resources, ideas, etc. and put more money into Research
and Development and buying patents. Therefore they can have a
technological and material advantage over the small company. They can
charge "uneconomic" prices for a time (and still survive due to their
resources) -- an activity called *"predatory pricing"* -- and/or mount
lavish promotional campaigns to gain larger market share or drive
competitors out of the market. In addition, it is easier for large
companies to raise external capital, and risk is generally less.

In addition, large firms can have a major impact on innovation and the
development of technology -- they can simply absorb newer, smaller,
enterprises by way of their economic power, buying out (and thus
controlling) new ideas, much the way oil companies hold patents on a
variety of alternative energy source technologies, which they then fail
to develop in order to reduce competition for their product (of course,
at some future date they may develop them when it becomes profitable for
them to do so). Also, when control of a market is secure, oligopolies
will usually delay innovation to maximise their use of existing plant
and equipment or introduce spurious innovations to maximise product
differentiation. If their control of a market is challenged (usually by
other big firms, such as the increased competition Western oligopolies
faced from Japanese ones in the 1970s and 1980s), they can speed up the
introduction of more advanced technology and usually remain competitive
(due, mainly, to the size of the resources they have available).

These barriers work on two levels -- **absolute** (entry) barriers and
**relative** (movement) barriers. As business grows in size, the amount
of capital required to invest in order to start a business also
increases. This restricts entry of new capital into the market (and
limits it to firms with substantial financial and/or political backing
behind them):

> *"Once dominant organisations have come to characterise the structure
> of an industry, immense barriers to entry face potential competitors.
> Huge investments in plant, equipment, and personnel are needed . . .
> [T]he development and utilisation of productive resources **within**
> the organisation takes considerable time, particularly in the face of
> formidable incumbents . . . It is therefore one thing for a few
> business organisations to emerge in an industry that has been
> characterised by . . . highly competitive conditions. It is quite
> another to break into an industry. . . [marked by] oligopolistic
> market power."* [William Lazonick, **Business Organisation and the
> Myth of the Market Economy**, pp. 86-87]

Moreover, **within** the oligopolistic industry, the large size and
market power of the dominant firms mean that smaller firms face
expansion disadvantages which reduce competition. The dominant firms
have many advantages over their smaller rivals -- significant purchasing
power (which gains better service and lower prices from suppliers as
well as better access to resources), privileged access to financial
resources, larger amounts of retained earnings to fund investment,
economies of scale both within and **between** workplaces, the
undercutting of prices to "uneconomical" levels and so on (and, of
course, they can **buy** the smaller company -- IBM paid \$3.5 billion
for Lotus in 1995. That is about equal to the entire annual output of
Nepal, which has a population of 20 million). The large firm or firms
can also rely on its established relationships with customers or
suppliers to limit the activities of smaller firms which are trying to
expand (for example, using their clout to stop their contacts purchasing
the smaller firms products).

Little wonder Proudhon argued that *"[i]n competition. . . victory is
assured to the heaviest battalions."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 260]

As a result of these entry/movement barriers, we see the market being
divided into two main sectors -- an oligopolistic sector and a more
competitive one. These sectors work on two levels -- within markets
(with a few firms in a given market having very large market shares,
power and excess profits) and within the economy itself (some markets
being highly concentrated and dominated by a few firms, other markets
being more competitive). This results in smaller firms in oligopolistic
markets being squeezed by big business along side firms in more
competitive markets. Being protected from competitive forces means that
the market price of oligopolistic markets is **not** forced down to the
average production price by the market, but instead it tends to
stabilise around the production price of the smaller firms in the
industry (which do not have access to the benefits associated with
dominant position in a market). This means that the dominant firms get
super-profits while new capital is not tempted into the market as
returns would not make the move worthwhile for any but the biggest
companies, who usually get comparable returns in their own oligopolised
markets (and due to the existence of market power in a few hands, entry
can potentially be disastrous for small firms if the dominant firms
perceive expansion as a threat).

Thus whatever super-profits Big Business reap are maintained due to the
advantages it has in terms of concentration, market power and size which
reduce competition (see [section C.5](secC5.html) for details).

And, we must note, that the processes that saw the rise of national Big
Business is also at work on the global market. Just as Big Business
arose from a desire to maximise profits and survive on the market, so
*"[t]ransnationals arise because they are a means of consolidating or
increasing profits in an oligopoly world."* [Keith Cowling and Roger
Sugden, **Transnational Monopoly Capitalism**, p. 20] So while a
strictly national picture will show a market dominated by, say, four
firms, a global view shows us twelve firms instead and market power
looks much less worrisome. But just as the national market saw a
increased concentration of firms over time, so will global markets. Over
time a well-evolved structure of global oligopoly will appear, with a
handful of firms dominating most global markets (with turnovers larger
than most countries GDP -- which is the case even now. For example, in
1993 Shell had assets of US\$ 100.8 billion, which is more than double
the GDP of New Zealand and three times that of Nigeria, and total sales
of US\$ 95.2 billion).

Thus the very dynamic of capitalism, the requirements for survival on
the market, results in the market becoming dominated by Big Business
(*"the more competition develops, the more it tends to reduce the number
of competitors."* [P-J Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 243]). The irony that
competition results in its destruction and the replacement of market
co-ordination with planned allocation of resources is one usually lost
on supporters of capitalism.

C.4.1 How extensive is Big Business?
------------------------------------

The effects of Big Business on assets, sales and profit distribution are
clear. In the USA, in 1985, there were 14,600 commercial banks. The 50
largest owned 45.7 of all assets, the 100 largest held 57.4%. In 1984
there were 272,037 active corporations in the manufacturing sector, 710
of them (one-fourth of 1 percent) held 80.2 percent of total assets. In
the service sector (usually held to be the home of small business), 95
firms of the total of 899,369 owned 28 percent of the sector's assets.
In 1986 in agriculture, 29,000 large farms (only 1.3% of all farms)
accounted for one-third of total farm sales and 46% of farm profits. In
1987, the top 50 firms accounted for 54.4% of the total sales of the
**Fortune** 500 largest industrial companies. [Richard B. Du Boff,
**Accumulation and Power**, p. 171] Between 1982 and 1992, the top two
hundred corporations increased their share of global Gross Domestic
Product from 24.2% to 26.8%, *"with the leading ten taking almost half
the profits of the top two hundred."* This underestimates economic
concentration as it *"does not take account of privately owned giants."*
[Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p. 181]

The process of market domination is reflected by the increasing market
share of the big companies. In Britain, the top 100 manufacturing
companies saw their market share rise from 16% in 1909, to 27% in 1949,
to 32% in 1958 and to 42% by 1975. In terms of net assets, the top 100
industrial and commercial companies saw their share of net assets rise
from 47% in 1948 to 64% in 1968 to 80% in 1976 [R.C.O. Matthews (ed.),
**Economy and Democracy**, p. 239]. Looking wider afield, we find that
in 1995 about 50 firms produce about 15 percent of the manufactured
goods in the industrialised world. There are about 150 firms in the
world-wide motor vehicle industry. But the two largest firms, General
Motors and Ford, together produce almost one-third of all vehicles. The
five largest firms produce half of all output and the ten largest firms
produce three-quarters. Four appliance firms manufacture 98 percent of
the washing machines made in the United States. In the U. S. meatpacking
industry, four firms account for over 85 percent of the output of beef,
while the other 1,245 firms have less than 15 percent of the market.

While the concentration of economic power is most apparent in the
manufacturing sector, it is not limited to that sector. We are seeing
increasing concentration in the service sector -- airlines, fast-food
chains ,and the entertainment industry are just a few examples. In
America Coke, Pepsi, and Cadbury-Schweppes dominate soft drinks while
Budweiser, Miller, and Coors share the beer market. Nabisco, Keebler and
Pepperidge Farms dominate the cookie industry. Expansions and mergers
play their role in securing economic power and dominance. In 1996 the
number three company in the US cookie industry was acquired by Keebler,
which (in turn) was acquired by Kellogg in 2000. Nabisco is a division
of Kraft/Philip Morris and Pepperidge Farm is owned by relatively minor
player Campbell. Looking at the US airline industry, considered the
great hope for deregulation in 1978, it has seen the six largest
companies control of the market rise from 73% in 1978 to 85% in 1987
(and increasing fares across the board). [*"Unexpected Result of Airline
Decontrol is Return to Monopolies,"* **Wall Street Journal**,
20/07/1987] By 1998, the top six’s share had increased by 1% but control
was effectively higher with three code-sharing alliances now linking all
six in pairs.[Amy Taub, *"Oligopoly!"* **Multinational Monitor**,
November 1998, p. 9]

This process of concentration is happening in industries historically
considered arenas of small companies. In the UK, a few big supermarkets
are driving out small corner shops (the four-firm concentration ratio of
the supermarket industry is over 70%) while the British brewing industry
has a staggering 85% ratio. In American, the book industry is being
dominated by a few big companies, both in production and distribution. A
few large conglomerates publish most leading titles while a few big
chains (Barnes & Nobles and Borders) have the majority of retail sales.
On the internet, Amazon dominates the field in competition with the
online versions of the larger bookshops. This process occurs in market
after market. As such, it should be stressed that increasing
concentration afflicts most, if not all sectors of the economy. There
are exceptions, of course, and small businesses never disappear totally
but even in many relatively de-centralised and apparently small-scale
businesses, the trend to consolidation has unmistakable:

> "The latest data available show that in the manufacturing sector the
> four largest companies in a given industry controlled an average of 40
> percent of the industry’s output in 1992, and the top eight had 52
> percent. These shares were practically unchanged from 1972, but they
> are two percentage points higher than in 1982. Retail trade
> (department stores, food stores, apparel, furniture, building
> materials and home supplies, eating and drinking places, and other
> retail industries) also showed a jump in market concentration since
> the early 1980s. The top four firms accounted for an average of 16
> percent of the retail industry’s sales in 1982 and 20 percent in 1992;
> for the eight largest, the average industry share rose from 22 to 28
> percent. Some figures now available for 1997 suggest that
> concentration continued to increase during the 1990s; of total sales
> receipts in the overall economy, companies with 2,500 employees or
> more took in 47 percent in 1997, compared with 42 percent in 1992.
> "In the financial sector, the number of commercial banks fell 30
> percent between 1990 and 1999, while the ten largest were increasing
> their share of loans and other industry assets from 26 to 45 percent.
> It is well established that other sectors, including agriculture and
> telecommunications, have also become more concentrated in the 1980s
> and 1990s. The overall rise in concentration has not been
> great-although the new wave may yet make a major mark-but the upward
> drift has taken place from a starting point of highly concentrated
> economic power across the economy." [Richard B. Du Boff and Edward S.
> Herman, *"Mergers, Concentration, and the Erosion of Democracy"*,
> **Monthly Review**, May 2001]

So, looking at the **Fortune** 500, even the 500th firm is massive (with
sales of around \$3 billion). The top 100 firms usually have sales
significantly larger than bottom 400 put together. Thus the capitalist
economy is marked by a small number of extremely large firms, which are
large in both absolute terms and in terms of the firms immediately below
them. This pattern repeats itself for the next group and so on, until we
reach the very small firms (where the majority of firms are).

The other effect of Big Business is that large companies tend to become
more diversified as the concentration levels in individual industries
increase. This is because as a given market becomes dominated by larger
companies, these companies expand into other markets (using their larger
resources to do so) in order to strengthen their position in the economy
and reduce risks. This can be seen in the rise of "subsidiaries" of
parent companies in many different markets, with some products
apparently competing against each other actually owned by the same
company!

Tobacco companies are masters of this diversification strategy; most
people support their toxic industry without even knowing it! Don't
believe it? Well, if are an American and you ate any Jell-O products,
drank Kool-Aid, used Log Cabin syrup, munched Minute Rice, quaffed
Miller beer, gobbled Oreos, smeared Velveeta on Ritz crackers, and
washed it all down with Maxwell House coffee, you supported the tobacco
industry, all without taking a puff on a cigarette! Similarly, in other
countries. Simply put, most people have no idea which products and
companies are owned by which corporations, which goods apparently in
competition with others in fact bolster the profits of the same
transnational company.

Ironically, the reason why the economy becomes dominated by Big Business
has to do with the nature of competition itself. In order to survive (by
maximising profits) in a competitive market, firms have to invest in
capital, advertising, and so on. This survival process results in
barriers to potential competitors being created, which results in more
and more markets being dominated by a few big firms. This
oligopolisation process becomes self-supporting as oligopolies (due to
their size) have access to more resources than smaller firms. Thus the
dynamic of competitive capitalism is to negate itself in the form of
oligopoly.

C.4.2 What are the effects of Big Business on society?
------------------------------------------------------

Unsurprisingly many pro-capitalist economists and supporters of
capitalism try to downplay the extensive evidence on the size and
dominance of Big Business in capitalism.

Some deny that Big Business is a problem - if the market results in a
few companies dominating it, then so be it (the "Chicago" and "Austrian"
schools are at the forefront of this kind of position -- although it
does seem somewhat ironic that "market advocates" should be, at best,
indifferent, at worse, celebrate the suppression of market co-ordination
by **planned** co-ordination within the economy that the increased size
of Big Business marks). According to this perspective, oligopolies and
cartels usually do not survive very long, unless they are doing a good
job of serving the customer.

We agree -- it is oligopolistic **competition** we are discussing here.
Big Business has to be responsive to demand (when not
manipulating/creating it by advertising, of course), otherwise they lose
market share to their rivals (usually other dominant firms in the same
market, or big firms from other countries). However, the response to
demand can be skewed by economic power and, while responsive to some
degree, an economy dominated by big business can see super-profits being
generated by externalising costs onto suppliers and consumers (in terms
of higher prices). As such, the idea that the market will solve all
problems is simply assuming that an oligopolistic market will respond
"as if" it were made up of thousands and thousands of firms with little
market power. An assumption belied by the reality of capitalism since
its birth.

Moreover, the "free market" response to the reality of oligopoly ignores
the fact that we are more than just consumers and that economic activity
and the results of market events impact on many different aspects of
life. Thus our argument is not focused on the fact we pay more for some
products than we would in a more competitive market -- it is the
**wider** results of oligopoly we should be concerned with, not just
higher prices, lower "efficiency" and other economic criteria. If a few
companies receive excess profits just because their size limits
competition the effects of this will be felt **everywhere.**

For a start, these "excessive" profits will tend to end up in few hands,
so skewing the income distribution (and so power and influence) within
society. The available evidence suggests that *"more concentrated
industries generate a lower wage share for workers"* in a firm's
value-added. [Keith Cowling, **Monopoly Capitalism**, p. 106] The
largest firms retain only 52% of their profits, the rest is paid out as
dividends, compared to 79% for the smallest ones and *"what might be
called rentiers share of the corporate surplus - dividends plus interest
as a percentage of pretax profits and interest - has risen sharply, from
20-30% in the 1950s to 60-70% in the early 1990s."* The top 10% of the
US population own well over 80% of stock and bonds owned by individuals
while the top 5% of stockowners own 94.5% of all stock held by
individuals. Little wonder wealth has become so concentrated since the
1970s [Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p. 75, p. 73 and pp. 66-67]. At
its most basic, this skewing of income provides the capitalist class
with more resources to fight the class war but its impact goes much
wider than this.

Moreover, the *"level of aggregate concentration helps to indicate the
degree of centralisation of decision-making in the economy and the
economic power of large firms."* [Malcolm C. Sawyer, **Op. Cit.**, p.
261] Thus oligopoly increases and centralises economic power over
investment decisions and location decisions which can be used to play
one region/country and/or workforce against another to lower wages and
conditions for all (or, equally likely, investment will be moved away
from countries with rebellious work forces or radical governments, the
resulting slump teaching them a lesson on whose interests count). As the
size of business increases, the power of capital over labour and society
also increases with the threat of relocation being enough to make
workforces accept pay cuts, worsening conditions, "down-sizing" and so
on and communities increased pollution, the passing of pro-capital laws
with respect to strikes, union rights, etc. (and increased corporate
control over politics due to the mobility of capital).

Also, of course, oligopoly results in political power as their economic
importance and resources gives them the ability to influence government
to introduce favourable policies -- either directly, by funding
political parties or lobbying politicians, or indirectly by investment
decisions (i.e. by pressuring governments by means of capital flight --
see [section D.2](secD2.html)). Thus concentrated economic power is in
an ideal position to influence (if not control) political power and
ensure state aid (both direct and indirect) to bolster the position of
the corporation and allow it to expand further and faster than
otherwise. More money can also be plowed into influencing the media and
funding political think-tanks to skew the political climate in their
favour. Economic power also extends into the labour market, where
restricted labour opportunities as well as negative effects on the work
process itself may result. All of which shapes the society we live in;
the laws we are subject to; the "evenness" and "levelness" of the
"playing field" we face in the market and the ideas dominant in society
(see [section D.3](secD3.html)).

So, with increasing size, comes the increasing power, the power of
oligopolies to *"influence the terms under which they choose to operate.
Not only do they **react** to the level of wages and the pace of work,
they also **act** to determine them. . . The credible threat of the
shift of production and investment will serve to hold down wages and
raise the level of effort [required from workers] . . . [and] may also
be able to gain the co-operation of the state in securing the
appropriate environment . . . [for] a redistribution towards profits"*
in value/added and national income. [Keith Cowling and Roger Sugden,
**Transnational Monopoly Capitalism**, p. 99]

Since the market price of commodities produced by oligopolies is
determined by a mark-up over costs, this means that they contribute to
inflation as they adapt to increasing costs or falls in their rate of
profit by increasing prices. However, this does not mean that
oligopolistic capitalism is not subject to slumps. Far from it. Class
struggle will influence the share of wages (and so profit share) as wage
increases will not be fully offset by price increases -- higher prices
mean lower demand and there is always the threat of competition from
other oligopolies. In addition, class struggle will also have an impact
on productivity and the amount of surplus value in the economy as a
whole, which places major limitations on the stability of the system.
Thus oligopolistic capitalism still has to contend with the effects of
social resistance to hierarchy, exploitation and oppression that
afflicted the more competitive capitalism of the past.

The distributive effects of oligopoly skews income, thus the degree of
monopoly has a major impact on the degree of inequality in household
distribution. The flow of wealth to the top helps to skew production
away from working class needs (by outbidding others for resources and
having firms produce goods for elite markets while others go without).
The empirical evidence presented by Keith Cowling *"points to the
conclusion that a redistribution from wages to profits will have a
depressive impact on consumption"* which may cause depression. [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 51] High profits also means that more can be retained by the
firm to fund investment (or pay high level managers more salaries or
increase dividends, of course). When capital expands faster than labour
income over-investment is an increasing problem and aggregate demand
cannot keep up to counteract falling profit shares (see [section
C.7](secC7.html) on more about the business cycle). Moreover, as the
capital stock is larger, oligopoly will also have a tendency to deepen
the eventual slump, making it last long and harder to recover from.

Looking at oligopoly from an efficiency angle, the existence of super
profits from oligopolies means that the higher price within a market
allows inefficient firms to continue production. Smaller firms can make
average (non-oligopolistic) profits **in spite** of having higher costs,
sub-optimal plant and so on. This results in inefficient use of
resources as market forces cannot work to eliminate firms which have
higher costs than average (one of the key features of capitalism
according to its supporters). And, of course, oligopolistic profits skew
allocative efficiency as a handful of firms can out-bid all the rest,
meaning that resources do not go where they are most needed but where
the largest effective demand lies. This impacts on incomes as well, for
market power can be used to bolster CEO salaries and perks and so drive
up elite income and so skew resources to meeting their demand for
luxuries rather than the needs of the general population. Equally, they
also allow income to become unrelated to actual work, as can be seen
from the sight of CEO's getting massive wages while their corporation's
performance falls.

Such large resources available to oligopolistic companies also allows
inefficient firms to survive on the market even in the face of
competition from other oligopolistic firms. As Richard B. Du Boff points
out, efficiency can also be *"impaired when market power so reduces
competitive pressures that administrative reforms can be dispensed with.
One notorious case was . . . U.S. Steel [formed in 1901]. Nevertheless,
the company was hardly a commercial failure, effective market control
endured for decades, and above normal returns were made on the watered
stock . . . Another such case was Ford. The company survived the 1930s
only because of cash reserves stocked away in its glory days. 'Ford
provides an excellent illustration of the fact that a really large
business organisation can withstand a surprising amount of
mismanagement.'"* [**Accumulation and Power**, p. 174]

This means that the market power which bigness generates can counteract
the costs of size, in terms of the bureaucratic administration it
generates and the usual wastes associated with centralised, top-down
hierarchical organisation. The local and practical knowledge so
necessary to make sensible decision cannot be captured by capitalist
hierarchies and, as a result, as bigness increases, so does the
inefficiencies in terms of human activity, resource use and information.
However, this waste that workplace bureaucracy creates can be hidden in
the super-profits which big business generates which means, by confusing
profits with efficiency, capitalism helps misallocate resources. This
means, as price-setters rather than price-takers, big business can make
high profits even when they are inefficient. Profits, in other words, do
not reflect "efficiency" but rather how effectively they have secured
market power. In other words, the capitalist economy is dominated by a
few big firms and so profits, far from being a signal about the
appropriate uses of resources, simply indicate the degree of economic
power a company has in its industry or market.

Thus Big Business reduces efficiency within an economy on many levels as
well as having significant and lasting impact on society's social,
economic and political structure.

The effects of the concentration of capital and wealth on society are
very important, which is why we are discussing capitalism's tendency to
result in big business. The impact of the wealth of the few on the lives
of the many is indicated in [section D](secDcon.html) of the FAQ. As
shown there, in addition to involving direct authority over employees,
capitalism also involves indirect control over communities through the
power that stems from wealth.

Thus capitalism is not the free market described by such people as Adam
Smith -- the level of capital concentration has made a mockery of the
ideas of free competition.

C.4.3 What does the existence of Big Business mean for economic theory and wage labour?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here we indicate the impact of Big Business on economic theory itself
and wage labour. In the words of Michal Kalecki, perfect competition is
"a most unrealistic assumption" and *"when its actual status of a handy
model is forgotten becomes a dangerous myth."* [quoted by Malcolm C.
Sawyer, **The Economics of Michal Kalecki**, p. 8] Unfortunately
mainstream capitalist economics is **built** on this myth. Ironically,
it was against a *"background [of rising Big Business in the 1890s] that
the grip of marginal economics, an imaginary world of many small firms.
. . was consolidated in the economics profession."* Thus, *"[a]lmost
from its conception, the theoretical postulates of marginal economics
concerning the nature of companies [and of markets, we must add] have
been a travesty of reality."* [Paul Ormerod, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 55-56]

This can be seen from the fact that mainstream economics has, for most
of its history, effectively ignored the fact of oligopoly for most of
its history. Instead, economics has refined the model of "perfect
competition" (which cannot exist and is rarely, if ever, approximated)
and developed an analysis of monopoly (which is also rare).
Significantly, an economist could still note in 1984 that *"traditional
economy theory . . . offers very little indeed by way of explanation of
oligopolistic behaviour"* in spite (or, perhaps, **because**) it was
*"the most important market situation today"* (as *"instances of
monopoly"* are *"as difficult to find as perfect competition."*). In
other words, capitalist economics does *"not know how to explain the
most important part of a modern industrial economy."* [Peter Donaldson,
**Economics of the Real World** p. 141, p. 140 and p. 142]

Over two decades later, the situation had not changed. For example, one
leading introduction to economics notes *"the prevalence of oligopoly"*
and admits it *"is far more common than either perfect competition or
monopoly."* However, *"the analysis of oligopoly turns out to present
some puzzles for which they is no easy solution"* as *"the analysis of
oligopoly is far more difficult and messy than that of perfect
competition."* Why? *"When we try to analyse oligopoly, the economists
usual way of thinking -- asking how self-interested individuals would
behave, then analysing their interaction -- does not work as well as we
might hope."* Rest assured, though, there is not need to reconsider the
*"usual way"* of economic analysis to allow it to analyse something as
marginal as the most common market form for, by luck, *"the industry
behaves 'almost' as if it were perfectly competitive."* [Paul Krugman
and Robin Wells, **Economics**, p. 383, p. 365 and p. 383] Which is
handy, to say the least.

Given that oligopoly has marked capitalist economics since, at least,
the 1880s it shows how little concerned with reality mainstream
economics is. In other words, neoclassicalism was redundant when it was
first formulated (if four or five large firms are responsible for most
of the output of an industry, avoidance of price competition becomes
almost automatic and the notion that all firms are price takers is an
obvious falsehood). That mainstream economists were not interested in
including such facts into their models shows the ideological nature of
the "science" (see [section C.1](secC1.html) for more discussion of the
non-scientific nature of mainstream economics).

This does not mean that reality has been totally forgotten. Some work
was conducted on "imperfect competition" in the 1930s independently by
two economists (Edward Chamberlin and Joan Robinson) but these were
exceptions to the rule and even these models were very much in the
traditional analytical framework, i.e. were still rooted in the
assumptions and static world of neo-classical economics. These models
assume that there are many producers and many consumers in a given
market and that there are no barriers to entry and exit, that is, the
characteristics of a monopolistically competitive market are almost
exactly the same as in perfect competition, with the exception of
heterogeneous products. This meant that monopolistic competition
involves a great deal of non-price competition. This caused Robinson to
later distance herself from her own work and look for more accurate
(non-neoclassical) ways to analyse an economy.

As noted, neo-classical economics **does** have a theory on "monopoly,"
a situation (like perfect competition) which rarely exists. Ignoring
that minor point, it is as deeply flawed as the rest of that ideology.
It argues that "monopoly" is bad because it produces a lower output for
a higher price. Unlike perfect competition, a monopolist can set a price
above marginal cost and so exploit consumers by over pricing. In
contrast, perfectly competitive markets force their members to set price
to be equal to marginal cost. As it is rooted in the assumptions we
exposed as nonsense as [section C.1](secC1.html), this neo-classical
theory on free competition and monopoly is similarly invalid. As Steve
Keen notes, there is *"no substance"* to the neo-classical *"critique of
monopolies"* as it *"erroneously assumes that the perfectly competitive
firm faces a horizontal demand curve,"* which is impossible given a
downward sloping market demand curve. This means that *"the individual
firm and the market level aspects of perfect competition are
inconsistent"* and the apparent benefits of competition in the model are
derived from *"a mathematical error of confusing a very small quantity
with zero."* While *"there are plenty of good reasons to be wary of
monopolies . . . economic theory does not provide any of them."*
[**Debunking Economics**, p. 108, p. 101, p. 99, p. 98 and p. 107]

This is not to say that economists have ignored oligopoly. Some have
busied themselves providing rationales by which to defend it, rooted in
the assumption that *"the market can do it all, and that regulation and
antitrust actions are misconceived. First, theorists showed that
efficiency gains from mergers might reduce prices even more than
monopoly power would cause them to rise. Economists also stressed
'entry,' claiming that if mergers did not improve efficiency any price
increases would be wiped out eventually by new companies entering the
industry. Entry is also the heart of the theory of 'contestable
markets,' developed by economic consultants to AT&T, who argued that the
ease of entry in cases where resources (trucks, aircraft) can be shifted
quickly at low cost, makes for effective competition."* By pure
co-incidence, AT&T had hired economic consultants as part of their
hundreds of millions of dollars antitrust defences, in fact some 30
economists from five leading economics departments during the 1970s and
early 1980s. [Edward S. Herman, *"The Threat From Mergers: Can Antitrust
Make a Difference?"*, **Dollars and Sense**, no. 217, May/June 1998]

Needless to say, these new "theories" are rooted in the same assumptions
of neo-classical economists and, as such, are based on notions we have
already debunked. As Herman notes, they *"suffer from
over-simplification, a strong infusion of ideology, and lack of
empirical support."* He notes that mergers *"often are motivated by
factors other than enhancing efficiency -- such as the desire for
monopoly power, empire building, cutting taxes, improving stock values,
and even as a cover for poor management (such as when the badly-run U.S.
Steel bought control of Marathon Oil)."* The conclusion of these models
is usually, by way of co-incidence, that an oligopolistic market acts
"as if" it were a perfectly competitive one and so we need not be
concerned by rising market dominance by a few firms. Much work by the
ideological supporters of "free market" capitalism is based on this
premise, namely that reality works "as if" it reflected the model
(rather than vice versa, in a real science) and, consequently, market
power is nothing to be concerned about (that many of these "think tanks"
and university places happen to be funded by the super-profits generated
by big business is, of course, purely a co-incidence as these
"scientists" act "as if" they were neutrally funded). In Herman's words:
*"Despite their inadequacies, the new apologetic theories have
profoundly affected policy, because they provide an intellectual
rationale for the agenda of the powerful."* [**Op. Cit.**]

It may be argued (and it has) that the lack of interest in analysing a
real economy by economists is because oligopolistic competition is hard
to model mathematically. Perhaps, but this simply shows the limitations
of neo-classical economics and if the tool used for a task are
unsuitable, surely you should change the tool rather than (effectively)
ignore the work that needs to be done. Sadly, most economists have
favoured producing mathematical models which can say a lot about theory
but very little about reality. That economics can become much broader
and more relevant is always a possibility, but to do so would mean to
take into account an unpleasant reality marked by market power, class,
hierarchy and inequality rather than logical deductions derived from
Robinson Crusoe. While the latter can produce mathematical models to
reach the conclusions that the market is already doing a good job (or,
at best, there are some imperfections which can be fixed by minor state
interventions), the former cannot. Which, of course, is makes it hardly
a surprise that neo-classical economists favour it so (particularly
given the origins, history and role of that particular branch of
economics).

This means that economics is based on a model which assumes that firms
have no impact on the markets they operate it. This assumption is
violated in most real markets and so the neo-classical conclusions
regarding the outcomes of competition cannot be supported. That the
assumptions of economic ideology so contradicts reality also has
important considerations on the "voluntary" nature of wage labour. If
the competitive model assumed by neo-classical economics held we would
see a wide range of ownership types (including co-operatives, extensive
self-employment and workers hiring capital) as there would be no
"barriers of entry" associated with firm control. This is not the case
-- workers hiring capital is non-existent and self-employment and
co-operatives are marginal. The dominant control form is capital hiring
labour (wage slavery).

With a model based upon "perfect competition," supporters of capitalism
could build a case that wage labour is a voluntary choice -- after all,
workers (in such a market) could hire capital or form co-operatives
relatively easily. But the **reality** of the "free" market is such that
this model does not exist -- and as an assumption, it is seriously
misleading. If we take into account the actuality of the capitalist
economy, we soon have to realise that oligopoly is the dominant form of
market and that the capitalist economy, by its very nature, restricts
the options available to workers -- which makes the notion that wage
labour is a "voluntary" choice untenable.

If the economy is so structured as to make entry into markets difficult
and survival dependent on accumulating capital, then these barriers are
just as effective as government decrees. If small businesses are
squeezed by oligopolies then chances of failure are increased (and so
off-putting to workers with few resources) and if income inequality is
large, then workers will find it very hard to find the collateral
required to borrow capital and start their own co-operatives. Thus,
looking at the **reality** of capitalism (as opposed to the textbooks)
it is clear that the existence of oligopoly helps to maintain wage
labour by restricting the options available on the "free market" for
working people. Chomsky states the obvious:

> *"If you had equality of power, you could talk about freedom, but when
> all the power is concentrated in one place, then freedom's a joke.
> People talk about a 'free market.' Sure. You and I are perfectly free
> to set up an automobile company and compete with General Motors.
> Nobody's stopping us. That freedom is meaningless . . . It's just that
> power happens to be organised so that only certain options are
> available. Within that limited range of options, those who have the
> power say, 'Let's have freedom.' That's a very skewed form of freedom.
> The principle is right. How freedom works depends on what the social
> structures are. If the freedoms are such that the only choices you
> have objectively are to conform to one or another system of power,
> there's no freedom."* [**Language and Politics**, pp. 641-2]

As we noted in [section C.4](secC4.html), those with little capital are
reduced to markets with low set-up costs and low concentration. Thus,
claim the supporters of capitalism, workers still have a choice.
However, this choice is (as we have indicated) somewhat limited by the
existence of oligopolistic markets -- so limited, in fact, that less
than 10% of the working population are self-employed workers. Moreover,
it is claimed, technological forces may work to increase the number of
markets that require low set-up costs (the computing market is often
pointed to as an example). However, similar predictions were made over
100 years ago when the electric motor began to replace the steam engine
in factories. *"The new technologies [of the 1870s] may have been
compatible with small production units and decentralised operations. . .
That. . . expectation was not fulfilled."* [Richard B. Du Boff, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 65] From the history of capitalism, we imagine that markets
associated with new technologies will go the same way (and the evidence
seems to support this).

The reality of capitalist development is that even **if** workers
invested in new markets, one that require low set-up costs, the dynamic
of the system is such that over time these markets will also become
dominated by a few big firms. Moreover, to survive in an oligopolised
economy small cooperatives will be under pressure to hire wage labour
and otherwise act as capitalist concerns. Therefore, even if we ignore
the massive state intervention which created capitalism in the first
place (see [section F.8](secF8.html)), the dynamics of the system are
such that relations of domination and oppression will always be
associated with it -- they cannot be "competed" away as the actions of
competition creates and re-enforces them (also see sections
[J.5.11](secJ5.html#secj511) and [J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512) on the
barriers capitalism places on co-operatives and self-management even
though they are more efficient).

So the effects of the concentration of capital on the options open to us
are great and very important. The existence of Big Business has a direct
impact on the "voluntary" nature of wage labour as it produces very
effective "barriers of entry" for alternative modes of production. The
resultant pressures big business place on small firms also reduces the
viability of co-operatives and self-employment to survive **as**
co-operatives and non-employers of wage labour, effectively
marginalising them as true alternatives. Moreover, even in new markets
the dynamics of capitalism are such that **new** barriers are created
all the time, again reducing our options.

Overall, the **reality** of capitalism is such that the equality of
opportunity implied in models of "perfect competition" is lacking. And
without such equality, wage labour cannot be said to be a "voluntary"
choice between available options -- the options available have been
skewed so far in one direction that the other alternatives have been
marginalised.
