C.11 Doesn't neo-liberalism in Chile prove that the free market benefits everyone?
==================================================================================

Chile is considered by some to be one of the economic success stories of
the modern world. It can be considered as the first laboratory for
neo-liberal economic dogma, first under Pinochet's dictatorship and
later when his regime had been replaced by a more democratic one. It can
be considered as the template for the economic vision later applied by
Reagan and Thatcher in the West. What happened in Chile was repeated (to
some degree) wherever neo-liberal policies were implemented. As such, it
makes a good case study to evaluate the benefits of free(r) market
capitalism and the claims of capitalist economics.

For the right, Chile was pointed to as a casebook in sound economics and
is held up as an example of the benefits of capitalism. Milton Friedman,
for example, stated in 1982 that Military Junta *"has supported a fully
free-market economy as a matter of principle. Chile is an economic
miracle."* [quoted by Elton Rayack, **Not so Free to Choose**, p. 37]
Then US President George Bush praised the Chilean economic record in
December 1990 when he visited that country, stating Chile deserved its
*"reputation as an economic model"* for others to follow.

However, the reality of the situation is radically different. As Chilean
expert Peter Winn argues, *"[w]e question whether Chile's neoliberal
boom . . . should be regarded as a miracle. When confronted by such a
claim, scholars and students should always ask: a miracle for **whom**
-- and at what cost?"* [*"Introduction"*, Peter Winn (ed.), **Victims of
the Chilean Miracle**, p. 12] As we will prove, Chile's "economic
miracle" is **very** class dependent. For its working class, the
neo-liberal reforms of the Pinochet regime have resulted in a worsening
of their lives; if you are a capitalist then it has been a miracle. That
the likes of Friedman claim the experiment as a "miracle" shows where
their sympathies lie -- and how firm a grasp they have of reality.

The reason why the Chilean people become the first test case for
neo-liberalism is significant. They did not have a choice. General
Pinochet was the figure-head of a military coup in 1973 against the
democratically elected left-wing government led by President Allende.
This coup was the culmination of years of US interference by the US in
Chilean politics and was desired by the US **before** Allende took
office in November 1970 (*"It is the firm and continuing policy that
Allende be overthrown by a coup,"* as one CIA memo put it in October of
that year [quoted by Gregory Palast, *"A Marxist threat to cola sales?
Pepsi demands a US coup. Goodbye Allende. Hello Pinochet"*, **The
Observer**, 8/11/1998]). Then American president Richard Nixon imposed
an embargo on Chile and began a covert plan to overturn the Allende
government. In the words of the US ambassador to Chile, the Americas
*"will do all in our power to condemn Chileans to utmost poverty."*
[quoted by Noam Chomsky, **Deterring Democracy**, p. 395]

According to notes taken by CIA director Richard Helms at a 1970 meeting
in the Oval Office, his orders were to *"make the economy scream."* This
was called Project FUBELT and its aims were clear: *"The Director [of
the CIA] told the group that President Nixon had decided that an Allende
regime in Chile was not acceptable to the United States. The President
asked the Agency to prevent Allende from coming to power or to unseat
him."* [*"Genesis of Project FUBELT"* document dated September 16, 1970]
Not all aid was cut. During 1972 and 1973 the US increased aid to the
military and increased training Chilean military personnel in the United
States and Panama. In other words, the coup was helped by US state and
various US corporations both directly and indirectly, by undermining the
Chilean economy.

Thousands of people were murdered by the forces of "law and order" and
Pinochet's forces *"are conservatively estimated to have killed over
11,000 people in his first year in power."* [P. Gunson, A. Thompson, G.
Chamberlain, **The Dictionary of Contemporary Politics of South
America**, p. 228] Military units embarked on an operation called the
Caravan of Death to hunt down those they considered subversives (i.e.
anyone suspected or accused of holding left-wing views or sympathies).
Torture and rape were used extensively and when people did not just
disappear, their mutilated bodies were jumped in plain view as a warning
to others. While the Chilean government's official truth and
reconciliation committee places the number of disappeared at roughly
3,000, church and human rights groups estimate the number is far higher,
at over 10,000. Hundreds of thousands fled into exile. Thus ended
Allende's "democratic road to Socialism." The terror did not end after
the coup and dictatorship's record on human rights was rightly denounced
as barbaric.

Friedman, of course, stressed his *"disagreement with the authoritarian
political system of Chile."* [quoted by Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. 61] For
the time being we will ignore the obvious contradiction in this
"economic miracle", i.e. why it almost always takes
authoritarian/fascistic states to introduce "economic liberty." Rather
we will take the right at its word and concentrate on the economic facts
of the free-market capitalism imposed on the Chilean people. They claim
it was a free market and given that, for example, Friedman was leading
ideologue for capitalism we can assume that the regime approximated the
workings of such a system. We will discuss the illogical nature and
utter hypocrisy of the right's position in [section D.11](secD11.html),
where we also discuss the limited nature of the democratic regime which
replaced Pinochet and the real relationship between economic and
political liberty.

Faced with an economic crisis, in 1975 Pinochet turned to the ideas of
Milton Friedman and a group of Chilean economics who had been taught by
him at the University in Chicago. A short meeting between Friedman and
Pinochet convinced the dictator to hand economic policy making to
Friedman's acolytes (who became known as "the Chicago Boys" for obvious
reasons). These were free-market economists, working on a belief in the
efficiency and fairness of the free market and who desired to put the
laws of supply and demand back to work. They set out to reduce the role
of the state in terms of regulation and social welfare as these, they
argued, had restricted Chile's growth by reducing competition, lowering
growth, artificially increasing wages, and leading to inflation. The
ultimate goal, Pinochet once said, was to make Chile *"not a nation of
proletarians, but a nation of entrepreneurs."* [quoted by Thomas E.
Skidmore and Peter H. Smith, **Modern Latin America**, p. 137]

The role of the Chicago Boys cannot be understated. They had a close
relationship with the military from 1972, and according to one expert
had a key role in the coup:

> *"In August of 1972 a group of ten economists under the leadership of
> de Castro began to work on the formulation of an economic programme
> that would replace [Allende's one]. . . In fact, the existence of the
> plan was essential to any attempt on the part of the armed forces to
> overthrow Allende as the Chilean armed forces did not have any
> economic plan of their own."* [Silvia Borzutzky, *"The Chicago Boys,
> social security and welfare in Chile"*, **The Radical Right and the
> Welfare State**, Howard Glennerster and James Midgley (eds.), p. 88]

This plan also had the backing of certain business interests.
Unsurprisingly, immediately after the coup, many of its authors entered
key Economic Ministries as advisers. [Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. 52] It is
also interesting to note that *"[a]ccording to the report of the United
States Senate on covert actions in Chile, the activities of these
economists were financed by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)."*
[Borzutzky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 89] Obviously some forms of state
intervention were more acceptable than others.

April 1975 saw the Chicago Boys assume *"what was in effect dictatorial
control over economic policy . . . The monetarists were now in a
commanding position to put in place Friedman's recommendations, and they
didn't hesitate."* The actual results of the free market policies
introduced by the dictatorship were far less than the "miracle" claimed
by Friedman and a host of other right-wingers. The initial effects of
introducing free market policies was a shock-induced depression which
resulted in GDP dropping by 12.9% year "shock treatment" was imposed saw
the GDP fall by 12.9% (Latin America saw a 3.8% rise), real wages fell
to 64.9% of their 1970 level and unemployment rising to 20 percent. Even
Pinochet *"had to concede that the social cost of the shock treatment
was greater than he expected."* [Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. 56, p. 41 and
p. 57] For Friedman, his *"only concern"* with the plan was *"whether it
would be pushed long enough and hard enough."* [quoted by Joseph Collins
and John Lear, **Chile's Free-Market Miracle: A Second Look**, p. 29]
Unsurprisingly, the *"rigorous imposition of the neoliberal economic
model after 1975 soon threatened [workers] job security too"* and they
*"bore the brunt"* of the changes in terms of *"lost jobs and raised
work norms."* [Winn, *"No Miracle for Us,"* Peter Winn (ed.), **Op.
Cit.**, p. 131]

After the depression of 1975, the economic started to grow again. This
is the source of claim of an "economic miracle." Friedman, for example,
used 1976 as his base-line, so excluding the depression year of 1975
which his recommended shock treatment deepened. This is dishonest as it
fails to take into account not only the impact of neo-liberal policies
but also that a deep recession often produces a vigorous upsurge:

> *"By taking 1975, a recession year in which the Chilean economy
> declined by 13 percent, as the starting point of their analysis, the
> Chicago Boys obscured the fact that their 'boom' was more a recovery
> from the deep recession than a new economic expansion. From 1974 to
> 1981, the Chilean economy grew at a modest 1.4 percent a year on
> average. Even at the height of the 'boom' in 1980, effective
> unemployment was so high -- 17 percent -- that 5 percent of the
> workforce were in government make-work programs, a confession of
> failure for neoliberals who believe in the market as self-correcting
> and who abhor government welfare programs. Nor did the Chicago Boys
> call attention to the extreme concentration of capital, precipitous
> fall in real wages and negative redistribution of income that their
> policies promoted, or their disincentives to productive investment."*
> [Peter Winn, *"The Pinochet Era"*, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 28-9]

Between 1975 and 1982, the regime implemented numerous economic reforms
based on the suggestions of the Chicago Boys and their intellectual
gurus Friedman and von Hayek. They privatised numerous state owned
industries and resources and, as would be expected, the privatisations
were carried out in such a way as to profit the wealthy. *"The
denationalisation process,"* notes Rayack, *"was carried out under
conditions that were extremely advantageous for the new owners . . . the
enterprises were sold at sharply undervalues prices."* Only large
conglomerates could afford them, so capital became even more
concentrated. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 67] When it privatised its interests in
the forestry processing plants in the country the government followed
the privatisation of other areas of the economy and they *"were sold at
a discount, according to one estimate, at least 20 per cent below their
value."* Thus *"the privatisations were bargain sell-offs of public
assets,"* which amounted to a *"subsidy from the national treasury to
the buyers of 27 to 69 percent"* and so *"[c]ontrol of the common wealth
of the entire nation passed to a handful of national and foreign
interests that captured most of the subsidy implicit in the rock bottom
prices."* [Joseph Collins and John Lear, **Chile's Free-Market Miracle:
A Second Look**, p. 206, p. 54 and p. 59]

By 1978, the Chicago Boys *"were pressing for new laws that would bring
labour relations in line with the neoliberal economic model in which the
market, not the state, would regulate factors of production."* [Winn,
*"The Pinochet Era"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 31] According to
Pinochet's Minister of Labour (1978-81), the Labour relations had been
*"modernised"* and that *"politicised"* labour leaders and their
*"privileged fiefdoms"* had been eliminated, with workers no longer
having *"monopolies"* on job positions. Rather than government
intervention, negotiation between capital and labour was now left to
*"individual responsibility and the discipline of the market."* The
stated aim was to *"introduce democracy into the world of Chilean unions
and resolve problems that for decades had been obstacles for the
progress of workers."* [quoted by Joseph Collins and John Lear,
*"Working in Chile's Free Market"*, pp. 10-29, **Latin American
Perspectives**, vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 10-11 and p. 16] The hypocrisy of a
technocratic bureaucrat appointed by a military dictatorship talking
about introducing democracy into unions is obvious. The price of labour,
it was claimed, now found its correct level as set by the "free" market.

All of which explains Friedman's 1991 comment that the *"real miracle of
Chile"* was that Pinochet *"support[ed] a free market regime designed by
principled believers in a free market."* [**Economic Freedom, Human
Freedom, Political Freedom**] As to be expected with Friedman, the
actual experience of implementing his dogmas refuted both them and his
assertions on capitalism. Moreover, working class paid the price.

The advent of the "free market" led to reduced barriers to imports *"on
the ground the quotas and tariffs protected inefficient industries and
kept prices artificially high. The result was that many local firms lost
out to multinational corporations. The Chilean business community, which
strongly supported the coup in 1973, was badly affected."* [Skidmore and
Smith, **Op. Cit.**, p. 138] The decline of domestic industry cost
thousands of better-paying jobs. Looking at the textile sector, firms
survived because of *"lowered labour costs and increased productivity."*
The sector has *"low real wages, which dramatically altered"* its
international competitiveness. In other words, the Chilean textile
industry *"had restructured itself on the back of its workers."* [Peter
Winn, *"No Miracle for Us"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 130] The mines
were *"enormously profitable after 1973 because of increased labour
discipline, the reduction in costs due to the contraction of real wages,
and an increase in production based on expansion programs initiated
during the late 1960s."* [Thomas Miller Klubock, *"Class, Community, and
Neoliberalism in Chile"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 241] This was the **real**
basis of the 1976 to 1981 "economic miracle" Friedman praised in 1982.

As with most neo-liberal experiments, the post-1975 "miracle" was built
on sand. It was *"a speculative bubble that was hailed as an 'economic
miracle' until it burst in the 1981-82 bank crash that brought the
deregulated Chilean economy down in its wake."* It was *"largely
short-term speculative capital . . . producing a bubble in stock market
and real estate values"* and *"by 1982 the economy was in shambles and
Chile in the throes of its worse economic crisis since the depression of
the 1930s. A year later, massive social protests defied Pinochet's
security forces."* [Winn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 38] Thus *"the bottom fell
out of the economy"* and Chile's GDP fell 14% in one year. In the
textile industry alone, an estimated 35 to 45% of companies failed.
[Collins and Lear, **Op. Cit.**, p. 15]

So after 7 years of free(r) market capitalism, Chile faced yet another
economic crisis which, in terms of unemployment and falling GDP was even
greater than that experienced during the terrible shock treatment of
1975. Real wages dropped sharply, falling in 1983 to 14% below what they
had been in 1970. Bankruptcies skyrocketed, as did foreign debt and
unemployment. [Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. 69] Chile's GNP *"fell by more
than 15 percent, while its real disposable GNP declined by 19 percent.
The industrial sector contracted by more than 21 percent and
construction by more than 23 percent. Bankruptcies tripled . . . It was
a crisis comparable to the Great Depression of the 1930s, which affected
Chile more severely than any other country in the world."* The same can
be said of this crisis, for while GNP in Chile feel 14% during 1982-3,
the rest of Latin America experienced 3.5% drop as whole. [Winn, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 41 and p. 66] By 1983, the Chilean economy was devastated and
it was only by the end of 1986 that Gross Domestic Product per capita
(barely) equalled that of 1970. Unemployment (including those on
government make-work programmes) had risen to a third of the labour
force by mid-1983. By 1986, per capita consumption was actually 11%
lower than the 1970 level. [Skidmore and Smith, **Op. Cit.**, p. 138]

Faced with this massive economic collapse (a collapse that somehow
slipped Friedman's mind when he was evaluating the Chilean experiment in
1991), the regime organised a massive bailout. The "Chicago Boys"
resisted this measure, arguing with dogmatic arrogance that there was no
need for government intervention or policy changes because they believed
in the self-correcting mechanisms of the market would resolve any
economic problem. However, they were applying a simplistic textbook
version of the economy to a complex reality which was spectacularly
different from their assumptions. When that reality refused to respond
in the way predicted by their ideological musing, the state stepped in
simply because the situation had become so critical it could not avoid
it.

The regime did do some things to help the unemployed, with 14% of the
labour force enrolled in two government make-work programs that paid
less than the minimum wage by October 1983. However, aid for the
capitalist class was far more substantial. The IMF offered loans to
Chile to help it out of mess its economic policies had helped create,
but under strict conditions (such as making the Chilean public
responsible for paying the billions in foreign loans contracted by
**private** banks and firms). The total bailout cost 3% of Chile's GNP
for three years, a cost which was passed on to the population (this
*"socialisation of private debts were both striking and unequal"*). This
follows the usual pattern of "free market" capitalism -- market
discipline for the working class, state aid for the elite. During the
"miracle," the economic gains had been privatised; during the crash the
burden for repayment was socialised. In fact, the regime's intervention
into the economy was so extensive that, *"[w]ith understandable irony,
critics lampooned the 'Chicago road to socialism.'"* [Winn, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 66 and p. 40]

Significantly, of the 19 banks that the government had privatised, all
but five failed. These along with the other bankrupt firms fell back
into government hands, a fact the regime sought to downplay by failing
to classify them as public companies. Once the debts had been *"assumed
by the public,"* their *"assets were sold to private interests."*
Significantly, the *"one bank that had not been privatised and the other
publicly owned companies survived the crisis in relatively good shape"*
and almost all of them were *"turning a profit, generating for the
government in profits and taxes 25 percent of its total revenues . . .
Thus the public companies that had escaped the Chicago Boy's
privatisations . . . enabled a financially strapped government to
resuscitate the failed private banks and companies."* [Collins and Lear,
**Chile's Free-Market Miracle: A Second Look**, pp. 51-2]

Needless to say, the recovery (like the illusionary boom) was paid for
by the working class. The 1982 crash meant that *"something had to give,
and the Chicago Boys decided that it would be wages. Wages, they
explained, should be allowed to find their natural level."* An 1982
decree *"transferred much of the burden of recovery and profitability to
workers and became central to Chile's economic recovery throughout the
rest of the decade."* [Collins and Lear, **Op. Cit.**, p. 20 and p. 19]
For the miners, between late 1973 and May 1983, real average wages
dropped by 32.6% and workers' benefits were reduced (for example, the
free medical attention and health care that had been won in the 1920s
were dropped). [Thomas Miller Klubock, *"Class, Community, and
Neoliberalism in Chile,"* Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 217] As Peter
Winn summarises:

> *"Chile's workers, who had paid the social costs of the illusory
> neoliberal 'miracle,' now paid as well the highest price for the
> errors of their nation's military rulers and Chicago Boy technocrats
> and the imprudence of their country's capitalists. Plant closing and
> layoffs drove the effective unemployment rate above 30 percent, while
> real wages for those lucky enough to retain their jobs fell by nearly
> 11 percent in 1979-82 and by some 20 percent during the 1980s. In
> addition, inflation jumped to over 20 percent in both 1982 and 1983,
> and the budget surplus gave way to a deficit equal to 3 percent of the
> GNP by 1983. By then, Chile's foreign debt was 13 percent higher than
> its GNP . . . Chile's economy contracted 400 percent more in 1982-83
> than the rest of Latin America."* [*"The Pinochet Era"*, Winn (ed.),
> **Op. Cit.**, pp. 41-2]

Unsurprisingly, for the capitalist class things were somewhat different.
Private banks *"were bailed out by the government, which spent \$6
billion in subsidies during 1983-85 (equal to 30 percent of the GNP!)
but were made subject to strict government regulation designed to assure
their solvency. Controls were also placed on flows of foreign capital."*
[Winn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 42] The government also raised tariffs from 10%
to between 20 and 35% and the peso was drastically devalued. [Collins
and Lear, **Op. Cit.**, p. 15] Pinochet's state took a more active role
in promoting economic activity. For example, it developed new export
industries which *"benefited from a series of subsidies, privatisations,
and deregulations that allowed for unrestricted exploitation of natural
resources of limited renewability. Equally important were low wages,
great flexibility of employers vis-à-vis workers, and high levels of
unemployment."* [Collins and Lear, **Op. Cit.**, p. 20] The forestry
sector was marked by government hand-outs to the already rich. Joseph
Collins and John Lear argue that the neoliberals' *"stated goals were to
curtail sharply the direct role of government in forestry and to let
market mechanisms determine the prices and direct the use of resources.
Yet government intervention and subsidies were in fact central to
reorienting the benefits of forestry production away from the rural
population towards a handful of national and foreign companies."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 205]

By 1986, the economy had stabilised and the crisis was over. However,
the recovery was paid for by the working class as *"wages stayed low"*
even as the economy began to recover. Low wages were key to the
celebrated 'miracle' recovery. From 1984 to 1989 the gross national
product grew an average of 6 percent annually. By 1987 Chile had
recovered the production levels of 1981, and by 1989 production levels
exceeded 1981 levels by 10 percent. The average wage, by contrast, was 5
percent lower at the end of the decade than it had been in 1981 --
almost 10 percent lower than the average 1970 wage. The drop in the
minimum wage *"was even more drastic."* Public unrest during the
economic crisis made it politically difficult to eliminate, so it *"was
allowed to erode steadily in the face of inflation. By 1988, it was 40
percent lower in real terms than it had been in 1981 . . . In that year
32 percent of the workers in Santiago earned the minimum wage or less."*
Thus, *"recovery and expansion after 1985 depended on two ingredients
that are unsustainable over the long term and in a democratic society,"*
namely *"an intensified exploitation of the labour force"* and *"the
unregulated exploitation of nonrenewable natural resources such as
native forests and fishing areas, which amounted to a one-time subsidy
to domestic conglomerates and multinationals."* [Collins and Lear, **Op.
Cit.**, **Op. Cit.**, p. 83, p. 84 and p. 35]

In summary, *"the experiment has been an economic disaster."* [Rayack,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 72]

C.11.1 Who benefited from Chile's "economic miracle"?
-----------------------------------------------------

Given that Chile was hardly an "economic miracle," the question arises
why it was termed so by people like Friedman. To answer that question,
we need to ask who actually benefited from the neo-liberalism Pinochet
imposed. To do this we need to recognise that capitalism is a class
system and these classes have different interests. We would expect any
policies which benefit the ruling elite to be classed as an "economic
miracle" regardless of how adversely they affect the general population
(and vice versa). In the case of Chile, this is precisely what happened.

Rather than benefit everyone, neo-liberalism harmed the majority.
Overall, by far the hardest group hit was the working class,
particularly the urban working class. By 1976, the third year of Junta
rule, real wages had fallen to 35% below their 1970 level. It was only
by 1981 that they has risen to 97.3% of the 1970 level, only to fall
again to 86.7% by 1983. Unemployment, excluding those on state make-work
programmes, was 14.8% in 1976, falling to 11.8% by 1980 (this is still
double the average 1960s level) only to rise to 20.3% by 1982. [Rayack,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 65] Between 1980 and 1988, the real value of wages grew
only 1.2 percent while the real value of the minimum wage declined by
28.5 percent. During this period, urban unemployment averaged 15.3
percent per year. [Silvia Borzutzky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 96] Even by 1989
the unemployment rate was still at 10% (the rate in 1970 was 5.7%) and
the real wage was still 8% lower than in 1970. Between 1975 and 1989,
unemployment averaged 16.7%. In other words, after nearly 15 years of
free market capitalism, real wages had still not exceeded their 1970
levels and unemployment was still higher. As would be expected in such
circumstances the share of wages in national income fell from 42.7% in
1970 to 33.9% in 1993. Given that high unemployment is often attributed
by the right to strong unions and other labour market "imperfections,"
these figures are doubly significant as the Chilean regime, as noted
above, reformed the labour market to improve its "competitiveness."

After 1982, *"stagnant wages and the unequal distribution of income
severely curtailed buying power for most Chileans, who would not recover
1970 consumption levels until 1989."* [Collins and Lear, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 25] By 1988, *"the average real wage had returned to 1980 levels, but
it was still well below 1970 levels. Moreover, in 1986, some 37 percent
of the labour force worked in the informal sector, where wages were
lower and benefits often nonexistent. Many worked for minimum wage which
in 1988 provided only half of what an average family required to live
decently -- and a fifth of the workers didn't even earn that. A survey .
. . concluded that nearly half of Chileans lived in poverty."* [Winn,
*"The Pinochet Era"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 48] This was far more in absolute
and relative terms than at any time in the in the preceding three
decades. [Collins and Lear, *"Working in Chile's Free Market"*, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 26]

Per capita consumption fell by 23% from 1972-87. The proportion of the
population below the poverty line (the minimum income required for basic
food and housing) increased from 20% to 44.4% between 1970 and 1987. Per
capita health care spending was more than halved from 1973 to 1985,
setting off explosive growth in poverty-related diseases such as
typhoid, diabetes and viral hepatitis. On the other hand, while
consumption for the poorest 20% of the population of Santiago dropped by
30%, it rose by 15% for the richest 20%. [Noam Chomsky, **Year 501**,
pp. 190-191] The percentage of Chileans without adequate housing
increased from 27 to 40 percent between 1972 and 1988, despite the
claims of the government that it would solve homelessness via market
friendly policies.

So after two decades of neoliberalism, the Chilean worker can look
forward to *"a job that offers little stability and low wages, usually a
temporary one or one in the informal economy . . . Much of the growth in
jobs after the 1982-1983 crash came in economic sectors characterised by
seasonal employment . . . [and are] notorious for their low pay, long
hours, and high turnover."* In 1989, over 30% of jobs were in the formal
sector in the Santiago metropolitan area with incomes less than half the
average of those in the formal sector. For those with jobs, *"the work
pace intensified and the work day lengthened . . . Many Chileans worked
far longer than the legal maximum work week of 48 hours without being
paid for the extra hours. Even free-market celebrants . . . admit that
extra unpaid hours remain a serious problem"* in 1989. In fact, it is
*"commonly assumed that employees work overtime without pay or else"*
and, unsurprisingly, the *"pattern resembles the European production
systems of the mid-19th century."* [Collins and Lear, **Op. Cit.**, p.
22 pp. 22-3, p. 23, p. 24 and p. 25] Unsurprisingly, as in neo-liberal
America, wages have become divorced from productivity growth. Even in
the 1990s, *"there is evidence that productivity growth outpaced real
wage growth by as much as a ratio 3:1 in 1993 and 5:1 in 1997."* [Volker
Frank, *"Politics without Policy"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 73]

Similar comments are possible in regards to the privatised pension
system, regarded by many right-wingers as a success and a model for
other countries. However, on closer inspection this system shows its
weaknesses -- indeed, it can be argued that the system is only a success
for those companies making extensive profits from it (administration
costs of the Chilean system are almost 30% of revenues, compared to 1%
for the U.S. Social Security system [Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p.
305]). For working people, it is a disaster. According to SAFP, the
government agency which regulates the system, 96% of the known workforce
were enrolled in February 1995, but 43.4% of these were not adding to
their funds. Perhaps as many as 60% do not contribute regularly (given
the nature of the labour market, this is unsurprising). Unfortunately,
regular contributions are required to receive full benefits. Critics
argue that only 20% of contributors will actually receive good pensions.

Workers need to find money for health care as their *"remuneration has
been reduced to the wage, ending most benefits that workers had gained
over the years [before the coup]. Moreover, the privatisation of such
social services as health care and retirement security . . . [has meant]
the costs were now taken entirely from employee earnings."*
Unsurprisingly, *"[l]onger work days and a stepped-up pace of work
increased the likelihood of accidents and illness. From 1982 to 1985 the
number of reported workplace accident almost doubled. Public health
experts estimate, however, that over three-quarters of workplace
accidents went unreported, in part because over half of the workforce is
without any kind of accident insurance."* [Collins and Lear, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 20 and p. 25]

It is interesting to note that when this programme was introduced, the
armed forces and police were allowed to keep their own generous public
plans. If the plans **were** are as good as their supporters claim, you
would think that those introducing them would have joined them.
Obviously what was good enough for the masses were not suitable for the
rulers and the holders of the guns they depended upon. Given the
subsequent fate of that scheme, it is understandable that the ruling
elite and its minions did not want middle-men to make money off their
savings and did not trust their pensions to the fluctuations of the
stock market. Their subjects, however, were less lucky. All in all,
Chile's privatised social security system *"transferred worker savings
in the form of social security contributions from the public to the
private sector, making them available to the country's economic groups
for investment. Given the oligopic concentration of wealth and corporate
control under Pinochet, this meant handing the forced savings of workers
over to Chile's most powerful capitalists."* That is, *"to shore up
capital markets through its transfer of worker savings to Chile's
business elites."* [Winn, *"The Pinochet Era"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 64 and
p. 31]

The same applies to the health system, with the armed forces and
national police and their dependants having their own public health care
system. This means that they avoid the privatised health system which
the wealthy use and the run-down public system which the majority have
access to. The market ensures that for most people, *"the actual
determining factor is not 'choice,' but one's ability to pay."* By 1990,
only 15% of Chileans were in the private system (of these, nearly 75%
are form the top 30% of the population by income). This means that there
are three medical systems in Chile. The well-funded public one for armed
forces and police, a good to excellent private system for the elite few
and a *"grossly under-funded, rundown, over-burdened"* one *"for some
70% of Chileans."* Most *"pay more and receive less."* [Collins and
Lear, **Op. Cit.**, p. 99 and p. 246]

The impact on individuals extended beyond purely financial
considerations, with the Chilean labour force *"once accustomed to
secure, unionised jobs [before Pinochet] . . . [being turned] into a
nation of anxious individualists . . . [with] over half of all visits to
Chile's public health system involv[ing] psychological ailments, mainly
depression. 'The repression isn't physical any more, it's economic -
feeding your family, educating your child,' says Maria Pena, who works
in a fishmeal factory in Concepcion. 'I feel real anxiety about the
future', she adds, 'They can chuck us out at any time. You can't think
five years ahead. If you've got money you can get an education and
health care; money is everything here now.'"* Little wonder, then, that
*"adjustment has created an atomised society, where increased stress and
individualism have damaged its traditionally strong and caring community
life. . . suicides have increased threefold between 1970 and 1991 and
the number of alcoholics has quadrupled in the last 30 years . . . [and]
family breakdowns are increasing, while opinion polls show the current
crime wave to be the most widely condemned aspect of life in the new
Chile. 'Relationships are changing,' says Betty Bizamar, a 26-year-old
trade union leader. 'People use each other, spend less time with their
family. All they talk about is money, things. True friendship is
difficult now.'"* [Duncan Green, **Op. Cit.**, p. 96 and p. 166]

The experiment with free market capitalism also had serious impacts for
Chile's environment. The capital city of Santiago became one of the most
polluted cities in the world due the free reign of market forces. With
no environmental regulation there is general environmental ruin and
water supplies have severe pollution problems. [Noam Chomsky, **Year
501**, p. 190] With the bulk of the country's experts being based on the
extraction and low processing of natural resources, eco-systems and the
environment have been plundered in the name of profit and property. The
depletion of natural resources, particularly in forestry and fishing, is
accelerating due to the self-interested behaviour of a few large firms
looking for short term profit.

So, in summary, Chile's workers *"were central target's of [Pinochet's]
political repression and suffered greatly from his state terror. They
also paid a disproportionate share of the costs of his regime's
regressive social policies. Workers and their organisations were also
the primary targets of Pinochet's labour laws and among the biggest
losers from his policies of privatisation and deindustrialisation."*
[Winn, *"Introduction"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 10]

Given that the majority of Chile's people where harmed by the economic
policies of the regime, how can it be termed a "miracle"? The answer can
be found in another consequence of Pinochet's neo-classical monetarist
policies, namely *"a contraction of demand, since workers and their
families could afford to purchase fewer goods. The reduction in the
market further threatened the business community, which started
producing more goods for export and less for local consumption. This
posed yet another obstacle to economic growth and led to increased
concentration of income and wealth in the hands of a small elite."*
[Skidmore and Smith, **Op. Cit.**, p. 138]

It is the increased wealth of the elite that we see the true "miracle"
of Chile. When the leader of the Christian Democratic Party returned
from exile in 1989 he said that economic growth that benefited the top
10% of the population had been achieved (Pinochet's official
institutions agreed). [Noam Chomsky, **Deterring Democracy**, p. 231]
This is more than confirmed by other sources. According to one expert in
the Latin American neo-liberal revolutions, the elite *"had become
massively wealthy under Pinochet."* [Duncan Green, **The Silent
Revolution**, p. 216] In 1980, the richest 10% of the population took
36.5% of the national income. By 1989, this had risen to 46.8%. By
contrast, the bottom 50% of income earners saw their share fall from
20.4% to 16.8% over the same period. Household consumption followed the
same pattern. In 1970, the top 20% of households had 44.5% of
consumption. This rose to 51% in 1980 and to 54.6% in 1989. Between 1970
and 1989, the share going to the other 80% fell. The poorest 20% of
households saw their share fall from 7.6% in 1970 to 4.4% in 1989. The
next 20% saw their share fall from 11.8% to 8.2%, and middle 20% share
fell from 15.6% to 12.7%. The next 20% saw their share of consumption
fall from 20.5% to 20.1%. In other words, *"at least 60 percent of the
population was relatively, if not absolutely, worse off."* [James Petras
and Fernando Ignacio Leiva, **Democracy and Poverty in Chile**, p. 39
and p. 34]

In summary, *"the distribution of income in Chile in 1988, after a
decade of free-market policies, was markedly regressive. Between 1978
and 1988 the richest 10 percent of Chileans increased their share of
national income from 37 to 47 percent, while the next 30 percent saw
their share shrink from 23 to 18%. The income share of the poorest fifth
of the population dropped from 5 to 4 percent."* [Collins and Lear,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 26] In the last years of Pinochet's dictatorship, the
richest 10% of the rural population saw their income rise by 90% between
1987 and 1990. The share of the poorest 25% fell from 11% to 7%. The
legacy of Pinochet's social inequality could still be found in 1993,
with a two-tier health care system within which infant mortality is 7
per 1000 births for the richest fifth of the population and 40 per 1000
for the poorest fifth. [Duncan Green, **Op. Cit.**, p. 108 and p. 101]
Between 1970 and 1989, labour's share of the national income fell from
52.3% to 30.7% (it was 62.8% in 1972). Real wages in 1987 were still
81.2% of their 1980-1 level. [Petras and Leiva, **Op. Cit.**, p. 34, p.
25 and p. 170]

Thus Chile has been a "miracle" for the capitalist class, with its
successes being *"enjoyed primarily (and in many areas, exclusively) by
the economic and political elites. In any society shot through with
enormous inequalities in wealth and income, the market . . . works to
concentrate wealth and income."* There has been *"a clear trend toward
more concentrated control over economic resources . . . Economic
concentration is now greater than at any other time in Chile's history"*
with multinational corporations reaping *"rich rewards from Chile's
free-market policies"* (*"not surprisingly, they enthusiastically
applaud the model and push to implant it everywhere"*). Ultimately, it
is *"unconscionable to consider any economic and social project
successful when the percentage of those impoverished . . . more than
doubled."* [Collins and Lear, **Chile's Free-Market Miracle: A Second
Look**, p. 252 and p. 253]

Thus the wealth created by the Chilean economy in during the Pinochet
years did **not** "trickle down" to the working class (as claimed would
happen by "free market" capitalist dogma) but instead accumulated in the
hands of the rich. As in the UK and the USA, with the application of
"trickle down economics" there was a vast skewing of income distribution
in favour of the already-rich. That is, there has been a 'trickle-up'
(or rather, a **flood** upwards). Which is hardly surprising, as
exchanges between the strong and weak will favour the former (which is
why anarchists support working class organisation and collective action
to make us stronger than the capitalists and why Pinochet repressed
them).

Overall, *"in 1972, Chile was the second most equal country in Latin
America; by 2002 it was the second most **un**equal country in the
region."* [Winn, *"The Pinochet Era"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 56]
Significantly, this refutes Friedman's 1962 assertion that *"capitalism
leads to less inequality . . . inequality appears to be less . . . the
more highly capitalist the country is."* [**Capitalism and Freedom**, p.
169] As with other countries which applied Friedman's ideas (such as the
UK and US), inequality soared in Chile. Ironically, in this as in so
many cases, implementing his ideas refuted his own assertions.

There are two conclusions which can be drawn. Firstly, that Chile is now
**less** capitalist after applying Friedman's dogmas. Secondly, that
Friedman did not know what he was talking about. The second option Seems
the most likely, although for some defenders of the faith Chile's
neo-liberal experiment may not have been "pure" enough. However, this
kind of assertion will only convince the true believer.

C.11.2 What about Chile's economic growth and low inflation?
------------------------------------------------------------

Given the actual results of the experiment, there are only two areas
left to claim an "economic miracle." These are combating inflation and
increasing economic growth. Neither can be said to be "miraculous."

As far as inflation goes, the Pinochet regime **did** reduce it,
eventually. At the time of the time of the CIA-backed coup it was around
500% (given that the US undermined the Chilean economy -- *"make the
economy scream"*, Richard Helms, the director of the CIA -- high
inflation would be expected). By 1982 it was 10% and between 1983 to
1987, it fluctuated between 20 and 31%. It took eight years for the
Chicago Boys to control inflation and, significantly, this involved
*"the failure of several stabilisation programmes at an elevated social
cost . . . In other words, the stabilisation programs they prescribed
not only were not miraculous -- they were not successful."* [Winn, *"The
Pinochet Era"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 63] In reality, inflation was not
controlled by means of Friedman's Monetarism but rather by state
repression as left-wing Keynesian Nicholas Kaldor points out:

> *"The rate of growth of the money supply was reduced from 570 per cent
> in 1973 . . . to 130 per cent in 1977. But this did not succeed in
> moderating the growth of the money GNP or of the rise in prices,
> because -- lo and behold! -- no sooner did they succeed in moderating
> the growth of the money supply down, than the velocity of circulation
> shot up, and inflation was greater with a lower rate of growth of the
> money supply . . . they have managed to bring down the rate of growth
> of prices . . . And how? By the method well tried by Fascist
> dictatorships. It is a kind of incomes policy. It is a prohibition of
> wage increases with concentration camps for those who disobey and, of
> course, the prohibition of trade union activity and so on. And so it
> was not monetarism that brought the Chilean inflation down . . . [It
> was based on] methods which by-passed the price mechanism."* [**The
> Economic Consequences of Mrs Thatcher**, p. 45]

Inflation was controlled by means of state repression and high
unemployment, a combination of the incomes policy of Hitler and
Mussolini and Karl Marx (i.e., Friedman's "natural rate of unemployment"
we debunked in [section C.9](secC9.html)). In other words, Monetarism
and "free market" capitalism did not reduce inflation (as was the case
with Thatcher and Reagan was well).

Which leaves growth, the only line of defence possible for the claim of
a Chilean "Miracle." As we discussed in [section C.10](secC10.html), the
right argue that relative shares of wealth are not important, it is the
absolute level which counts. While the share of the economic pie may
have dropped for most Chileans, the right argue that the high economic
growth of the economy meant that they were receiving a smaller share of
a bigger pie. We will ignore the well documented facts that the
**level** of inequality, rather than absolute levels of standards of
living, has most effect on the health of a population and that
ill-health is inversely correlated with income (i.e. the poor have worse
health that the rich). We will also ignore other issues related to the
distribution of wealth, and so power, in a society (such as the free
market re-enforcing and increasing inequalities via "free exchange"
between strong and weak parties, as the terms of any exchange will be
skewed in favour of the stronger party, an analysis which the Chilean
experience provides extensive evidence for with its "competitive" and
"flexible" labour market). In other words, growth without equality can
have damaging effects which are not, and cannot be, indicated in growth
figures.

So we will consider the claim that the Pinochet regime's record on
growth makes it a "miracle" (as nothing else could). However, when we
look at the regime's growth record we find that it is hardly a "miracle"
at all -- the celebrated economic growth of the 1980s must be viewed in
the light of the two catastrophic recessions which Chile suffered in
1975 and 1982. As Edward Herman points out, this growth was *"regularly
exaggerated by measurements from inappropriate bases (like the 1982
trough)."* [**The Economics of the Rich**]

This point is essential to understand the actual nature of Chile's
"miracle" growth. For example, supporters of the "miracle" pointed to
the period 1978 to 1981 (when the economy grew at 6.6 percent a year) or
the post 1982-84 recession up-swing. However, this is a case of "lies,
damn lies, and statistics" as it does not take into account the catching
up an economy goes through as it leaves a recession. During a recovery,
laid-off workers go back to work and the economy experiences an increase
in growth due to this. This means that the deeper the recession, the
higher the subsequent growth in the up-turn. So to see if Chile's
economic growth was a miracle and worth the decrease in income for the
many, we need to look at whole business cycle, rather than for the
upturn. If we do this we find that Chile had the second worse rate of
growth in Latin America between 1975 and 1980. The average growth in GDP
was 1.5% per year between 1974 and 1982, which was lower than the
average Latin American growth rate of 4.3% and lower than the 4.5% of
Chile in the 1960's. [Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. 64]

This meant that, in per capita terms, Chile's GDP only increased by 1.5%
per year between 1974-80. This was considerably less than the 2.3%
achieved in the 1960's. The average growth in GDP was 1.5% per year
between 1974 and 1982, which was lower than the average Latin American
growth rate of 4.3% and lower than the 4.5% of Chile in the 1960s.
Between 1970 and 1980, per capita GDP grew by only 8%, while for Latin
America as a whole, it increased by 40%. Between the years 1980 and 1982
during which all of Latin America was adversely affected by depression
conditions, per capita GDP fell by 12.9 percent, compared to a fall of
4.3 percent for Latin America as a whole. [Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. 57
and p. 64]

Thus, between 1970 and 1989, Chile's GDP *"grew at a slow pace (relative
to the 1960s and to other Latin American countries over the same period)
with an average rate of 1.8-2.0 per cent. On a per capita basis . . .
GDP [grew] at a rate (0.1-0.2 per cent) well below the Latin American
average . . . [B]y 1989 the GDP was still 6.1 per cent below the 1981
level, not having recovered the level reached in 1970. For the entire
period of military rule (1974-1989) only five Latin American countries
had a worse record. Some miracle!"* [Petras and Leiva, **Op. Cit.**, p.
32]

Thus the growth "miracles" refer to recoveries from depression-like
collapses, collapses that can be attributed in large part to the
free-market policies imposed on Chile! Overall, the growth "miracle"
under Pinochet turns out to be non-existent. The full time frame
illustrates Chile's lack of significant economic and social process
between 1975 and 1989. Indeed, the economy was characterised by
instability rather than real growth. The high levels of growth during
the boom periods (pointed to by the right as evidence of the "miracle")
barely made up for the losses during the bust periods.

All in all, the experience of Chile under Pinochet and its "economic
miracle" indicates that the costs involved in creating a free market
capitalist regime are heavy, at least for the majority. Rather than
being transitional, these problems have proven to be structural and
enduring in nature, as the social, environmental, economic and political
costs become embedded into society. The murky side of the Chilean
"miracle" is simply not reflected in the impressive macroeconomic
indictors used to market "free market" capitalism, indicators themselves
subject to manipulation as we have seen.

C.11.3 Did neo-liberal Chile confirm capitalist economics?
----------------------------------------------------------

No. Despite claims by the likes of Friedman, Chile's neo-liberal
experiment was no "economic miracle" and, in fact, refuted many of the
key dogmas of capitalist economics. We can show this by comparing the
actual performance of "economic liberty" with Friedman's predictions
about it.

The first thing to note is that neo-liberal Chile hardly supports the
claim that the free market is stable. In fact, it was marked by deep
recessions followed by periods of high growth as the economic recovered.
This resulted in overall (at best) mediocre growth rates (see [last
section](secC11.html#secc112)).

Then there is the fact that the Chilean experiment refutes key
neo-classical dogmas about the labour market. In **Capitalist and
Freedom**, Friedman was at pains to attack trade unions and the idea
that they defended the worker from coercion by the boss. Nonsense, he
asserted, the *"employee is protected from coercion by the employer
because of other employers for whom he can work."* [pp. 14-5] Thus
collective action in the form of, say, unions is both unnecessary and,
in fact, harmful. The ability of workers to change jobs is sufficient
and the desire of capitalist economists is always to make the real
labour market become more like the ideal market of perfect competition
-- lots of atomised individuals who are price takers, not price setters.
While big business gets ignored, unions are demonised.

The problem is that such "perfect" labour markets are hard to create
outside of dictatorships. Pinochet's reign of terror created such a
market. Faced with the possibility of death and torture if they stood up
for their rights, the only **real** alternative most workers had was
that of finding a new job. So while the labour market was far from being
an expression of "economic liberty," Chile's dictatorship **did**
produce a labour market which almost perfectly reflected the
neo-classical (and Austrian) ideal. Workers become atomised individuals
as state terror forced them to eschew acting as trade unionists and
seeking collective solutions to their (individual and collective)
problems. Workers had no choice **but** to seek a new employer if they
felt they were being mistreated or under-valued. Terror created the
preconditions for the workings of an ideal capitalist labour market.
Friedman's talk of "economic liberty" in Chile suggests that Friedman
thought that a "free market" in labour would work "as if" it were
subject to death squads. In other words, that capitalism needs an
atomised workforce which is too scared to stand up for themselves.
Undoubtedly, he would prefer such fear to be imposed by purely
"economic" means (unemployment playing its usual role) but as his work
on the "natural rate of unemployment" suggests, he is not above
appealing to the state to maintain it.

Unfortunately for capitalist ideology, Chile refuted that notion, with
its workers subject to the autocratic power of the boss and having to
give concession after concession simply to remain in work. Thus the
*"total overhaul of the labour law system [which] took place between
1979 and 1981 . . . aimed at creating a perfect labour market,
eliminating collective bargaining, allowing massive dismissal of
workers, increasing the daily working hours up to twelve hours and
eliminating the labour courts."* [Silvia Borzutzky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 91]
In reality, the Labour code simply reflected the power property owners
have over their wage slaves and *"was solidly probusiness. It was
intended to maximise the flexibility of management's use of labour and
to keep any eventual elected government from intervening on behalf of
labour in negotiations between employers and workers."* This was hidden,
of course, by *"populist rhetoric."* [Collins and Lear, **Op. Cit.**, p.
16] In fact, the Plan Laboral *"was intended to definitely shift the
balance of power in labour relations in favour of business and to weaken
the workers and unions that formed the central political base of the
Left."* [Winn, *"The Pinochet Era"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 31]

Unsurprisingly, *"workers . . . have not received a fair share of the
benefits from the economic growth and productivity increases that their
labour has produced and that they have had to bear a disproportionate
share of the costs of this restructuring in their wages, working
conditions, job quality, and labour relations."* [Winn,
*"Introduction"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 10]

Chile, yet again, refuted another of Friedman's assertions about
capitalism. In 1975, he wrongly predicted that the unemployed caused by
the Monetarist recession would quickly find work, telling a Santiago
audience that they would *"be surprised how fast people would be
absorbed by a growing private-sector economy."* [quoted by Rayack, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 57] Unemployment reached record levels for decades, as the
free market regime *"has been slow to create jobs. During the 1960s
unemployment hovered around 6 percent; by contrast, the unemployment
level for the years 1974 to 1987 averaged 20 percent of the workforce.
Even in the best years of the boom (1980-1981) it stayed as high as 18
percent. In the years immediately following the 1982 crash, unemployment
-- including government emergency work programs -- peaked at 35 percent
of the workforce."* Unsurprisingly, the *"most important
rationalisation"* made by Chilean industry *"was the lowering of labour
costs. This was accomplished through massive layoffs, intensifying the
work of remaining workers, and pushing wage levels well below historic
levels."* This was aided by unemployment levels which *"officially
averaged 20 percent from 1974 to 1987. Chronic high levels of
unemployment afforded employers considerable leverage in setting working
conditions and wage levels . . . Not surprisingly, workers who managed
to hold onto their jobs were willing to make repeated concessions to
employers, and in order to get jobs employees often submitted to onerous
terms."* Between 1979 and 1982, more than a fifth of manufacturing
companies failed and employment in the sector fell by over a quarter. In
the decade before 1981, out of every 26 workers, 13 became unemployed, 5
joined the urban informal sector and 8 were on a government emergency
employment program. It should be stressed that official statistics
*"underestimate the real level of unemployment"* as they exclude people
who worked just one day in the previous week. A respected
church-sponsored institute on employment found that in 1988,
unemployment in Santiago was as high as 21%. [Lear and Collins, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 22, p. 15, p. 16, p. 15 and p. 22]

The standard free-market argument is that unemployment is solved by
subjecting the wage level to the rigours of the market. While wages will
be lower, more people will be employed. As we discussed in [section
C.9](secC9.html), the logic and evidence for such claims is spurious.
Needless to say, Friedman never revised his claims in the light of the
empirical evidence produced by the application of his ideas.

Given the fact that "labour" (i.e., an individual) is not produced for
the market in the first place, you can expect it to react differently
from other "commodities." For example, a cut in its price will generally
increase supply, not decrease it, simply because people have to eat, pay
the rent and so forth. Cutting wages will see partners and children sent
to work, plus the acceptance of longer hours by those who remain in
work. As such, the idea that unemployment is caused by wages being too
high has always been a specious and self-serving argument, one refuted
not only by logic but that bane of economics, empirical evidence. This
was the case with Chile's "economic miracle," where declining wages
forced families to seek multiple incomes in order to survive: *"The
single salary that could support a family was beyond the reach of most
workers; the norm, in fact, was for spouses and children to take on
temporary and informal jobs . . . Even with multiple incomes, many
families were hard-pressed to survive."* [Lear and Collins, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 23] Which, of course, refutes "free market" capitalist claim
that the labour market is like any other market. In reality, it is not
and so it is hardly surprising that a drop in the price of labour
**increased** supply nor that the demand for labour did not increase to
in response to the drop in its real wage.

Lastly, there is the notion that collective action in the market by the
state or trade unions harms the general population, particularly the
poor. For neo-classical and Austrian economists, labour is the source of
all of capitalism's problems (and any government silly enough to pander
to the economically illiterate masses). Pinochet's regime allowed them
to prove this was the case. Again Chile refuted them.

The "Chicago Boys" had no illusions that fascism was required to create
free market capitalism. According to Sergio de Castro, the architect of
the economic programme Pinochet imposed, fascism was required to
introduce "economic liberty" because *"it provided a lasting regime; it
gave the authorities a degree of efficiency that it was not possible to
obtain in a democratic regime; and it made possible the application of a
model developed by experts and that did not depend upon the social
reactions produced by its implementation."* [quoted by Silvia Borzutzky,
*"The Chicago Boys, social security and welfare in Chile"*, **The
Radical Right and the Welfare State**, Howard Glennerster and James
Midgley (eds.), p. 90] They affirmed that *"in a democracy we could not
have done one-fifth of what we did."* [quoted by Winn, *"The Pinochet
Era"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 28]

Given the individualistic assumptions of neo-classical and Austrian
economics, it is not hard to conclude that creating a police state in
order to control industrial disputes, social protest, unions, political
associations, and so on, is what is required to introduce the ground
rules the capitalist market requires for its operation. As socialist
Brian Barry argues in relation to the Thatcher regime in Britain which
was also heavily influenced by the ideas of "free market" capitalists
like Milton Friedman and Frederick von Hayek:

> *"Some observers claim to have found something paradoxical in the fact
> that the Thatcher regime combines liberal individualist rhetoric with
> authoritarian action. But there is no paradox at all. Even under the
> most repressive conditions . . . people seek to act collectively in
> order to improve things for themselves, and it requires an enormous
> exercise of brutal power to fragment these efforts at organisation and
> to force people to pursue their interests individually. . . left to
> themselves, people will inevitably tend to pursue their interests
> through collective action -- in trade unions, tenants' associations,
> community organisations and local government. Only the pretty ruthless
> exercise of central power can defeat these tendencies: hence the
> common association between individualism and authoritarianism, well
> exemplified in the fact that the countries held up as models by the
> free-marketers are, without exception, authoritarian regimes."* [*"The
> Continuing Relevance of Socialism"*, Robert Skidelsky (ed.),
> **Thatcherism**, p. 146]

Little wonder, then, that Pinochet's regime was marked by
authoritarianism, terror and rule by savants. Indeed, *"[t]he
Chicago-trained economists emphasised the scientific nature of their
programme and the need to replace politics by economics and the
politicians by economists. Thus, the decisions made were not the result
of the will of the authority, but they were determined by their
scientific knowledge. The use of the scientific knowledge, in turn,
would reduce the power of government since decisions will be made by
technocrats and by the individuals in the private sector."* [Silvia
Borzutzky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 90] However, as Winn points out:

> *"Although the Chicago Boys justified their policies with a discourse
> of liberty, they were not troubled by the contradiction of basing the
> economic freedom they promoted on the most dictatorial regime in
> Chilean history -- or in denying workers the freedom to strike or
> bargain collectively. At bottom, the only freedom that they cared
> about was the economic liberty of those Chileans and foreigners with
> capital to invest and consume, and that 'freedom,' de Castro believed,
> was best assured by an authoritarian government and a passive labour
> force. In short, their notions of freedom were both selective and
> self-serving."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 28]

Of course, turning authority over to technocrats and private power does
not change its nature -- only who has it. Pinochet's regime saw a marked
shift of governmental power away from protection of individual rights to
a protection of capital and property rather than an abolition of that
power altogether. As would be expected, only the wealthy benefited. The
working class were subjected to attempts to create a "perfect labour
market" -- and only terror can turn people into the atomised commodities
such a market requires. Perhaps when looking over the nightmare of
Pinochet's regime we should ponder these words of Bakunin in which he
indicates the negative effects of running society by means of science
books and "experts":

> *"human science is always and necessarily imperfect. . . were we to
> force the practical life of men -- collective as well as individual --
> into rigorous and exclusive conformity with the latest data of
> science, we would thus condemn society as well as individuals to
> suffer martyrdom on a Procrustean bed, which would soon dislocate and
> stifle them, since life is always an infinitely greater thing than
> science."* [**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 79]

The Chilean experience of rule by free market ideologues prove Bakunin's
points beyond doubt. Chilean society was forced onto the Procrustean bed
by the use of terror and life was forced to conform to the assumptions
found in economics textbooks. And as we proved above, only those with
power or wealth did well out of the experiment. From an anarchist
perspective, the results were all too sadly predictable. The only
surprising thing is that the right point to the experiment as a success
story.

Since Chile has become (mostly) a democracy (with the armed forces still
holding considerable influence) the post-Pinochet governments have made
minor reforms. For example, *"tax increases targeted for social spending
for the poor"* allowed them to *"halve the 1988 45 percent poverty rate
bequeathed by Pinochet."* In fact, the *"bulk of this spending"* was
aimed at *"the poorest of the poor, the 25 percent of the population
classified as destitute in 1988."* [Winn, *"The Pinochet Era,"* **Op.
Cit.**, p. 50, p. 52 and p. 55]

However, while this *"curtailed absolute poverty, they did not reduce
inequality . . . From 1990 to 1996 the share of the national income of
the poorest 20 percent of the population stagnated beneath 4 percent,
while that of the richest 20 percent inched up from 56 percent to 57
percent . . . the distribution of income was one of the most unequal in
the world. In Latin America, only Brazil was worse."* [Paul W Drake,
*"Foreword"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. xi] The new government raised
the minimum wage in 1990 by 17% in real terms, with another rise of
approximately 15% two years later. This had a significant on income as
*"a substantial number of the Chilean labour force receives wages and
salaries that are only slightly above the minimum wage."* [Volker Frank,
*"Politics without Policy"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 73 and p. 76]
In stark contrast to the claims of neo-classical economics, the rise in
the minimum wage did not increase unemployment. In fact, it **dropped**
to 4.4%, in 1992, the lowest since the early 1970s.

Overall, increased social spending on health, education and poverty
relief has occurred since the end of the dictatorship and has lifted
over a million Chileans out of poverty between 1987 and 1992 (the
poverty rate has dropped from 44.6% in 1987 to 23.2% in 1996, although
this is still higher than in 1970). However, inequality is still a major
problem as are other legacies from the Pinochet era, such as the nature
of the labour market, income insecurity, family separations, alcoholism,
and so on. Yet while *"both unemployment and poverty decreased, in part
because of programs targeted at the poorest sectors of the population by
centre-left governments with greater social concern than the Pinochet
dictatorship,"* many problems remain such as *"a work week that was
among the longest in the world."* [Winn, *"Introduction"*, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 4]

Chile has moved away from Pinochet's "free-market" model in other ways
to. In 1991, Chile introduced a range of controls over capital,
including a provision for 30% of all non-equity capital entering Chile
to be deposited without interest at the central bank for one year. This
reserve requirement - known locally as the encaje - amounts to a tax on
capital flows that is higher the shorter the term of the loan. As
William Greider points out, Chile *"has managed in the last decade to
achieve rapid economic growth by abandoning the pure free-market theory
taught by American economists and emulating major elements of the Asian
strategy, including forced savings and the purposeful control of
capital. The Chilean government tells foreign investors where they may
invest, keeps them out of certain financial assets and prohibits them
from withdrawing their capital rapidly."* [**One World, Ready or Not**,
p. 280]

Needless to say, while state aid to the working class has increased
somewhat, state welfare for business is still the norm. After the 1982
crash, the Chilean Economic Development Agency (CORFO) reverted to its
old role in developing Chilean industry (after the coup, it did little
more than just selling off state property at discount prices to the
wealthy). In other words, the post-recession "miracle" of the 1980s was
due, in part, to a state organisation whose remit was promoting economic
development, supporting business with new technology as well as
technical and financial assistance. It, in effect, promoted joint
public-private sectors initiatives. One key example was its role in
funding and development of new resource-sector firms, such as the
forestry sector ad the fishing industry. While free-marketeers have
portrayed the boom natural-resource extraction as the result of the
"free market," in reality private capital lacked the initiative and
foresight to develop these industries and CORFO provided aid as well as
credits and subsidies to encourage it. [James M. Cypher, *"Is Chile a
Neoliberal Success?"*, **Dollars & Sense**, September/October 2004] Then
there is the role of Fundación Chile, a public-private agency designed
to develop firms in new areas where private capital will not invest.
This pays for research and development before selling its stake to the
private sector once a project becomes commercially viable. [Jon Jeter,
*"A Smoother Road To Free Markets,"* **Washington Post**, 21/01/2004] In
other words, a similar system of state intervention promoted by the
East-Asian Tigers (and in a similar fashion, ignored by the ideologues
of "free market" capitalism -- but, then, state action for capitalists
never seems to count as interfering in the market).

Thus the Chilean state has violated its "free market" credentials, in
many ways, very successfully too. While it started in the 1980s,
post-Pinochet has extended this to include aid to the working class.
Thus the claims of free-market advocates that Chile's rapid growth in
the 1990s is evidence for their model are false (just as their claims
concerning South-East Asia also proved false, claims conveniently
forgotten when those economies went into crisis). Needless to say, Chile
is under pressure to change its ways and conform to the dictates of
global finance. In 1998, Chile eased its controls, following heavy
speculative pressure on its currency, the peso. That year economic
growth halved and contracted 1.1% in 1999.

So even the neo-liberal jaguar has had to move away from a purely free
market approach on social issues and the Chilean government has had to
intervene into the economy in order to start putting back together the
society ripped apart by market forces and authoritarian government.
However, fear of the military has ensured that reforms have been minor
and, consequently, Chile cannot be considered a genuine democracy. In
other words, "economic liberty" has not produced genuine "political
liberty" as Friedman (and others) claim (see [section
D.11](secD11.html)). Ultimately, for all but the tiny elite at the top,
the Pinochet regime of "economic liberty" was a nightmare. Economic
"liberty" only seemed to benefit one group in society, an obvious
"miracle." For the vast majority, the "miracle" of economic "liberty"
resulted, as it usually does, in increased inequality, exploitation,
poverty, pollution, crime and social alienation. The irony is that many
right-wing free-marketers point to it as a model of the benefits of
capitalism.
