C.7 What causes the capitalist business cycle?
==============================================

The business cycle is the term used to describe the boom and slump
nature of capitalism. Sometimes there is full employment, with
workplaces producing more and more goods and services, the economy grows
and along with it wages. However, as Proudhon argued, this happy
situation does not last:

> *"But industry, under the influence of property, does not proceed with
> such regularity. . . As soon as a demand begins to be felt, the
> factories fill up, and everybody goes to work. Then business is
> lively. . . Under the rule of property, the flowers of industry are
> woven into none but funeral wreaths. The labourer digs his own grave.
> . . [the capitalist] tries. . . to continue production by lessening
> expenses. Then comes the lowering of wages; the introduction of
> machinery; the employment of women and children . . . the decreased
> cost creates a larger market. . . [but] the productive power tends to
> more than ever outstrip consumption. . . To-day the factory is closed.
> Tomorrow the people starve in the streets. . . In consequence of the
> cessation of business and the extreme cheapness of merchandise. . .
> frightened creditors hasten to withdraw their funds [and] Production
> is suspended, and labour comes to a standstill."* [**What is
> Property**, pp. 191-192]

Why does this happen? For anarchists, as Proudhon noted, it's to do with
the nature of capitalist production and the social relationships it
creates (*"the rule of property"*). The key to understanding the
business cycle is to understand that, to use Proudhon's words,
*"Property sells products to the labourer for more than it pays him for
them; therefore it is impossible."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 194] In other
words, the need for the capitalist to make a profit from the workers
they employ is the underlying cause of the business cycle. If the
capitalist class cannot make enough surplus value (profit, interest,
rent) then it will stop production, sack people, ruin lives and
communities until such time as enough can once again be extracted from
working class people. As Proudhon put it (using the term *"interest"* to
cover all forms of surplus value):

> *"The primary cause of commercial and industrial stagnations is, then,
> interest on capital, -- that interest which the ancients with one
> accord branded with the name of usury, whenever it was paid for the
> use of money, but which they did not dare to condemn in the forms of
> house-rent, farm-rent, or profit: as if the nature of the thing lent
> could ever warrant a charge for the lending; that is, robbery."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p. 193]

So what influences the level of surplus value? There are two main
classes of pressure on surplus value production, what we will call the
***"subjective"*** and ***"objective"*** (we will use the term profits
to cover surplus value from now on as this is less cumbersome and other
forms of surplus value depend on the amount extracted from workers on
the shopfloor). The "subjective" pressures are to do with the nature of
the social relationships created by capitalism, the relations of
domination and subjection which are the root of exploitation and the
resistance to them. In other words the subjective pressures are the
result of the fact that *"property is despotism"* (to use Proudhon's
expression) and are a product of the class struggle. This will be
discussed in [section C.7.1](secC7.html#secc71). The objective pressures
are related to how capitalism works and fall into two processes. The
first is the way in which markets do not provide enough information to
producers avoid disproportionalities within the market. In other words,
that the market regularly produces situations where there is too much
produced for specific markets leading to slumps The second objective
factor is related to the process by which *"productive power tends more
and more to outstrip consumption"* (to use Proudhon's words), i.e.
over-investment or over-accumulation. These are discussed in sections
[C.7.2](secC7.html#secc72) and [C.7.3](secC7.html#secc73), respectively.

Before continuing, we would like to stress here that all three factors
operate together in a real economy and we have divided them purely to
help explain the issues involved in each one. The class struggle, market
"communication" creating disproportionalities and over-investment all
interact. Due to the needs of the internal (class struggle) and external
(inter-company) competition, capitalists have to invest in new means of
production. As workers' power increases during a boom, capitalists
innovate and invest in order to try and counter it. Similarly, to get
market advantage (and so increased profits) over their competitors, a
company invests in new machinery. While this helps increase profits for
individual companies in the short term, it leads to collective
over-investment and falling profits in the long term. Moreover, due to
lack of effective communication within the market caused by the price
mechanism firms rush to produce more goods and services in specific boom
markets, so leading to over-production and the resulting gluts result in
slumps. This process is accelerated by the incomplete information
provided by the interest rate, which results in investment becoming
concentrated in certain parts of the economy. Relative over-investment
can occur, increasing and compounding any existing tendencies for
over-production and so creating the possibility of crisis. In addition,
the boom encourages new companies and foreign competitors to try and get
market share, so decreasing the *"degree of monopoly"* in an industry,
and so reducing the mark-up and profits of big business (which, in turn,
can cause an increase in mergers and take-overs towards the end of the
boom).

Meanwhile, as unemployment falls workers' power, confidence and
willingness to stand up for their rights increases, causing profit
margins to be eroded at the point of production. This has the impact of
reducing tendencies to over-invest as workers resist the introduction of
new technology and techniques. The higher wages also maintain and even
increase demand for the finished goods and services produced, allowing
firms to realise the potential profits their workers have created.
Rising wages, therefore, harms the potential for **producing** profits
by increasing costs yet it increases the possibility for **realising**
profits on the market as firms cannot make profits if there is no demand
for their goods and their inventories of unsold goods pile up. In other
words, wages are costs for any specific firm but the wages other
companies pay are a key factor in the demand for what it produces. This
contradictory effect of class struggle matches the contradictory effect
of investment. Just as investment causes crisis because it is useful,
the class struggle both hinders over-accumulation of capital and
maintains aggregate demand (so postponing the crisis) while at the same
time eroding capitalist power and so profit margins at the point of
production (so accelerating it).

And we should note that these factors work in reverse during a slump,
creating the potential for a new boom. In terms of workers, rising
unemployment empower the capitalists who take advantage of the weakened
position of their employees to drive through wage cuts or increase
productivity in order to improve the profitability of their companies
(i.e. increase surplus value). Labour will, usually, accept the
increased rate of exploitation this implies to remain in work. This
results in wages falling and so, potentially, allows profit margins to
rise. However, wage cuts result in falling demand for goods and services
and so, overall, the net effect of cutting wages may be an overall
**drop** in demand which would make the slump worse. There is a
contradictory aspect to the objective pressures as well during a slump.
The price mechanism hinders the spread of knowledge required for
production and investment decisions to be made. While collectively it
makes sense for firms to start producing and investing more, individual
firms are isolated from each other. Their expectations are negative,
they expect the slump to continue and so will be unwilling to start
investing again. In the slump, many firms go out of business so reducing
the amount of fixed capital in the economy and so over-investment is
reduced. As overall investment falls, so the average rate of profit in
the economy can increase. Yet falling investment means that firms in
that sector of the economy will face stagnant demand and in the face of
an uncertain future will be a drag on other sectors. In addition, as
firms go under the *"degree of monopoly"* of each industry increases
which increases the mark-up and profits of big business yet the overall
market situation is such that their goods cannot be sold.

Eventually, however, the slump will end (few anarchists accept the
notion that capitalism will self-destruct due to internal economic
processes). The increased surplus value production made possible by high
unemployment is enough relative to the (reduced) fixed capital stock to
increase the rate of profit. This encourages capitalists to start
investing again and a boom begins (a boom which contains the seeds of
its own end). How long this process takes cannot be predicted in advance
(which is why Keynes stressed that in the long run we are all dead). It
depends on objective circumstances, how excessive the preceding boom
was, government policy and how willing working class people are to pay
the costs for the capitalist crisis.

Thus subjective and objective factors interact and counteract with each
other, but in the end a crisis will result simply because the system is
based upon wage labour and the producers are not producing for
themselves. Ultimately, a crisis is caused because capitalism is
production for profit and when the capitalist class does not
(collectively) get a sufficient rate of profit for whatever reason then
a slump is the result. If workers produced for themselves, this decisive
factor would not be an issue as no capitalist class would exist. Until
that happens the business cycle will continue, driven by "subjective"
and "objective" pressures -- pressures that are related directly to the
nature of capitalist production and the wage labour on which it is
based. Which pressure will predominate in any given period will be
dependent on the relative power of classes. One way to look at it is
that slumps can be caused when working class people are "too strong" or
"too weak." The former means that we are able to reduce the rate of
exploitation, squeezing the profit rate by keeping an increased share of
the surplus value we produce. The later means we are too weak to stop
income distribution being shifted in favour of the capitalist class,
which results in over-accumulation and rendering the economy prone to a
failure in aggregate demand. The 1960s and 1970s are the classic example
of what happens when "subjective" pressures predominate while the 1920s
and 1930s show the "objective" ones at work.

Finally, it must be stressed that this analysis does **not** imply that
anarchists think that capitalism will self-destruct. In spite of crises
being inevitable and occurring frequently, revolution is not. Capitalism
will only be eliminated by working class revolution, when people see the
need for social transformation and not imposed on people as the
by-product of an economic collapse.

C.7.1 What role does class struggle play in the business cycle?
---------------------------------------------------------------

At its most basic, the class struggle (the resistance to hierarchy in
all its forms) is the main cause of the business cycle. As we argued in
sections [B.1.2](secB1.html#secb12) and [C.2](secC2.html), capitalists
in order to exploit a worker must first oppress them. But where there is
oppression, there is resistance; where there is authority, there is the
will to freedom. Hence capitalism is marked by a continuous struggle
between worker and boss at the point of production as well as struggle
outside of the workplace against other forms of hierarchy.

This class struggle reflects a conflict between workers attempts at
liberation and self-empowerment and capital's attempts to turn the
individual worker into a small cog in a big machine. It reflects the
attempts of the oppressed to try to live a fully human life, when the
*"worker claims his share in the riches he produces; he claims his share
in the management of production; and he claims not only some additional
well-being, but also his full rights in the higher enjoyment of science
and art."* [Peter Kropotkin, **Anarchism**, pp. 48-49] As Errico
Malatesta argued:

> *"If [workers] succeed in getting what they demand, they will be
> better off: they will earn more, work fewer hours and will have more
> time and energy to reflect on things that matter to them, and will
> immediately make greater demands and have greater needs . . . [T]here
> exists no natural law (law of wages) which determines what part of a
> worker's labour should go to him [or her] . . . Wages, hours and other
> conditions of employment are the result of the struggle between bosses
> and workers. The former try and give the workers as little as
> possible; the latter try, or should try to work as little, and earn as
> much, as possible. Where workers accept any conditions, or even being
> discontented, do not know how to put up effective resistance to the
> bosses demands, they are soon reduced to bestial conditions of life.
> Where, instead, they have ideas of how human beings should live and
> know how to join forces, and through refusal to work or the latent and
> open threat of rebellion, to win bosses respect, in such cases, they
> are treated in a relatively decent way . . . Through struggle, by
> resistance against the bosses, therefore, workers can, up to a certain
> point, prevent a worsening of their conditions as well as obtaining
> real improvement."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, pp.
> 191-2]

It is this struggle that determines wages and indirect income such as
welfare, education grants and so forth. This struggle also influences
the concentration of capital, as capital attempts to use technology to
get an advantage against their competitors by driving down prices by
increasing the productivity of labour (i.e., to extract the maximum
surplus value possible from employees). And, as will be discussed in
[section D.10](secD10.html), increased capital investment also reflects
an attempt to increase the control of the worker by capital (or to
replace them with machinery that cannot say "no") **plus** the
transformation of the individual into "the mass worker" who can be fired
and replaced with little or no hassle. For example, Proudhon quotes an
*"English Manufacturer"* who states that he invested in machinery
precisely to replace humans by machines because machines are easier to
control:

> *"The insubordination of our workforce has given us the idea of
> dispensing with them. We have made and stimulated every imaginable
> effort of the mind to replace the service of men by tools more docile,
> and we have achieved our object. Machinery has delivered capital from
> the oppression of labour."* [quoted by Proudhon, **System of
> Economical Contradictions**, p. 189]

(To which Proudhon replied *"[w]hat a misfortunate that machinery cannot
also deliver capital from the oppression of consumers!"* The
over-production and reductions in demand caused by machinery replacing
people soon destroys these illusions of automatic production by a slump
-- see [section C.7.3](secC7.html#secc73)).

Therefore, class struggle influences both wages and capital investment,
and so the prices of commodities in the market. It also, more
importantly, determines profit levels and it is the rise and fall of
profit levels that are the ultimate cause of the business cycle. This is
because, under capitalism, production's *"only aim is to increase the
profits of the capitalist. And we have, therefore, -- the continuous
fluctuations of industry, the crisis coming periodically."* [Kropotkin,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 55]

A common capitalist myth, derived from neo-classical (and related)
ideology, is that free-market capitalism will result in a continuous
boom. Since the cause of slumps is allegedly state interference in the
market (particularly in credit and money), eliminating such meddling
will obviously bring reality into line with the textbooks and,
consequently, eliminate such negative features of "actually existing"
capitalism as the business cycle. Let us assume, for a moment, that this
is the case (as will be discussed in [section C.8](secC8.html), this is
**not** the case). In the "boom economy" of capitalist dreams there will
be full employment yet while this helps *"increase total demand, its
fatal characteristic from the business view is that it keeps the reserve
army of the unemployed low, thereby protecting wage levels and
strengthening labour's bargaining power."* [Edward S. Herman, **Beyond
Hypocrisy**, p. 93] This leads to the undermining of full employment as
profit margins are placed under pressure (which explains why bosses have
lead the fight against government full employment policies).

The process should be obvious enough. Full employment results in a
situation where workers are in a very strong position, a strength which
can undermine the system. This is because capitalism always proceeds
along a tightrope. If a boom is to continue smoothly, real wages must
develop within a certain band. If their growth is too low then
capitalists will find it difficult to sell the products their workers
have produced and so, because of this, face what is often called a
*"realisation crisis"* (i.e. the fact that capitalists cannot make a
profit if they cannot sell their products). If real wage growth is too
high then the conditions for producing profits are undermined as labour
gets more of the value it produces. This means that in periods of boom,
when unemployment is falling, the conditions for realisation improve as
demand for consumer goods increase, thus expanding markets and
encouraging capitalists to invest. However, such an increase in
investment (and so employment) has an adverse effect on the conditions
for **producing** surplus value as labour can assert itself at the point
of production, increase its resistance to the demands of management and,
far more importantly, make its own.

If an industry or country experiences high unemployment, workers will
put up with longer hours, stagnating wages, worse conditions and new
technology in order to remain in work. This allows capital to extract a
higher level of profit from those workers, which in turn signals other
capitalists to invest in that area. As investment increases,
unemployment falls. As the pool of available labour runs dry, then wages
will rise as employers bid for scare resources and workers feel their
power. As workers are in a better position they can go from resisting
capital's agenda to proposing their own (e.g. demands for higher wages,
better working conditions and even for workers' control). As workers'
power increases, the share of income going to capital falls, as do
profit rates, and capital experiences a profits squeeze and so cuts down
on investment and employment and/or wages. The cut in investment
increases unemployment in the capital goods sector of the economy, which
in turn reduces demand for consumption goods as jobless workers can no
longer afford to buy as much as before. This process accelerates as
bosses fire workers or cut their wages and the slump deepens and so
unemployment increases, which begins the cycle again. This can be called
"subjective" pressure on profit rates.

This interplay of profits and wages can be seen in most business cycles.
As an example, let us consider the crisis which ended post-war
Keynesianism in the early 1970's and paved the way for the neo-liberal
reforms of Thatcher and Reagan. This crisis, which started in 1973, had
its roots in the 1960s boom and the profits squeeze it produced. If we
look at the USA we find that it experienced continuous growth between
1961 and 1969 (the longest in its history until then). From 1961
onwards, unemployment steadily fell, effectively creating full
employment. From 1963, the number of strikes and total working time lost
steadily increased (the number of strikes doubled from 1963 to 1970,
with the number of wildcat strike rising from 22% of all strikes in 1960
to 36.5% in 1966). By 1965 both the business profit shares and business
profit rates peaked. The fall in profit share and rate of profit
continued until 1970 (when unemployment started to increase), where it
rose slightly until the 1973 slump occurred. In addition, after 1965,
inflation started to accelerate as capitalist firms tried to maintain
their profit margins by passing cost increases to consumers (as we
discuss [section C.8.2](secC8.html#secc82), inflation has far more to do
with capitalist profits than it has with money supply or wages). This
helped to reduce real wage gains and maintain profitability over the
1968 to 1973 period above what it otherwise would have been, which
helped postpone, but not stop, a slump.

Looking at the wider picture, we find that for the advanced capital
countries as a whole, the product wage rose steadily between 1962 and
1971 while productivity fell. The growth of the product wage (the real
cost to the employer of hiring workers) exceeded that of productivity
growth in the late 1960s, slightly after the year in which profit share
in national income and the rate of profit peaked. From then on,
productivity continued to fall while the product wage continued to rise.
This process, the result of falling unemployment and rising workers'
power (expressed, in part, by an explosion in the number of strikes
across Europe and elsewhere), helped to ensure that workers keep an
increasing share of the value they produced. The actual post-tax real
wages and productivity in the advanced capitalist countries increased at
about the same rate from 1960 to 1968 but between 1968 and 1973 the
former increased at a larger rate than the latter (hence the profits
squeeze). Moreover, increased international competition meant that many
domestic companies where limited in their responses to the profits
squeeze as well as facing a global decrease in demand for their
products. This resulted in profit shares and rates declining to around
80% of their previous peak levels across the advanced capitalist
nations. [Philip Armstrong, Andrew Glyn and John Harrison, **Capitalism
Since 1945**, pp. 178-80, pp. 182-4 and pp. 192-3]

It must be stressed that social struggle was not limited to the
workplace. In the 1960s a *"series of strong liberation movements
emerged among women, students and ethnic minorities. A crisis of social
institutions was in progress, and large social groups were questioning
the very foundations of the modern, hierarchical society: the
patriarchal family, the authoritarian school and university, the
hierarchical workplace or office, the bureaucratic trade union or
party."* [Takis Fotopoulos, *"The Nation-state and the Market,"* pp.
37-80, **Society and Nature**, Vol. 2, No. 2, p. 58] In stark contrast
to the predictions of the right, state intervention within capitalism to
maintain full employment and provide social services like health care
had **not** resulted in a *"Road to Serfdom."* The opposite occurred,
with previously marginalised sectors of the population resisting their
oppression and exploitation by questioning authority in more and more
areas of life -- including, it must be stressed, within our own
organisations as well (for example, the rank and file of trade unions
had to rebel just as much against their own officials as they had
against the bureaucracy of the capitalist firm).

These social struggles resulted in an economic crisis as capital could
no longer oppress and exploit working class people sufficiently in order
to maintain a suitable profit rate. This crisis was then used to
discipline the working class and restore capitalist authority within and
outside the workplace (see [section C.8.2](secC8.html#secc82)). We
should also note that this process of social revolt in spite, or perhaps
because of, the increase of material wealth was predicted by Malatesta.
In 1922 he argued that:

> "The fundamental error of the reformists is that of dreaming of
> solidarity, a sincere collaboration, between masters and servants,
> between proprietors and workers . . .
>
> "Those who envisage a society of well stuffed pigs which waddle
> contentedly under the ferule of a small number of swineherd; who do
> not take into account the need for freedom and the sentiment of human
> dignity . . . can also imagine and aspire to a technical organisation
> of production which assures abundance for all and at the same time
> materially advantageous both to bosses and the workers. But in reality
> 'social peace' based on abundance for all will remain a dream, so long
> as society is divided into antagonistic classes, that is employers and
> employees. And there will be neither peace nor abundance.
>
> "The antagonism is spiritual rather than material. There will never be
> a sincere understanding between bosses and workers for the better
> exploitation [sic!] of the forces of nature in the interests of
> mankind, because the bosses above all want to remain bosses and secure
> always more power at the expense of the workers, as well as by
> competition with other bosses, whereas the workers have had their fill
> of bosses and don't want more!" [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 78-79]

The experience of the post-war compromise and social democratic reform
shows that, ultimately, the social question is not poverty but rather
freedom. However, to return to the impact of class struggle on
capitalism.

It is the awareness that full employment is bad for business which is
the basis of the so-called *"Non-Accelerating Inflation Rate of
Unemployment"* (NAIRU). As we will discuss in more detail in [section
C.9](secC9.html), the NAIRU is the rate of unemployment for an economy
under which inflation, it is claimed, starts to accelerate. While the
basis of this "theory" is slim (the NAIRU is an invisible, mobile rate
and so the "theory" can explain every historical event simply because
you can prove anything when your datum cannot be seen by mere mortals)
it is very useful for justifying policies which aim at attacking working
people, their organisations and their activities. The NAIRU is concerned
with a *"wage-price"* spiral caused by falling unemployment and rising
workers' rights and power. Of course, you never hear of an
*"interest-price"* spiral or a *"rent-price"* spiral or a
*"profits-price"* spiral even though these are also part of any price.
It is always a *"wage-price"* spiral, simply because interest, rent and
profits are income to capital and so, by definition, above reproach. By
accepting the logic of NAIRU, the capitalist system implicitly
acknowledges that it and full employment are incompatible and so with it
any claim that it allocates resources efficiently or labour contracts
benefit both parties equally.

For these reasons, anarchists argue that a continual "boom" economy is
an impossibility simply because capitalism is driven by profit
considerations, which, combined with the subjective pressure on profits
due to the class struggle between workers and capitalists,
**necessarily** produces a continuous boom-and-bust cycle. When it boils
down to it, this is unsurprising, as *"industry is directed, and will
have to be directed, not towards what is needed to satisfy the needs of
all, but towards that which, at a given moment, brings in the greatest
temporary profit to a few. Of necessity, the abundance of some will be
based upon the poverty of others, and the straitened circumstances of
the greater number will have to be maintained at all costs, that there
may be hands to sell themselves for a part only of that which they are
capable of producing, without which private accumulation of capital is
impossible!"* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 128]

Of course, when such "subjective" pressures are felt on the system, when
private accumulation of capital is threatened by improved circumstances
for the many, the ruling class denounces working class "greed" and
"selfishness." When this occurs we should remember what Adam Smith had
to say on this subject:

> *"In reality high profits tend much more to raise the price of work
> than high wages . . . That part of the price of the commodity that
> resolved itself into wages would . . . rise only in arithmetical
> proportion to the rise in wages. But if profits of all the different
> employers of those working people should be raised five per cent.,
> that price of the commodity which resolved itself into profit would .
> . . rise in geometrical proportion to this rise in profit . . . Our
> merchants and master manufacturers complain of the bad effects of high
> wages in raising the price and thereby lessening the sale of their
> goods at home and abroad. They say nothing concerning the bad effects
> of high profits. They are silent with regard to the pernicious effects
> of their own gains. They complain only of those of other people."*
> [**The Wealth of Nations**, pp. 87-88]

As an aside, we must note that these days we would have to add
economists to Smith's *"merchants and master manufacturers."* Not that
this is surprising, given that economic theory has progressed (or
degenerated) from Smith's disinterested analysis into apologetics for
any action of the boss (a classic example, we must add, of supply and
demand, with the marketplace of ideas responding to a demand for such
work from *"our merchants and master manufacturers"*). Any "theory"
which blames capitalism's problems on "greedy" workers will always be
favoured over one that correctly places them in the contradictions
created by wage slavery. Ultimately, capitalist economics blame every
problem of capitalism on the working class refusing to kow-tow to the
bosses (for example, unemployment is caused by wages being too high
rather than bosses needing unemployment to maintain their power and
profits -- see [section C.9.2](secC9.html#secc92) on empirical evidence
that indicates that the first explanation is wrong).

Before concluding, one last point. While it may appear that our analysis
of the "subjective" pressures on capitalism is similar to that of
mainstream economics, this is not the case. This s because our analysis
recognises that such pressures are inherent in the system, have
contradictory effects (and so cannot be easily solved without making
things worse before they get better) and hold the potential for creating
a free society. Our analysis recognises that workers' power and
resistance **is** bad for capitalism (as for any hierarchical system),
but it also indicates that there is nothing capitalism can do about it
without creating authoritarian regimes (such as Nazi Germany) or by
generating massive amounts of unemployment (as was the case in the early
1980s in both the USA and the UK, when right-wing governments mismanaged
the economy into deep recessions) and even this is no guarantee of
eliminating working class struggle as can be seen, for example, from
1930s America.

This means that our analysis shows the limitations and contradictions of
the system as well as its need for workers to be in a weak bargaining
position in order for it to "work" (which explodes the myth that
capitalism is a free society). Moreover, rather than portray working
people as victims of the system (as is the case in many Marxist analyses
of capitalism) our analysis recognises that we, both individually and
collectively, have the power to influence and **change** that system by
our activity. We should be proud of the fact that working people refuse
to negate themselves or submit their interests to that of others or play
the role of order-takers required by the system. Such expressions of the
human spirit, of the struggle of freedom against authority, should not
be ignored or down-played, rather they should be celebrated. That the
struggle against authority causes the system so much trouble is not an
argument against social struggle, it is an argument against a system
based on hierarchy, oppression, exploitation and the denial of freedom.

To sum up, in many ways, social struggle is the inner dynamic of the
system, and its most basic contradiction: while capitalism tries to turn
the majority of people into commodities (namely, bearers of labour
power), it also has to deal with the human responses to this process of
objectification (namely, the class struggle). However, it does not
follow that cutting wages will solve a crisis -- far from it, for, as we
argue in [section C.9.1](secC9.html#secc91), cutting wages will deepen
any crisis, making things worse before they get better. Nor does it
follow that, if social struggle were eliminated, capitalism would work
fine. After all, if we assume that labour power is a commodity like any
other, its price will rise as demand increases relative to supply (which
will either produce inflation or a profits squeeze, probably both).
Therefore, even without the social struggle which accompanies the fact
that labour power cannot be separated from the individuals who sell it,
capitalism would still be faced with the fact that only surplus labour
(unemployment) ensures the creation of adequate amounts of surplus
value.

Moreover, even assuming that individuals can be totally happy in a
capitalist economy, willing to sell their freedom and creativity for a
little more money, putting up, unquestioningly, with every demand and
whim of their bosses (and so negating their own personality and
individuality in the process), capitalism does have "objective"
pressures limiting its development. So while social struggle, as argued
above, can have a decisive effect on the health of the capitalist
economy, it is not the only problem the system faces. This is because
there are objective pressures within the system beyond and above the
authoritarian social relations it produces and the resistance to them.
These pressures are discussed next, in sections
[C.7.2](secC7.html#secc72) and [C.7.3](secC7.html#secc73).

C.7.2 What role does the market play in the business cycle?
-----------------------------------------------------------

A major problem with capitalism is the working of the capitalist market
itself. For the supporters of "free market" capitalism, the market
provides all the necessary information required to make investment and
production decisions. This means that a rise or fall in the price of a
commodity acts as a signal to everyone in the market, who then respond
to that signal. These responses will be co-ordinated by the market,
resulting in a healthy economy.

This perspective is expressed well by right-liberal, Frederick von Hayek
in his *"The Uses of Knowledge in Society"* (reprinted in
**Individualism and Economic Order**). Using the example of the tin
market, he defends capitalism against central planning on its ability to
handle the division of knowledge within society and its dynamic use of
this dispersed knowledge when demand or supply changes. *"Assume,"* he
argues, *"that somewhere in the world a new opportunity for the use of
some raw material, say tin, has arisen, or that one of the sources of
supply of tin has been eliminated. It does not matter for our purpose
and it is very significant that it does not matter which of these two
causes has made tin more scarce. All that the users of tin need to know
is that some of the tin they used to consume is now more profitably
employed elsewhere, and that in consequence they must economise tin.
There is no need for the great majority of them even to know where the
more urgent need has arisen, or in favour of what other uses they ought
to husband the supply."* The subsequent rise in its price will result in
reduced consumption as many users will economise on its use and so the
information that tin has become (relatively) scarcer spreads throughout
the economy and influences not only tin users, but also its substitutes
and the substitutes of these substitutes and so on. This will move the
economy towards equilibrium without the people informed knowing anything
about the original causes for these changes. *"The whole acts as one
market, not because any of its members survey the whole field, but
because their limited individual fields of vision sufficiently overlap
so that through many intermediaries the relevant information is
communicated to all."* (*"The use of knowledge in society,"* pp. 519-30,
**American Economic Review**, Vol. 35, No. 4, , p. 526)

While it can be granted that this account of the market is not without
foundation, it is also clear that the price mechanism does not
communicate all the relevant information needed by companies or
individuals. This means that capitalism does not work in the way
suggested in the economic textbooks. It is the workings of the price
mechanism itself which leads to booms and slumps in economic activity
and the resulting human and social costs they entail. This can be seen
if we investigate the actual processes hidden behind the workings of the
price mechanism.

The key problem with Hayek's account is that he does not discuss the
**collective** results of the individual decisions he highlights. It is
true that faced with a rise in the price of tin, individual firms will
cut back on its use. Yet there is no reason to suppose that the net
result of these actions will bring the demand and supply of tin back to
equilibrium. In fact, it is just as likely that the reduction in demand
for tin is such that its producers face falling sales and so cut back
production even more. Similarly, a rising demand for tin could easily
result in all tin producers increasing supply so much as to produce a
glut on the market. Proudhon described this process well in the 1840s:

> *"A peasant who has harvested twenty sacks of wheat, which he with his
> family proposes to consume, deems himself twice as rich as if he had
> harvested only ten; likewise a housewife who has spun fifty yards of
> linen believes that she is twice as rich as if she had spun but
> twenty-five. Relatively to the household, both are right; looked at in
> their external relations, they may be utterly mistaken. If the crop of
> wheat is double throughout the whole country, twenty sacks will sell
> for less than ten would have sold for if it had been but half as
> great; so, under similar circumstances, fifty yards of linen will be
> worth less than twenty-five: so that value decreases as the production
> of utility increases, and a producer may arrive at poverty by
> continually enriching himself."* [**The System of Economical
> Contradictions**, pp. 77-78]

He argued that this occurred due to the *"contradiction"* of *"the
double character of value"* (i.e. between value in use and value in
exchange). [**Op. Cit.**, p. 78]

As John O'Neill argues (basing himself on Marx rather than Proudhon),
when producers *"make plans concerning future production, they are
planning not with respect of demand at the present moment . . . but with
respect to expected demand at some future moment . . . when their
products reach the market."* The price mechanism provides information
that indicates the relationship between supply and demand **now** and
while this information **is** relevant to producers plans, it is not
**all** the information that is relevant or is required by those
involved. It cannot provide information which will allow producers to
predict demand later. *"A major component of the information required
for such a prediction is that of the plans of other producers which
respond to that demand. This is information that the market, as a
competitive system, fails to distribute."* It is this *"informational
restriction"* which is one of the sources of why there is a business
cycle. This is because each producer *"responds to the same signal the
change in price. However, each agent acts independently of the response
of other producers and consumers."* The result is *"an overproduction of
goods in relation to effective demand for them. Goods cannot be sold.
There is a realisation crisis: producers cannot realise the value of
their products. Given this overproduction, demand falls against supply.
There is a slump. This eventually leads to a rise in demand against
supply, production expends leading to another boom, and so on."* [**The
Market**, pp. 134-5]

This information cannot be supplied due to competition. Simply put, if A
and B are in competition, if A informs B of her activities and B does
not reciprocate, then B is in a position to compete more effectively
than A. Hence communication within the market is discouraged and each
production unit is isolated from the rest. In other words, each person
or company responds to the same signal (the change in price) but each
acts independently of the response of other producers and consumers. The
result is often a slump in the market, causing unemployment and economic
disruption. Thus the market *"blocks the communication of information
and fails to co-ordinate plans for economic action."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
137]

This, it should be noted, is not a problem of people making a series of
unrelated mistakes. *"Rather, it is that the market imparts the same
information to affected agents, and this information is such that the
rational strategy for all agents is to expand production or contract
consumption, while it is not rational for all agents to act in this
manner collectively."* In other words, the information the market
provides is not sufficient for rational decision making and naturally
results in disproportionalities in the market. Thus the price mechanism
actively encourages *"the suppression of the mutual exchange of
information concerning planned responses"* to current prices and this
*"leads to over production."* So it is **not** a question of inaccurate
prediction (although given that the future is unknowable and
unpredictable this is a factor). Instead, it is *"one of individually
rational responses to the same signal resulting in collectively
irrational responses."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 135 and p. 197]

This means that prices in themselves do not provide adequate knowledge
for rational decision making as they are not at their long-run
equilibrium levels. This causes a problem for Hayek's account of the
market process as he stresses that actual prices never are at this
(purely theoretical) price. As we discuss in [section C.8](secC8.html),
Hayek's own theory of the business cycle shows the negative impact which
the 'misinformation' conveyed by disequilibrium prices can cause on the
economy. In that analysis, the disequilibrium price that leads to very
substantial macroeconomic distortions is the rate of interest but,
obviously, the same argument applies for commodity prices as well. This
means that the market process, based on the reactions of
profit-maximising firms to the same (unsustainable) prices for a
commodity can generating mal-investment and subsequent market
distributions on a wide level. Simply put, the price mechanism may carry
information regarding the terms on which various commodities may
currently be exchanged but it does not follow that a knowledge of these
exchange ratios enable agents to calculate the future profitability of
their production decisions (social usefulness is, of course, of no
concern).

It is this irrationality and lack of information which feed into the
business cycle. *"These local booms and slumps in production . . . are
then amplified into general crises precisely through the
interconnections in the market that Hayek highlights in his example of
the production and consumption of tin."* [O'Neill, **Op. Cit.**, p. 136]
The negative effects of over-production in one market will be passed on
to those which supply it with goods in the shape of decreased demand.
These firms will now experience relative over-production which, in turn,
will affect their suppliers. Whatever benefits may accrue to consumers
of these goods in the shape of lower prices will be reduced as demand
for their products drops as more and more workers are made unemployed or
their wages are cut (which means that **real** wages remain constant as
prices are falling alongside money wages -- see [section
C.9.1](secC9.html#secc91) for details). Firms will also seek to hoard
money, leading to yet more falling demand for goods and so unemployed
labour is joined by under-utilisation of capacity.

Which brings us to the issue of money and its role in the business
cycle. "Free market" capitalist economics is based on Say's Law. This is
the notion that supply creates its own demand and so general gluts of
goods and mass unemployment are impossible. As we noted in [section
C.1.5](secC1.html#secc15), this vision of economic activity is only
suited to precapitalist economies or ones without money for money is
considered as nothing more than an aid to barter, a medium of exchange
only. It ignores the fact that money is a store of value and, as such,
can be held onto precisely for that reason. This means that Say's Law is
invalid as its unity between sale and purchase can be disturbed so
causing the chain of contractual relationships to be broken. Simply put,
someone who sells a product need not spend their income on another
product at the same time. Unlike barter, the sale of one commodity is an
act distinct from the purchase of another. Money, in other words,
*"brings in time"* into the market process and *"the possibility of
hoarding."* Time *"because a good is usually sold some time after it is
made, running the risk that its sale price could fall below the cost of
production, wiping out the capitalist's expected profit."* Hoarding
*"because income need not be spent but may merely be kept idle."* [Doug
Henwood, **Wall Street**, p. 232]

This means that over-production becomes possible and bankruptcies and
unemployment can become widespread and so a slump can start. *"As any
Marxian or Keynesian crisis theorist can tell you,"* Henwood summarises,
*"the separation of purchase and sale is one of the great flashpoints of
capitalism; an expected sale that goes unmade can drive a capitalist
under, and can unravel a chain of financial commitments. Multiply that
by a thousand or two and you have great potential mischief."* Thus *"the
presence of money as a store of value, the possibility of keeping wealth
in financial form rather than spending it promptly on commodities,
always introduces the possibility of crisis."* That is, the possibility
*"of an excess of capital lacking a profitable investment outlet, and an
excess of goods that couldn't be sold profitably on the open market."*
[**Op. Cit.**, pp. 93-4 and p. 94]

So when the market prices of goods fall far below their cost prices then
production and investment stagnate. This is because profits can only be
transformed into capital at a loss and so it lies idle in banks. Thus
unemployed labour is associated with unemployed capital, i.e. excess
money. This desire for capitalists to increase their demand for storing
their wealth in money rather than investing it is driven by the rate of
profit in the economy. Bad times result in increased hoarding and so a
general fall in aggregate demand. Lowering interest rates will not
provoke a demand for such money hoards, as claimed in "free market"
capitalist theory, as few capitalists will seek to invest in a recession
as expected profits will be lower than the interest rate.

However, it should be stressed that disproportionalities of production
between industries and the separation of production and sale do not
**per se** result in a general crisis. If that were the case the
capitalism would be in a constant state of crisis as markets are rarely
in a state of equilibrium and sales do not instantly result in
purchases. This means that market dislocations need not automatically
produce a general crisis in the economy as the problems associated with
localised slumps can be handled when the overall conditions within an
economy are good. It simply provides the **potential** for crisis and a
means of transmitting and generalising local slumps when the overall
economic situation is weak. In other words, it is an accumulative
process in which small changes can build up on each other until the
pressures they exert become unstoppable. The key thing to remember is
that capitalism is an inherently dynamic system which consists of
different aspects which develop unevenly (i.e., disproportionately).
Production, credit, finance markets, circulation of money and goods,
investment, wages, profits as well as specific markets get out of step.
An economic crisis occurs when this process gets too far out of line.

This process also applies to investment as well. So far, we have assumed
that firms adjust to price changes without seeking new investment. This
is, of course, unlikely to always be the case. As we discuss in [section
C.8](secC8.html), this analysis of the market providing incomplete
information also applies to the market for credit and other forms of
external financing. This results in a situation where the problems
associated with over-production can be amplified by over-investment.
This means that the problems associated with markets creating
disproportionalities are combined with the problems resulting from
increased productivity and capital investment which are discussed in the
[next section](secC7.html#secc73).

C.7.3 What role does investment play in the business cycle?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Other problems for capitalism arise due to the increases in productivity
which occur as a result of capital investment or new working practices
which aim to increase short term profits for the company. The need to
maximise profits results in more and more investment in order to improve
the productivity of the workforce (i.e. to increase the amount of
surplus value produced). A rise in productivity, however, means that
whatever profit is produced is spread over an increasing number of
commodities. This profit still needs to be realised on the market but
this may prove difficult as capitalists produce not for existing markets
but for expected ones. As individual firms cannot predict what their
competitors will do, it is rational for them to try to maximise their
market share by increasing production (by increasing investment). As the
market does not provide the necessary information to co-ordinate their
actions, this leads to supply exceeding demand and difficulties
realising sufficient profits. In other words, a period of
over-production occurs due to the over-accumulation of capital.

Due to the increased investment in the means of production, variable
capital (labour) uses a larger and larger constant capital (the means of
production). As labour is the source of surplus value, this means that
in the short term profits may be increased by the new investment, i.e.
workers must produce more, in relative terms, than before so reducing a
firms production costs for the commodities or services it produces. This
allows increased profits to be realised at the current market price
(which reflects the old costs of production). Exploitation of labour
must increase in order for the return on total (i.e. constant **and**
variable) capital to increase or, at worse, remain constant. However,
while this is rational for one company, it is not rational when all
firms do it (which they must in order to remain in business). As
investment increases, the surplus value workers have to produce must
increase faster. As long as the rate of exploitation produced by the new
investments is high enough to counteract the increase in constant
capital and keep the profit rate from falling, then the boom will
continue. If, however, the mass of possible profits in the economy is
too small compared to the total capital invested (both in means of
production, fixed, and labour, variable) then the possibility exists for
a general fall in the rate of profit (the ratio of profit to investment
in capital and labour). Unless exploitation increases sufficiently,
already produced surplus value earmarked for the expansion of capital
may not be realised on the market (i.e. goods may not be sold). If this
happens, then the surplus value will remain in its money form, thus
failing to act as capital. In other words, accumulation will grind to a
halt and a slump will start.

When this happens, over-investment has occurred. No new investments are
made, goods cannot be sold resulting in a general reduction of
production and so increased unemployment as companies fire workers or go
out of business. This removes more and more constant capital from the
economy, increasing unemployment which forces those with jobs to work
harder, for longer so allowing the mass of profits produced to be
increased, resulting (eventually) in an increase in the rate of profit.
Once profit rates are high enough, capitalists have the incentive to
make new investments and slump turns to boom. As we discuss in [section
C.8](secC8.html), the notion that investment will be helped by lowing
interest rates in a slump fails to understand that *"the rate of
investment decisions is an increasing function of the difference between
the prospective rate of profit and the rate of interest."* [Michal
Kalecki, quoted by Malcolm Sawyer, **The Economics of Michal Kalecki**,
p. 98] If profit rates are depressed due to over-investment then even
the lowest interest rates will have little effect. In other words,
expectations of capitalists and investors are a key issue and these are
shaped by the general state of the economy.

It could be argued that such an analysis is flawed as no company would
invest in machinery if it would reduce its rate of profit. But such an
objection is flawed, simply because (as we noted) such investment is
perfectly sensible (indeed, a necessity) for a specific firm. By
investing they gain (potentially) an edge in the market and so increased
profits for a period. This forces their competitors to act likewise and
**they** invest in new technology. Unfortunately, while this is
individually sensible, collectively it is not as the net result of these
individual acts is over-investment in the economy as a whole. Moreover,
unlike the model of perfect competition, in a real economy capitalists
have no way of knowing the future, and so the results of their own
actions never mind the actions of their competitors. Thus
over-accumulation of capital is the natural result of competition simply
because even if we assume that the bosses of the firms are individually
rational they are driven to make decisions which are collectively
irrational to remain in business. The future is unknowable and so the
capitalist has no idea what the net result of their decisions will be
nor the state of the economy when their investment decisions are finally
active. Both of these factors ensure that firms act as they do,
investing in machinery which, in the end, will result in a crisis of
over-accumulation.

The logic is simple and is rooted in the concept of *"the fallacy of
composition."* To use an analogy, if you attend a rock concert and take
a box to stand on then you will get a better view. If others do the
same, you will be in exactly the same position as before. Worse, even,
as it may be easier to loose your balance and come crashing down in a
heap (and, perhaps, bringing others with you). This analogy shows why
introducing new machinery, which is profitable for an individual
company, has such a potentially negative effect on the economy as a
whole. While it is profitable for an individual company in the short
term, its overall effect means that it is **not** profitable for all in
the long run. As Kalecki put it, the *"tragedy of investment is that it
causes crisis because it is useful. Doubtless many people will consider
this theory paradoxical. But it is not the theory which is paradoxical,
but its subject -- the capitalist economy."* [quoted by Sawyer **Op.
Cit.**, p. 156] This paradox applies to the issue of wages as well:

> "What a system is that which leads a business man to think with
> delight that society will soon be able to dispense with men!
> **Machinery has delivered capital from the oppression of labour**! . .
> . Fool! though the workmen cost you something, they are your
> customers: what will you do with your products, when, driven away by
> you, they shall consume them no longer? Thus machinery, after crushing
> the workmen, is not slow in dealing employers a counter-blow; for, if
> production excludes consumption, it is soon obliged to stop itself.
>
> [. . .]
>
> "These failures were caused by over-production, -- that is, by an
> inadequate market, or the distress of the people. What a pity that
> machinery cannot also deliver capital from the oppression of
> consumers! What a misfortune that machines do not buy the fabrics
> which they weave! The ideal society will be reached when commerce,
> agriculture, and manufactures can proceed without a man upon earth!"
> [Proudhon, **System of Economical Contradictions**, pp. 189-90]

So, if the profit rate falls to a level that does not allow capital
formation to continue, a slump sets in. This general slump means that
the rate of profit over the whole economy falls due to excessive
investment. When one industry over-invests and over-produces, it cuts
back production, introduces cost-cutting measures, fires workers and so
on in order to try and realise more profits. These may spread if the
overall economic is fragile as the reduced demand for industries that
supplied the affected industry impacts on the **general** demand (via a
fall in inputs as well as rising unemployment). The related industries
now face over-production themselves and the natural response to the
information supplied by the market is for individual companies to reduce
production, fire workers, etc., which again leads to declining demand.
This makes it even harder to realise profit on the market and leads to
more cost cutting, deepening the crisis. While individually this is
rational, collectively it is not and so soon all industries face the
same problem. A local slump is propagated through the economy.

Cycles of prosperity, followed by over-production and then depression
are the natural result of capitalism. Over-production is the result of
over-accumulation, and over-accumulation occurs because of the need to
maximise short-term profits in order to stay in business. So while the
crisis appears as a glut of commodities on the market, as there are more
commodities in circulation that can be purchased by the aggregate demand
(*"Property sells products to the labourer for more than it pays him for
them,"* to use Proudhon's words), its roots are deeper. It lies in the
nature of capitalist production itself.

"Over-production," we should point out, exists only from the viewpoint
of capital, **not** of the working class:

> *"What economists call over-production is but a production that is
> above the purchasing power of the worker. . . this sort of
> over-production remains fatally characteristic of the present
> capitalist production, because workers cannot buy with their salaries
> what they have produced and at the same time copiously nourish the
> swarm of idlers who live upon their work."* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**,
> pp. 127-128]

In other words, over-production and under-consumption reciprocally imply
each other. There is no over production except in regard to a given
level of solvent demand. There is no deficiency in demand except in
relation to a given level of production. The goods "over-produced" may
be required by consumers, but the market price is too low to generate a
profit and so existing goods must be destroyed and production must be
reduced in order to artificially increase it. So, for example, the sight
of food and other products being destroyed while people are in need of
them is a common one in depression years.

So, while the crisis appears on the market as a *"commodity glut"* (i.e.
as a reduction in effective demand) and is propagated through the
economy by the price mechanism, its roots lie in production. Until such
time as profit levels stabilise at an acceptable level, thus allowing
renewed capital expansion, the slump will continue. The social costs of
the wage cutting this requires is yet another "externality," to be
bothered with only if they threaten capitalist power and wealth.

There are means, of course, by which capitalism can postpone (but not
stop) a general crisis developing. The extension of credit by banks to
both investors and consumers is the traditional, and most common, way.
Imperialism, by which markets are increased and profits are extracted
from less developed countries and used to boost the imperialist
countries profits, is another method (*"The workman being unable to
purchase with their wages the riches they are producing, industry must
search for markets elsewhere."* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 55]).
Another is state intervention in the economy (such as minimum wages, the
incorporation of trades unions into the system, arms production,
manipulating interest rates to maintain a *"natural"* rate of
unemployment to keep workers on their toes, etc.). Another is state
spending to increase aggregate demand, which can increase consumption
and so lessen the dangers of over-production. However, these have
(objective and subjective) limits and can never succeed in stopping
depressions from occurring as they ultimately flow from capitalist
production and the need to make profits.

A classic example of these "objective" pressures on capitalism is the
"Roaring Twenties" that preceded the Great Depression of the 1930s.
After the 1921 slump, there was a rapid rise in investment in the USA
with investment nearly doubling between 1919 and 1927. Because of this
investment in capital equipment, manufacturing production grew by 8.0%
per annum between 1919 and 1929 and labour productivity grew by an
annual rate of 5.6% (this is including the slump of 1921-22). With costs
falling and prices comparatively stable, profits increased which in turn
lead to high levels of capital investment (the production of capital
goods increased at an average annual rate of 6.4%). [William Lazonick,
**Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**, p. 241] The optimism felt
by business as a result of higher profits was reflected in the wealthy
sections of America. In the 1920s prosperity was concentrated at the
top. One-tenth of the top 1% of families received as much income as the
bottom 42% and only 2.3% of the population enjoyed incomes over \$100,00
(60% of families made less than \$2,000 a year, 42% less than \$1,000).
While the richest 1% owned 40% of the nation's wealth by 1929 (and the
number of people claiming half-million dollar incomes rose from 156 in
1920 to 1,489 in 1929) the bottom 93% of the population experienced a 4%
drop in real disposable per-capita income between 1923 and 1929.
However, in spite (or, perhaps, because) of this, US capitalism was
booming and belief in capitalism was at its peak.

But by 1929 all this had changed with the stock market crash -- followed
by a deep depression. What was its cause? Given our analysis presented
in [section C.7.1](secC7.html#secc71), it may have been expected to have
been caused by the "boom" decreasing unemployment, so increased working
class power and leading to a profits squeeze but this was not the case.
This slump was **not** the result of working class resistance, indeed
the 1920s were marked by a labour market which was continuously
favourable to employers. This was for two reasons. Firstly, the "Palmer
Raids" at the end of the 1910s saw the state root out radicals in the US
labour movement and wider society. Secondly, the deep depression of
1920-21 (during which national unemployment rates averaged over 9%, the
highest level over any two-year period since the 1890s) changed the
labour market from a seller's to a buyer's market. This allowed the
bosses to apply what became to be known as *"the American Plan,"* namely
firing workers who belonged to a union and forcing them to sign
*"yellow-dog"* contracts (promises not to join a union) to gain or keep
their jobs. Reinforcing this was the use of legal injunctions by
employers against work protests and the use of industrial spies to
identify and sack union members. This class war from above made labour
weak, which is reflected in the influence and size of unions falling
across the country. As union membership declined, the number of strilkes
reached their lowest level since the early 1880s, falling to just over
700 per year between 1927 to 1930 (compared to 3,500 per year between
1916 and 1921). [Lazonick, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 249-251] The key thing to
remember is that the impact of unemployment is not limited to the
current year's figures. High unemployment rates have a sustained impact
on the organisations, morale, and bargaining power of workers even if
unemployment rates fall afterwards. This was the situation in the 1920s,
with workers remembering the two years of record unemployment rates of
1921 and 1922 (in fact, the unemployment rate for manufacturing workers
was close to the overall rate in 1933).

During the post-1922 boom, this position did not change. The national
3.3% unemployment rate hid the fact that non-farm unemployment averaged
5.5% between 1923 and 1929. Across all industries, the growth of
manufacturing output did not increase the demand for labour. Between
1919 and 1929, employment of production workers fell by 1% and
non-production employment fell by about 6% (during the 1923 to 29 boom,
production employment only increased by 2%, and non-production
employment remained constant). This was due to the introduction of
labour saving machinery and the rise in the capital stock. In addition,
the numbers seeking work were boosted by new immigrants and the
unwillingness of existing ones to return home due to difficulties
returning to America. Lastly, the greatest source of industrial labour
supply came from the American farm -- there was a flood of rural workers
into the urban labour market over the 1920s. [Lazonick, **Op. Cit.**,
pp. 252-5] It is interesting to note that even **with** a labour market
favourable to employers for over 5 years, unemployment was still high.
This suggests that the neo-classical "argument" (assertion would be more
correct) that unemployment within capitalism is caused by strong unions
or high real wages is somewhat flawed to say the least (see [section
C.9](secC9.html)).

Facing high unemployment, workers' quit rates fell due to fear of
loosing jobs (particularly those workers with relatively higher wages).
This, combined with the steady decline of the unions and the very low
number of strikes, indicates that labour was weak. This is reflected in
the share of total manufacturing income going to wages fell from 57.5%
in 1923-24 to 52.6% in 1928/29 (between 1920 and 1929, it fell by 5.7%).
Productivity increased from an annual rate of 1.2% between 1909 and 1919
to 5.6% between 1919 and 1929. This increase in productivity was
reflected in the fact that over the post-1922 boom, the share of
manufacturing income paid in salaries rose from 17% to 18.3% and the
share to capital rose from 25.5% to 29.1%. Managerial salaries rose by
21.9% and firm surplus by 62.6% between 1920 and 1929. [Lazonick, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 241-2] Any notion that the 1929 crash was the result of a
rebellious working class is not applicable.

The key to understanding what happened lies in the contradictory nature
of capitalist production. The "boom" conditions were the result of
capital investment, which increased productivity thereby reducing costs
and increasing profits. The large and increasing investment in capital
goods was the principal device by which profits were spent. In addition,
those sectors of the economy marked by big business (i.e. oligopoly, a
market dominated by a few firms) placed pressures upon the more
competitive ones. As big business, as usual, received a higher share of
profits due to their market position (see [section C.5](secC5.html)),
this lead to many firms in the more competitive sectors of the economy
facing a profitability crisis during the 1920s.

The increase in investment, while directly squeezing profits in the more
competitive sectors of the economy, also eventually caused the rate of
profit to stagnate, and then fall, over the economy as a whole. While
the mass of available profits in the economy grew, it eventually became
too small compared to the total capital invested. Moreover, with the
fall in the share of income going to labour and the rise of inequality,
aggregate demand for goods could not keep up with production leading to
unsold goods (which is another way of expressing the process of
over-investment leading to over-production, as over-production implies
under-consumption and vice versa). As expected returns (profitability)
on investments hesitated, a decline in investment demand occurred and so
a slump began (rising predominantly from the capital stock rising faster
than profits). Investment flattened out in 1928 and turned down in 1929.
With the stagnation in investment, a great speculative orgy occurred in
1928 and 1929 in an attempt to enhance profitability. This
unsurprisingly failed and in October 1929 the stock market crashed,
paving the way for the Great Depression of the 1930s.

This process of over-investment relative to consumption is based on
rising labour productivity combined with stagnant wages or relative slow
wage growth. This implies inadequate workers' consumption but rising
profit rates. This is possible as long as aggregate demand remains
sufficient, which it can as long as high profit rates stimulate
investment (i.e., money is not saved or sufficient credit is generated
to ensure that investment spending does not lag consumption). Investment
creates new capacity and that implies the need for further increases in
investment, capitalist luxury consumption, and credit-based consumption
to maintain aggregate demand. This profit-led growth is hard to sustain
as high profits rates are difficult to maintain due to low working class
income as both investment and capitalist luxury consumption are more
unstable. Investment is more volatile than consumption, so the average
degree of instability increases which, in turn, means that the
probability of a slump rises. Further, this type of growth creates
imbalances between sectors of the economy as firms rush to invest in
profitable sections leading to relative over-production and
over-investment in those areas (see [last section](secC7.html#secc72)).
With the rise in unstable forms of demand, an economy becomes
increasingly fragile and so increasingly vulnerable to "shocks." The
stock market crash of 1929 was such a shock and the resulting panic and
reduced demand for luxury goods and investment that it produced exposed
the underlying weakness of the economy. After the Crash, restrictive
fiscal and monetary policies and falling demand interacted to break this
unstable prosperity and to accelerate the slump. This was reinforced by
wage-cut induced under-consumption as well as debt deflation making
over-investment worse in relation to over demand within the economy. So
US prosperity was fragile long before late 1929, due to the process of
over-investment relative to demand which lead the economy to be reliant
on unstable forms of demand such as luxury consumption and investment.

The crash of 1929 indicates the "objective" limits of capitalism. Even
with a very weak position of labour crisis still occurred and prosperity
turned to "hard times." In contradiction to neo-classical economic
theory, the events of the 1920s indicate that even if the capitalist
assumption that labour is a commodity like all others **is**
approximated in real life, capitalism is still subject to crisis
(ironically, a militant union movement in the 1920s would have postponed
crisis by shifting income from capital to labour, increasing aggregate
demand, reducing investment and supporting the more competitive sectors
of the economy!). Therefore, any neo-classical "blame labour" arguments
for crisis (which were so popular in the 1930s and 1970s) only tells
half the story (if that). Even if workers **do** act in a servile way to
capitalist authority, capitalism will still be marked by boom and bust
(as shown by the 1920s and 1980/90s).

To conclude, capitalism will suffer from a boom-and-bust cycle due to
the above-mentioned objective pressures on profit production, even if we
ignore the subjective revolt against authority by workers, explained
earlier. In other words, even if the capitalist assumption that workers
are not human beings but only "variable capital" **were** true, it would
not mean that capitalism would be a crisis free system. However, for
most anarchists, such a discussion is somewhat academic for human beings
are not commodities, the labour "market" is not like the iron market,
and the subjective revolt against capitalist domination will exist as
long as capitalism does.
