C.9 Would laissez-faire capitalism reduce unemployment?
=======================================================

In order to answer this question, we must first have to point out that
"actually existing capitalism" tries to manage unemployment to ensure a
compliant and servile working class. This is done under the name of
fighting "inflation" but, in reality, it about controlling wages and
maintaining high profit rates for the capitalist class. Market
discipline for the working class, state protection for the ruling class,
in other words. As Edward Herman points out:

> "Conservative economists have even developed a concept of a 'natural
> rate of unemployment,' a metaphysical notion and throwback to an
> eighteenth century vision of a 'natural order,' but with a modern
> apologetic twist. The natural rate is defined as the minimum
> unemployment level consistent with price level stability, but, as it
> is based on a highly abstract model that is not directly testable, the
> natural rate can only be inferred from the price level itself. That
> is, if prices are going up, unemployment is below the 'natural rate'
> and too low, whether the actual rate is 4, 8, or 10 percent. In this
> world of conservative economics, anybody is 'voluntarily' unemployed.
> Unemployment is a matter of rational choice: some people prefer
> 'leisure' over the real wage available at going (or still lower) wage
> rates . . .
> "Apart from the grossness of this kind of metaphysical legerdemain,
> the very concept of a natural rate of unemployment has a huge built-in
> bias. It takes as granted all the other institutional factors that
> influence the price level-unemployment trade-off (market structures
> and independent pricing power, business investment policies at home
> and abroad, the distribution of income, the fiscal and monetary mix,
> etc.) and focuses solely on the tightness of the labour market as the
> controllable variable. Inflation is the main threat, the labour market
> (i.e. wage rates and unemployment levels) is the locus of the solution
> to the problem." [**Beyond Hypocrisy**, p. 94]

Unsurprisingly, Herman defines this "natural" rate as *"the rate of
unemployment preferred by the propertied classes."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
156] The theory behind this is usually called the ***"Non-Accelerating
Inflation Rate of Unemployment"*** (or NAIRU). Like many of the worse
aspects of modern economics, the concept was raised Milton Friedman in
the late 1960s. At around the same time, Edmund Phelps independently
developed the theory (and gained the so-called "Nobel Prize" in
economics for so doing in 2006). Both are similar and both simply
repeat, in neo-classical jargon, the insight which critics of capitalism
had argued for over a century: unemployment is a necessary aspect of
capitalism for it is essential to maintaining the power of the boss over
the worker. Ironically, therefore, modern neo-classical economics is
based on a notion which it denied for over a century (this change may
be, in part, because the ruling elite thinks it has won the class war
and has, currently, no major political and social movements it has to
refute by presenting a rosy picture of the system).

Friedman raised his notion of a *"Natural Rate of Unemployment"* in
1968. He rooted it in the neo-classical perspective of individual
expectations rather than, say, the more realistic notion of class
conflict. His argument was simple. There exists in the economy some
*"natural"* rate associated with the real wage an ideal economy would
produce (this is *"the level that would be ground out by the Walrasian
system of general equilibrium equations,"* to quote him). Attempts by
the government to reduce actual unemployment below this level would
result in rising inflation. This is because there would be divergence
between the actual rate of inflation and its expected rate. By lowering
unemployment, bosses have to raise wages and this draws unemployed
people into work (note the assumption that unemployment is voluntary).
However, rising wages were passed on by bosses in rising prices and so
the **real** wage remains the same. This eventually leads to people
leaving the workforce as the real wage has fallen back to the previous,
undesired, levels. However, while the unemployment level rises back to
its *"natural"* level, inflation does not. This is because workers are
interested in real wages and, so if inflation is at, say, 2% then they
will demand wage increases that take this into account. If they expect
inflation to increase again then workers will demand **more** wages to
make up for it, which in turn will cause prices to rise (although
Friedman downplayed that this was because **bosses** were increasing
their prices to maintain profit levels). This will lead to rising
inflation **and** rising unemployment. Thus the expectations of
individuals are the key.

For many economists, this process predicted the rise of stagflation in
the 1970s and gave Friedman's Monetarist dogmas credence. However, this
was because the *"Bastard Keynesianism"* of the post-war period was
rooted in the same neo-classical assumptions used by Friedman. Moreover,
they had forgotten the warnings of left-wing Keynesians in the 1940s
that full unemployment would cause inflation as bosses would pass on
wage rises onto consumers. This class based analysis, obviously, did not
fit in well with the panglossian assumptions of neo-classical economics.
Yet basing an analysis on individual expectations does not answer the
question whether these expectations are meet. With strong organisation
and a willingness to act, workers can increase their wages to counteract
inflation. This means that there are two main options within capitalism.
The first option is to use price controls to stop capitalists increasing
their prices. However, this contradicts the scared laws of supply and
demand and violates private property. Which brings us to the second
option, namely to break unions and raise unemployment to such levels
that workers think twice about standing up for themselves. In this case,
workers cannot increase their money wages and so their real wages drop.

Guess which option the capitalist state went for? As Friedman made clear
when he introduced the concept there was really nothing *"natural"*
about the natural rate theory as it was determined by state policy:

> *"I do not mean to suggest that it is immutable and unchangeable. On
> the contrary, many of the market characteristics that determine its
> level are man-made and policy-made. In the United States, for example,
> legal minimum wage rates . . . and the strength of labour unions all
> make the natural rate of unemployment higher than it would otherwise
> be."* [*"The Role of Monetary Policy,"* pp. 1-17, **American Economic
> Review**, Vol. 68, No. 1, p. 9]

Thus the "natural" rate is really a social and political phenomenon
which, in effect, measures the bargaining strength of working people.
This suggests that inflation will fall when working class people are in
no position to recoup rising prices in the form of rising wages. The
"Natural Rate" is, in other words, about class conflict.

This can be seen when the other (independent) inventor of the "natural"
rate theory won the so-called Nobel prize in 2006. Unsurprisingly, the
**Economist** magazine was cock-a-hoop. [*"A natural choice: Edmund
Phelps earns the economics profession's highest accolade"*, Oct 12th
2006] The reasons why became clear. According to the magazine, *"Phelps
won his laurels in part for kicking the feet from under his intellectual
forerunners"* by presenting a (neo-classical) explanation for the
breakdown of the so-called *"Phillips curve."* This presented a
statistical trade-off between inflation and unemployment (*"unemployment
was low in Britain when wage inflation was high, and high when inflation
was low"*). The problem was that economists *"were quick -- too quick --
to conclude that policymakers therefore faced a grand, macroeconomic
trade-off"* in which, due to *"such a tight labour market, companies
appease workers by offering higher wages. They then pass on the cost in
the form of dearer prices, cheating workers of a higher real wage. Thus
policy makers can engineer lower unemployment only through deception."*
Phelps innovation was to argue that *"[e]ventually workers will cotton
on, demanding still higher wages to offset the rising cost of living.
They can be duped for as long as inflation stays one step ahead of their
rising expectations of what it will be."* The similarities with
Friedman's idea are obvious. This meant that the *"stable trade-off
depicted by the Phillips curve is thus a dangerous mirage"* which broke
down in the 1970s with the rise of stagflation.

Phelps argued that there was a *"natural"* rate of unemployment, where
*"workers' expectations are fulfilled, prices turn out as anticipated,
and they no longer sell their labour under false pretences."* This
*"equilibrium does not, sadly, imply full employment"* and so capitalism
required *"leaving some workers mouldering on the shelf. Given
economists' almost theological commitment to the notion that markets
clear, the presence of unemployment in the world requires a theodicy to
explain it."* The religious metaphor does seem appropriate as most
economists (and **The Economist**) do treat the market like a god (a
theodicy is a specific branch of theology and philosophy that attempts
to reconcile the existence of evil in the world with the assumption of a
benevolent God). And, as with all gods, sacrifices are required and
Phelps’ theory is the means by which this is achieved. As the magazine
noted: *"in much of his work he contends that unemployment is necessary
to cow workers, ensuring their loyalty to the company and their
diligence on the job, at a wage the company can afford to pay"* (i.e.,
one which would ensure a profit).

It is this theory which has governed state policy since the 1980s. In
other words, government's around the world have been trying to *"cow
workers"* in order to ensure their obedience (*"loyalty to the
company"*). Unsurprisingly, attempts to lower the *"natural rate"* have
all involved using the state to break the economic power of working
class people (attacking unions, increasing interest rates to increase
unemployment in order to temporarily *"cow"* workers and so on). All so
that profits can be keep high in the face of the rising wages caused by
the natural actions of the market!

Yet it must be stressed that Friedman's and Phelps' conclusions are
hardly new. Anarchists and other socialists had been arguing since the
1840s that capitalism had no tendency to full employment either in
theory or in practice. They have also noted how periods of full
employment bolstered working class power and harmed profits. It is, as
we stressed in [section C.1.5](secC1.html#secc15), the fundamental
disciplinary mechanism of the system. Somewhat ironically, then, Phelps
got bourgeois economics highest prize for restating, in neo-classical
jargon, the model of the labour market expounded by, say, Marx:

> *"If [capital’s] accumulation on the one hand increases the demand for
> labour, it increases on the other the supply of workers by 'setting
> them free', while at the same time the pressure of the unemployed
> compels those that are employed to furnish more labour, and therefore
> makes the supply of labour to a certain extent independent of the
> supply of labourers. The movement of the law of supply and demand of
> labour on this basis completes the despotism of capital. Thus as soon
> as the workers learn the secret of why it happens that the more they
> work, the more alien wealth they produce . . . as soon as, by setting
> up trade unions, etc., they try to organise a planned co-operation
> between employed and unemployed in order to obviate or to weaken the
> ruinous effects of this natural law of capitalistic production on
> their class, so soon capital and its sycophant, political economy, cry
> out at the infringement of the 'eternal' and so to speak 'sacred' law
> of supply and demand. Every combination of employed and unemployed
> disturbs the 'pure' action of this law. But on the other hand, as soon
> as . . . adverse circumstances prevent the creation of an industrial
> reserve army and, with it, the absolute dependence of the
> working-class upon the capitalist class, capital, along with its
> platitudinous Sancho Panza, rebels against the 'sacred' law of supply
> and demand, and tries to check its inadequacies by forcible means."*
> [**Capital**, Vol. 1, pp. 793-4]

That the **Economist** and Phelps are simply echoing, and confirming,
Marx is obvious. Modern economics, while disparaging Marx, has
integrated this idea into its macro-economic policy recommendations by
urging the state to manipulate the economy to ensure that "inflation"
(i.e. wage rises) are under control. Economics has played its role of
platitudinous sycophant well while Phelps' theory has informed state
interference (*"forcible means"*) in the economy since the 1980s, with
the expected result that wages have failed to keep up with rising
productivity and so capital as enriched itself at the expense of labour
(see [section C.3](secC3.html) for details). The use of Phelps' theory
by capital in the class war is equally obvious -- as was so blatantly
stated by **The Economist** and the head of the American Federal Reserve
during this period:

> *"there's supporting testimony from Alan Greenspan. Several times
> during the late 1990s, Greenspan worried publicly that, as
> unemployment drifted steadily lower the 'pool of available workers'
> was running dry. The dryer it ran, the greater risk of 'wage
> inflation,' meaning anything more than minimal increases. Productivity
> gains took some of the edge of this potentially dire threat, said
> Greenspan, and so did 'residual fear of job skill obsolescence, which
> has induced a preference for job security over wage gains' . . .
> Workers were nervous and acting as if the unemployment rate were
> higher than the 4% it reached in the boom. Still, Greenspan was a bit
> worried, because . . . if the pool stayed dry, 'Significant increases
> in wages, in excess of productivity growth, [would] inevitably emerge,
> absent the unlikely repeal of the law of supply and demand.' Which is
> why Greenspan & Co. raised short-term interest rates by about two
> points during 1999 and the first half of 2000. There was no threat of
> inflation . . . nor were there any signs of rising worker militancy.
> But wages were creeping higher, and the threat of the sack was losing
> some of its bite."* [Doug Henwood, **After the New Economy**, pp.
> 206-7]

Which is quite ironic, given that Greenspan's role in the economy was,
precisely, to *"repeal"* the *"law of supply and demand."* As one
left-wing economist puts it (in a chapter correctly entitled *"The
Workers Are Getting Uppity: Call In the Fed!"*), the Federal Reverse
(like all Central Banks since the 1980s) *"worries that if too many
people have jobs, or if it is too easy for workers to find jobs, there
will be upward pressure on wages. More rapid wage growth can get
translated into more rapidly rising prices -- in other words, inflation.
So the Fed often decides to raise interest rates to slow the economy and
keep people out of work in order to keep inflation from increasing and
eventually getting out of control."* However, *"[m]ost people probably
do not realise that the Federal Reserve Board, an agency of the
government, intervenes in the economy to prevent it from creating too
many jobs. But there is even more to the story. When the Fed hits the
brakes to slow job growth, it is not doctors, lawyers, and CEOs who end
up without jobs. The people who lose are those in the middle and the
bottom -- sales clerks, factory workers, custodians, and dishwashers.
These are the workers who don’t get hired or get laid off when the
economy slows or goes into a recession."* [**The Conservative Nanny
State**, p. 31] Thus the state pushes up unemployment rates to slow wage
growth, and thereby relieve inflationary pressure. The reason should be
obvious:

> "In periods of low unemployment, workers don't only gain from higher
> wages. Employers must make efforts to accommodate workers' various
> needs, such as child care or flexible work schedules, because they
> know that workers have other employment options. The Fed is well aware
> of the difficulties that employers face in periods of low
> unemployment. It compiles a regular survey, called the 'Beige Book,'
> of attitudes from around the country about the state of the economy.
> Most of the people interviewed for the Beige Book are employers.
>
> "From 1997 to 2000, when the unemployment rate was at its lowest
> levels in 30 years, the Beige Book was filled with complaints that
> some companies were pulling workers from other companies with offers
> of higher wages and better benefits. Some Beige Books reported that
> firms had to offer such non-wage benefits as flexible work hours,
> child care, or training in order to retain workers. The Beige Books
> give accounts of firms having to send buses into inner cities to bring
> workers out to the suburbs to work in hotels and restaurants. It even
> reported that some employers were forced to hire workers with
> handicaps in order to meet their needs for labour.
>
> "From the standpoint of employers, life is much easier when the
> workers are lined up at the door clamouring for jobs than when workers
> have the option to shop around for better opportunities. Employers can
> count on a sympathetic ear from the Fed. When the Fed perceives too
> much upward wage pressure, it slams on the brakes and brings the party
> to an end. The Fed justifies limiting job growth and raising the
> unemployment rate because of its concern that inflation may get out of
> control, but this does not change the fact that it is preventing
> workers, and specifically less-skilled workers, from getting jobs, and
> clamping down on their wage growth." [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 32-3]

This has not happened by accident. Lobbying by business, as another
left-wing economist stresses, *"is directed toward increasing their
economic power"* and business *"has been a supporter of macroeconomic
policies that have operated the economy with higher rates of
unemployment. The stated justification is that this lowers inflation,
but it also weakens workers' bargaining power."* Unsurprisingly, *"the
economic consequence of the shift in the balance of power in favour of
business . . . has served to redistribute income towards profits at the
expense of wages, thereby lowering demand and raising unemployment."* In
effect, the Federal Reserve *"has been using monetary policy as a form
of surrogate incomes policy, and this surrogate policy has been tilted
against wages in favour of profits"* and so is regulating the economy
*"in a manner favourable to business."* [Thomas I. Palley, **Plenty of
Nothing**, p. 77, p. 111 and pp. 112-3] That this is done under the name
of fighting inflation should not fool us:

> *"Mild inflation is often an indication that workers have some
> bargaining strength and may even have the upper hand. Yet, it is at
> exactly this stage that the Fed now intervenes owning to its
> anti-inflation commitment, and this intervention raises interest rates
> and unemployment. Thus, far from being neutral, the Fed's
> anti-inflation policy implies siding with business in the ever-present
> conflict between labour and capital over distribution of the fruits of
> economic activity . . . natural-rate theory serves as the perfect
> cloak for a pro-business policy stance."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 110]

In a sense, it is understandable that the ruling class within capitalism
desires to manipulate unemployment in this way and deflect questions
about their profit, property and power onto the state of the labour
market. High prices can, therefore, be blamed on high wages rather than
high profits, rents and interest while, at the same time, workers will
put up with lower hours and work harder and be too busy surviving to
find the time or the energy to question the boss's authority either in
theory or in practice. So managing the economy by manipulating interest
rates to increase unemployment levels when required allows greater
profits to be extracted from workers as management hierarchy is more
secure. People will put up with a lot in the face of job insecurity. As
left-wing economist Thomas Balogh put it, full employment *"generally
removes the need for servility, and thus alters the way of life, the
relationship between classes . . . weakening the dominance of men over
men, dissolving the master-servant relation. It is the greatest engine
for the attainment by all of human dignity and greater equality."*
[**The Irrelevance of Conventional Economics**, p. 47]

Which explains, in part, why the 1960s and 1970s were marked by mass
social protest against authority rather than von Hayek's *"Road to
Serfdom."* It also explains why the NAIRU was so enthusiastically
embraced and applied by the ruling class. When times are hard, workers
with jobs think twice before standing up to their bosses and so work
harder, for longer and in worse conditions. This ensures that surplus
value is increased relative to wages (indeed, in the USA, real wages
have stagnated since 1973 while profits have grown massively). In
addition, such a policy ensures that political discussion about
investment, profits, power and so on (*"the other institutional
factors"*) are reduced and diverted because working class people are too
busy trying to make ends meet. Thus the state intervenes in the economy
to **stop** full employment developing to combat inflation and
instability on behalf of the capitalist class.

That this state manipulation is considered consistent with the "free
market" says a lot about the bankruptcy of the capitalist system and its
defenders. But, then, for most defenders of the system state
intervention on behalf of capital is part of the natural order, unlike
state intervention (at least in rhetoric) on behalf of the working class
(and shows that Kropotkin was right to stress that the state **never**
practices "laissez-faire" with regard to the working class -- see
[section D.1](secD1.html)). Thus neo-liberal capitalism is based on
monetary policy that explicitly tries to weaken working class resistance
by means of unemployment. If "inflation" (i.e. labour income) starts to
increase, interest rates are raised so causing unemployment and, it is
hoped, putting the plebes back in their place. In other words, the road
to private serfdom has been cleared of any barriers imposed on it by the
rise of the working class movement and the policies of social democracy
implemented after the Second World War to stop social revolution. This
is the agenda pursued so strongly in America and Britain, imposed on the
developing nations and urged upon Continental Europe.

Although the aims and results of the NAIRU should be enough to condemn
it out of hand, it can be dismissed for other reasons. First and
foremost, this "natural" rate is both invisible and can move. This means
trying to find it is impossible (although it does not stop economists
trying, and then trying again when rate inflation and unemployment rates
refute the first attempt, and then trying again and again). In addition,
it is a fundamentally a meaningless concept -- you can prove anything
with an invisible, mobile value -- it is an non-refutable concept and
so, fundamentally, non-scientific. Close inspection reveals natural rate
theory to be akin to a religious doctrine. This is because it is not
possible to conceive of a test that could possibly falsify the theory.
When predictions of the natural rate turn out wrong (as they repeatedly
have), proponents can simply assert that the natural rate has changed.
That has led to the most recent incarnation of the theory in which the
natural rate is basically the trend rate of unemployment. Whatever trend
is observed is natural -- case closed.

Since natural rate theory cannot be tested, a sensible thing would be to
examine its assumptions for plausibility and reasonableness. However,
Milton Friedman’s early work on economic methodology blocks this route
as he asserted that realism and plausibility of assumptions have no
place in economics. With most economists blindly accepting this
position, the result is a church in which entry is conditional on
accepting particular assumptions about the working of markets. The net
effect is to produce an ideology, an ideology which survives due to its
utility to certain sections of society.

If this is the case, and it is, then any attempts to maintain the
"natural" rate are also meaningless as the only way to discover it is to
watch **actual** inflation levels and raising interest rates
appropriately. Which means that people are being made unemployed on the
off-chance that the unemployment level will drop below the (invisible
and mobile) "natural" rate and harm the interests of the ruling class
(high inflation rates harms interest incomes and full employment
squeezes profits by increasing workers' power). This does not seem to
bother most economists, for whom empirical evidence at the best of times
is of little consequence. This is doubly true with the NAIRU, for with
an invisible, mobile value, the theory is always true after the fact --
if inflation rises as unemployment rises, then the natural rate has
increased; if inflation falls as unemployment rises, it has fallen! As
post-Keynesian economist James K. Galbraith noted in his useful critique
of the NAIRU, *"as the real unemployment rate moves, the apparent NAIRU
moves in its shadow"* and its *"estimates and re-estimates seem largely
a response to predictive failure. We still have no theory, and no
external evidence, governing the fall of the estimated NAIRU. The
literature simply observes that inflation hasn't occurred and so the
previous estimate must have been too high."* He stresses, economists
have held *"to a concept in the face of twenty years of unexplained
variation, predictive failure, and failure of the profession to coalesce
on procedural issues."* [**Created Unequal**, p. 180] Given that most
mainstream economists subscribe to this fallacy, it just shows how the
"science" accommodates itself to the needs of the powerful and how the
powerful will turn to any old nonsense if it suits their purpose. A
better example of supply and demand for ideology could not be found.

So, supporters of "free market" capitalism do have a point, "actually
existing capitalism" has created high levels of unemployment. What
**is** significant is that most supporters of capitalism consider that
this is a laissez-faire policy! Sadly, the ideological supporters of
pure capitalism rarely mention this state intervention on behalf of the
capitalist class, preferring to attack trade unions, minimum wages,
welfare and numerous other "imperfections" of the labour market which,
strangely, are designed (at least in rhetoric) to benefit working class
people. Ignoring that issue, however, the question now arises, would a
"purer" capitalism create full employment?

First, we should point out that some supporters of "free market"
capitalism (most notably, the "Austrian" school) claim that real markets
are not in equilibrium at all, i.e. that the nature state of the economy
is one of disequilibrium. As we noted in [section
C.1.6](secC1.html#secc16), this means full employment is impossible as
this is an equilibrium position but few explicitly state this obvious
conclusion of their own theories and claim against logic that full
employment can occur (full employment, it should be stressed, has never
meant 100% employment as they will always be some people looking for a
job and so by that term we mean close to 100% employment). Anarchists
agree: full employment can occur in "free market" capitalism but not for
ever nor even for long periods. As the Polish socialist economist Michal
Kalecki pointed out in regards to pre-Keynesian capitalism, *"[n]ot only
is there mass unemployment in the slump, but average employment
throughout the cycle is considerably below the peak reached in the boom.
The reserve of capital equipment and the reserve army of unemployed are
typical features of capitalist economy at least throughout a
considerable part of the [business] cycle."* [quoted by Malcolm C.
Sawyer, **The Economics of Michal Kalecki**, pp. 115-6]

It is doubtful that "pure" capitalism will be any different. This is due
to the nature of the system. What is missing from the orthodox analysis
is an explicit discussion of class and class struggle (implicitly, they
are there and almost always favour the bosses). Once this is included,
the functional reason for unemployment becomes clear. It serves to
discipline the workforce, who will tolerate being bossed about much more
with the fear that unemployment brings. This holds down wages as the
threat of unemployment decreases the bargaining power of workers. This
means that unemployment is not only a natural product of capitalism, it
is an essential part of it.

So cycles of short periods approaching full employment and followed by
longer periods of high unemployment are actually a more likely outcome
of pure capitalism than continued full employment. As we argued in
sections [C.1.5](secC1.html#secc15) and [C.7.1](secC7.html#secc71)
capitalism needs unemployment to function successfully and so "free
market" capitalism will experience periods of boom and slump, with
unemployment increasing and decreasing over time (as can be seen from
19th century capitalism). So as Juliet Schor, a labour economist, put
it, usually *"employers have a structural advantage in the labour
market, because there are typically more candidates ready and willing to
endure this work marathon [of long hours] than jobs for them to fill."*
Under conditions of full-employment *"employers are in danger of losing
the upper hand"* and hiring new workers *"suddenly becomes much more
difficult. They are harder to find, cost more, and are less
experienced."* These considerations *"help explain why full employment
has been rare."* Thus competition in the labour market is *"typically
skewed in favour of employers: it is a buyers market. And in a buyer's
market, it is the sellers who compromise."* In the end, workers adapt to
this inequality of power and instead of getting what they want, they
want what they get (to use Schor's expression). Under full employment
this changes. In such a situation it is the bosses who have to start
compromising. And they do not like it. As Schor notes, America *"has
never experienced a sustained period of full employment. The closest we
have gotten is the late 1960s, when the overall unemployment rate was
under 4 percent for four years. But that experience does more to prove
the point than any other example. The trauma caused to business by those
years of a tight labour market was considerable. Since then, there has
been a powerful consensus that the nation cannot withstand such a low
rate of unemployment."* Hence the support for the NAIRU to ensure that
*"forced idleness of some helps perpetuate the forced overwork of
others."* [**The Overworked American**, p. 71, p. 75, p. 129, pp. 75-76
and p. 76]

So, full employment under capitalism is unlikely to last long (nor would
full employment booms fill a major part of the business cycle). In
addition, it should be stressed that the notion that capitalism
naturally stays at equilibrium or that unemployment is temporary
adjustments is false, even given the logic of capitalist economics. As
Proudhon argued:

> *"The economists admit it [that machinery causes unemployment]: but
> here they repeat their eternal refrain that, after a lapse of time,
> the demand for the product having increased in proportion to the
> reduction in price [caused by the investment], labour in turn will
> come finally to be in greater demand than ever. Undoubtedly, **with
> time,** the equilibrium will be restored; but I must add again, the
> equilibrium will be no sooner restored at this point than it will be
> disturbed at another, because the spirit of invention never stops."*
> [**System of Economical Contradictions**, pp. 200-1]

That capitalism creates permanent unemployment and, indeed, needs it to
function is a conclusion that few, if any, pro-"free market" capitalists
subscribe to. Faced with the empirical evidence that full employment is
rare in capitalism, they argue that reality is not close enough to their
theories and must be changed (usually by weakening the power of labour
by welfare "reform" and reducing "union power"). Thus reality is at
fault, not the theory (to re-quote Proudhon, *"Political economy -- that
is, proprietary despotism -- can never be in the wrong: it must be the
proletariat."* [**Op. Cit.** p. 187]) So if unemployment exists, then
its because real wages are too high, not because capitalists need
unemployment to discipline labour (see [section
C.9.2](secC9.html#secc92) for evidence that this argument is false). Or
if real wages are falling as unemployment is rising, it can only mean
that the real wage is not falling fast enough -- empirical evidence is
never enough to falsify logical deductions from assumptions!

(As an aside, it is one of amazing aspects of the "science" of economics
that empirical evidence is never enough to refute its claims. As the
Post-Keynesian economist Nicholas Kaldor once pointed out, *"[b]ut
unlike any scientific theory, where the basic assumptions are chosen on
the basis of direct observation of the phenomena the behaviour of which
forms the subject-matter of the theory, the basic assumptions of
economic theory are either of a kind that are unverifiable. . . or of a
kind which are directly contradicted by observation."* [**Further Essays
on Applied Economics**, pp. 177-8])

Of course, reality often has the last laugh on any ideology. For
example, since the late 1970s and early 1980s right-wing capitalist
parties have taken power in many countries across the world. These
regimes made many pro-free market reforms, arguing that a dose of market
forces would lower unemployment, increase growth and so on. The reality
proved somewhat different. For example, in the UK, by the time the
Labour Party under Tony Blair come back to office in 1997, unemployment
(while falling) was still higher than it had been when the last Labour
government left office in 1979 (this in spite of repeated redefinitions
of unemployment by the Tories in the 1980s to artifically reduce the
figures). 18 years of labour market reform had **not** reduced
unemployment even under the new definitions. This outcome was identical
to New Zealand's neo-liberal experiment, were its overall effect was
unimpressive, to say the least: lower growth, lower productivity and
feeble real wage increases combined with rising inequality and
unemployment. Like the UK, unemployment was still higher in 1997 than it
had been in 1979. Over a decade of "flexible" labour markets had
increased unemployment (more than doubling it, in fact, at one point as
in the UK under Thatcher). It is no understatement to argue, in the
words of two critics of neo-liberalism, that the *"performance of the
world economy since capital was liberalised has been worse than when it
was tightly controlled"* and that *"[t]hus far, [the] actual performance
[of liberalised capitalism] has not lived up to the propaganda."* [Larry
Elliot and Dan Atkinson, **The Age of Insecurity**, p. 274 and p. 223]
In fact, as Palley notes, *"wage and income growth that would have been
deemed totally unsatisfactory a decade ago are now embraced as
outstanding economic performance."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 202]

Lastly, it is apparent merely from a glance at the history of capitalism
during its laissez-faire heyday in the 19th century that "free"
competition among workers for jobs does not lead to full employment.
Between 1870 and 1913, unemployment was at an average of 5.7% in the 16
more advanced capitalist countries. This compares to an average of 7.3%
in 1913-50 and 3.1% in 1950-70. [Takis Fotopoulos, *"The Nation-State
and the Market"*, pp. 37-80, **Society and Nature**, Vol. 2, No. 2, p.
61] If laissez-faire did lead to full employment, these figures would,
surely, be reversed.

As discussed above, full employment **cannot** be a fixed feature of
capitalism due to its authoritarian nature and the requirements of
production for profit. To summarise, unemployment has more to do with
private property than the wages of our fellow workers or any social
safety nets working class movements have managed to pressure the ruling
class to accept. However, it is worthwhile to discuss why the "free
market" capitalist is wrong to claim that unemployment within their
system will not exist for long periods of time. In addition, to do so
will also indicate the poverty of their theory of, and "solution" to,
unemployment and the human misery they would cause. We do this in the
[next section](secC9.html#secc91).

C.9.1 Would cutting wages reduce unemployment?
----------------------------------------------

The "free market" capitalist (i.e., neo-classical, neo-liberal or
"Austrian") argument is that unemployment is caused by the real wage of
labour being higher than the market clearing level. The basic argument
is that the market for labour is like any other market and as the price
of a commodity increases, the demand for it falls. In terms of labour,
high prices (wages) causes lower demand (unemployment). Workers, it is
claimed, are more interested in money wages than real wages (which is
the amount of goods they can buy with their money wages). This leads
them to resist wage cuts even when prices are falling, leading to a rise
in their real wages and so they price themselves out of work without
realising it. From this analysis comes the argument that if workers were
allowed to compete 'freely' among themselves for jobs, real wages would
decrease and so unemployment would fall. State intervention (e.g.
unemployment benefit, social welfare programmes, legal rights to
organise, minimum wage laws, etc.) and labour union activity are,
according to this theory, the cause of unemployment, as such
intervention and activity forces wages above their market level and so
force employers to "let people go." The key to ending unemployment is
simple: cut wages.

This position was brazenly put by "Austrian" economist Murray Rothbard.
He opposed any suggestion that wages should **not** be cut as the notion
that *"the first shock of the depression must fall on profits and not on
wages."* This was *"precisely the reverse of sound policy since profits
provide the motive power for business activity."* [**America's Great
Depression**, p. 188] Rothbard's analysis of the Great Depression is so
extreme it almost reads like a satirical attack on the laissez-faire
position as his hysterical anti-unionism makes him blame unions for the
depression for, apparently, merely existing (even in an extremely
weakened state) for their influence was such as to lead economists and
the President to recommend to numerous leading corporate business men
**not** to cut wages to end the depression (wages were cut, but not
sufficiently as prices also dropped as we will discuss in the [next
section](secC2.html#secc92)). It should be noted that Rothbard takes his
position on wage cutting despite of an account of the business cycle
rooted in bankers lowering interest rates and bosses over-investing as a
result (see [section C.8](secC8.html)). So despite not setting interest
rates nor making investment decisions, he expected working class people
to pay for the actions of bankers and capitalists by accepting lower
wages! Thus working class people must pay the price of the profit
seeking activities of their economic masters who not only profited in
good times, but can expect others to pay the price in bad ones. Clearly,
Rothbard took the first rule of economics to heart: the boss is always
right.

The chain of logic in this explanation for unemployment is rooted in
many of the key assumptions of neo-classical and other marginalist
economics. A firm's demand for labour (in this schema) is the marginal
physical product of labour multiplied by the price of the output and so
it is dependent on marginal productivity theory. It is assumed that
there are diminishing returns and marginal productivity as only this
produces a downward-sloping labour demand curve. For labour, it is
assumed that its supply curve is upwards slopping. So it must be
stressed that marginal productivity theory lies at the core of "free
market" capitalist theories of output and distribution and so
unemployment as the marginal product of labour is interpreted as the
labour demand curve. This enforces the viewpoint that unemployment is
caused by wages being too high as firms adjust production to bring the
marginal cost of their products (the cost of producing one more item)
into equality with the product's market-determined price. So a drop in
labour costs theoretically leads to an expansion in production,
producing jobs for the "temporarily" unemployed and moving the economy
toward full-employment. So, in this theory, unemployment can only be
reduced by lowering the real wages of workers currently employed. Thus
the unfettered free market would ensure that all those who want to work
at the equilibrium real wage will do so. By definition, any people who
were idle in such a pure capitalism would be voluntarily enjoying
leisure and **not** unemployed. At worse, mass unemployment would be a
transitory disturbance which will quickly disappear if the market is
flexible enough and there are no imperfections in it (such as trade
unions, workers' rights, minimum wages, and so on).

Sadly for these arguments, the assumptions required to reach it are
absurd as the conclusions (namely, that there is no involuntary
unemployment as markets are fully efficient). More perniciously, when
confronted with the reality of unemployment, most supporters of this
view argue that it arises only because of government-imposed rigidities
and trade unions. In their "ideal" world without either, there would,
they claim, be no unemployment. Of course, it is much easier to demand
that nothing should be done to alleviate unemployment and that workers'
real wages be reduced when you are sitting in a tenured post in academia
save from the labour market forces you wish others to be subjected to
(in their own interests).

This perspective suffered during the Great Depression and the threat of
revolution produced by persistent mass unemployment meant that dissident
economists had space to question the orthodoxy. At the head of this
re-evaluation was Keynes who presented an alternative analysis and
solution to the problem of unemployment in his 1936 book **The General
Theory of Employment, Interest and Money** (it should be noted that the
Polish socialist economist Michal Kalecki independently developed a
similar theory a few years before Keynes but without the neo-classical
baggage Keynes brought into his work).

Somewhat ironically, given the abuse he has suffered at the hands of the
right (and some of his self-proclaimed followers), Keynes took the
assumptions of neo-classical economics on the labour market as the
starting point of his analysis. As such, critics of Keynes's analysis
generally misrepresent it. For example, right-liberal von Hayek asserted
that Keynes *"started from the correct insight that the regular cause of
extensive unemployment is real wages that are too high. The next step
consisted in the proposition that a direct lowering of money wages could
be brought about only by a struggle so painful and prolonged that it
could not be contemplated. Hence he concluded that real wages must be
lowered by the process of lowering the value of money,"* i.e. by
inflation. Thus *"the supply of money must be so increased as to raise
prices to a level where the real value of the prevailing money wage is
no longer greater than the productivity of the workers seeking
employment."* [**The Constitution of Liberty**, p. 280] This is echoed
by libertarian Marxist Paul Mattick who presented an identical argument,
stressing that for Keynes *"wages were less flexible than had been
generally assumed"* and lowering real wages by inflation *"allowed for
more subtle ways of wage-cutting than those traditionally employed."*
[**Marx and Keynes**, p. 7]

Both are wrong. These arguments are a serious distortion of Keynes's
argument. While he did start by assuming the neo-classical position that
unemployment was caused by wages being too high, he was at pains to
stress that even with ideally flexible labour markets cutting real wages
would **not** reduce unemployment. As such, Keynes argued that
unemployment was **not** caused by labour resisting wage cuts or by
"sticky" wages. Indeed, any "Keynesian" economist who does argue that
"sticky" wages are responsible for unemployment shows that he or she has
not read Keynes -- Chapter two of the **General Theory** critiques
precisely this argument. Taking neo-classical economists at its word,
Keynes analyses what would happen **if** the labour market were perfect
and so he assumes the same model as his neo-classical opponents, namely
that unemployment is caused by wages being too high and there is
flexibility in both commodity and labour markets. As he stressed, his
*"criticism of the accepted [neo-]classical theory of economics has
consisted not so much in finding logical flaws in its analysis as in
pointing out that its tacit assumptions are seldom or never satisfied,
with the result that it cannot solve the economic problems of the actual
world."* [**The General Theory**, p. 378]

What Keynes did was to consider the **overall** effect of cutting wages
on the economy as a whole. Given that wages make up a significant part
of the costs of a commodity, *"if money-wages change, one would have
expected the [neo-]classical school to argue that prices would change in
almost the same proportion, leaving the real wage and the level of
unemployment practically the same as before."* However, this was not the
case, causing Keynes to point out that they *"do not seem to have
realised that . . . their supply curve for labour will shift bodily with
every movement of prices."* This was because labour cannot determine its
own real wage as prices are controlled by bosses. Once this is
recognised, it becomes obvious that workers do not control the cost of
living (i.e., the real wage). Therefore trade unions *"do not raise the
obstacle to any increase in aggregate employment which is attributed to
them by the [neo-]classical school."* So while workers could, in theory,
control their wages by asking for less pay (or, more realistically,
accepting any wage cuts imposed by their bosses as the alternative is
unemployment) they do not have any control over the prices of the goods
they produce. This means that they have **no** control over their real
wages and so **cannot** reduce unemployment by pricing themselves into
work by accepting lower wages. Given these obvious facts, Keynes
concluded that there was *"no ground for the belief that a flexible wage
policy is capable of continuous full employment . . . The economic
system cannot be made self-adjusting along these lines."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 12, pp. 8-9, p. 15 and p. 267] As he summarised:

> *"the contention that the unemployment which characterises a
> depression is due to a refusal by labour to accept a reduction of
> money-wages is not clearly supported by the facts. It is not very
> plausible to assert that unemployment in the United States in 1932 was
> due either to labour obstinately refusing to accept a reduction of
> money-wages or to its demanding a real wage beyond what the
> productivity of the economic machine was capable of furnishing . . .
> Labour is not more truculent in the depression than in the boom -- far
> from it. Nor is its physical productivity less. These facts from
> experience are a **prima facie** ground for questioning the adequacy
> of the [neo-]classical analysis."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 9]

This means that the standard neo-classical argument was flawed. While
cutting wages may make sense for one firm, it would not have this effect
throughout the economy as is required to reduce unemployment as a whole.
This is another example of the fallacy of composition. What may work
with an individual worker or firm will not have the same effect on the
economy as a whole for cutting wages for all workers would have a
massive effect on the aggregate demand for their firms products.

For Keynes and Kalecki, there were two possibilities if wages were cut.
One possibility, which Keynes considered the most likely, would be that
a cut in money wages across the whole economy would see a similar cut in
prices. The net effect of this would be to leave real wages unchanged.
The other assumes that as wages are cut, prices remain prices remained
unchanged or only fell by a small amount (i.e. if wealth was
redistributed from workers to their employers). This is the underlying
assumption of "free market" argument that cutting wages would end the
slump. In this theory, cutting real wages would increase profits and
investment and this would make up for any decline in working class
consumption and so its supporters reject the claim that cutting real
wages would merely decrease the demand for consumer goods without
automatically increasing investment sufficiently to compensate for this.

However, in order make this claim, the theory depends on three critical
assumptions, namely that firms can expand production, that they will
expand production, and that, if they do, they can sell their expanded
production. This theory and its assumptions can be questioned. To do so
we will draw upon David Schweickart's excellent summary. [**Against
Capitalism**, pp. 105-7]

The first assumption states that it is always possible for a company to
take on new workers. Yet increasing production requires more than just
labour. Tools, raw materials and work space are all required in addition
to new workers. If production goods and facilities are not available,
employment will not be increased. Therefore the assumption that labour
can always be added to the existing stock to increase output is plainly
unrealistic, particularly if we assume with neo-classical economics that
all resources are fully utilised (for an economy operating at less than
full capacity, the assumption is somewhat less inappropriate).

Next, will firms expand production when labour costs decline? Hardly.
Increasing production will increase supply and eat into the excess
profits resulting from the fall in wages (assuming, of course, that
demand holds up in the face of falling wages). If unemployment did
result in a lowering of the general market wage, companies might use the
opportunity to replace their current workers or force them to take a pay
cut. If this happened, neither production nor employment would increase.
However, it could be argued that the excess profits would increase
capital investment in the economy (a key assumption of neo-liberalism).
The reply is obvious: perhaps, perhaps not. A slumping economy might
well induce financial caution and so capitalists could stall investment
until they are convinced of the sustained higher profitability will
last.

This feeds directly into the last assumption, namely that the produced
goods will be sold. Assuming that money wages are cut, but prices remain
the same then this would be a cut in real wages. But when wages decline,
so does worker purchasing power, and if this is not offset by an
increase in spending elsewhere, then total demand will decline. However,
it can be argued that not everyone's real income would fall: incomes
from profits would increase. But redistributing income from workers to
capitalists, a group who tend to spend a smaller portion of their income
on consumption than do workers, could reduce effective demand and
increase unemployment. Moreover, business does not (cannot)
instantaneously make use of the enlarged funds resulting from the shift
of wages to profit for investment (either because of financial caution
or lack of existing facilities). In addition, which sane company would
increase investment in the face of falling demand for its products? So
when wages decline, so does workers' purchasing power and this is
unlikely to be offset by an increase in spending elsewhere. This will
lead to a reduction in aggregate demand as profits are accumulated but
unused, so leading to stocks of unsold goods and renewed price
reductions. This means that the cut in real wages will be cancelled out
by price cuts to sell unsold stock and unemployment remains. In other
words, contrary to neo-classical economics, a fall in wages may result
in the same or even more unemployment as aggregate demand drops and
companies cannot find a market for their goods. And so, *"[i]f prices do
not fall, it is still worse, for then real wages are reduced and
unemployment is increased directly by the fall in the purchase of
consumption goods."* [Joan Robinson, **Further Contributions to
Economics**, p. 34]

The "Pigou" (or *"real balance"*) effect is another neo-classical
argument that aims to prove that (in the end) capitalism will pass from
slump to boom quickly. This theory argues that when unemployment is
sufficiently high, it will lead to the price level falling which would
lead to a rise in the real value of the money supply and so increase the
real value of savings. People with such assets will have become richer
and this increase in wealth will enable people to buy more goods and so
investment will begin again. In this way, slump passes to boom
naturally.

However, this argument is flawed in many ways. In reply, Michal Kalecki
argued that, firstly, Pigou had *"assumed that the banking system would
maintain the stock of money constant in the face of declining incomes,
although there was no particular reason why they should."* If the money
stock changes, the value of money will also change. Secondly, that *"the
gain in money holders when prices fall is exactly offset by the loss to
money providers. Thus, whilst the real value of a deposit in bank
account rises for the depositor when prices fell, the liability
represented by that deposit for the bank also rises in size."* And,
thirdly, *"that falling prices and wages would mean that the real value
of outstanding debts would be increased, which borrowers would find it
increasingly difficult to repay as their real income fails to keep pace
with the rising real value of debt. Indeed, when the falling prices and
wages are generated by low levels of demand, the aggregate real income
will be low. Bankruptcies follow, debts cannot be repaid, and a
confidence crisis was likely to follow."* In other words, debtors may
cut back on spending more than creditors would increase it and so the
depression would continue as demand did not rise. [Malcolm C. Sawyer,
**The Economics of Michal Kalecki**, p. 90]

So, the traditional neo-classical reply that investment spending will
increase because lower costs will mean greater profits, leading to
greater savings, and ultimately, to greater investment is weak. Lower
costs will mean greater profits only if the products are sold, which
they might not be if demand is adversely affected. In other words, a
higher profit margins do not result in higher profits due to fall in
consumption caused by the reduction of workers purchasing power. And, as
Michal Kalecki argued, wage cuts in combating a slump may be ineffective
because gains in profits are not applied immediately to increase
investment and the reduced purchasing power caused by the wage cuts
causes a fall in sales, meaning that higher profit margins do not result
in higher profits. Moreover, as Keynes pointed out long ago, the forces
and motivations governing saving are quite distinct from those governing
investment. Hence there is no necessity for the two quantities always to
coincide. So firms that have reduced wages may not be able to sell as
much as before, let alone more. In that case they will cut production,
add to unemployment and further reduce demand. This can set off a
vicious downward spiral of falling demand and plummeting production
leading to depression, a process described by Kropotkin (nearly 40 years
before Keynes made the same point in **The General Theory**):

> "Profits being the basis of capitalist industry, low profits explain
> all ulterior consequences.
> "Low profits induce the employers to reduce the wages, or the number
> of workers, or the number of days of employment during the week. . .
> As Adam Smith said, low profits ultimately mean a reduction of wages,
> and low wages mean a reduced consumption by the worker. Low profits
> mean also a somewhat reduced consumption by the employer; and both
> together mean lower profits and reduced consumption with that immense
> class of middlemen which has grown up in manufacturing countries, and
> that, again, means a further reduction of profits for the employers."
> [**Fields, Factories and Workshops Tomorrow**, p. 33]

So, as is often the case, Keynes was simply including into mainstream
economics perspectives which had long been held by critics of capitalism
and dismissed by the orthodoxy. Keynes' critique of Say's Law
essentially repeated Marx's while Proudhon pointed out in 1846 that *"if
the producer earns less, he will buy less"* and this will *"engender . .
. over-production and destitution."* This was because *"though the
workmen cost [the capitalist] something, they are [his] customers: what
will you do with your products, when driven away by [him], they shall
consume no longer?"* This means that cutting wages and employment would
not work for they are *"not slow in dealing employers a counter-blow;
for if production excludes consumption, it is soon obliged to stop
itself."* [**System of Economical Contradictions**, p. 204 and p. 190]
Significantly, Keynes praised Proudhon's follower Silvio Gesell for
getting part of the answer and for producing *"an anti-Marxian
socialism"* which the *"future will learn more from"* than Marx. [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 355]

So far our critique of the "free market" position has, like Keynes's,
been within the assumptions of that theory itself. More has to be said,
though, as its assumptions are deeply flawed and unrealistic. It should
be stressed that while Keynes's acceptance of much of the orthodoxy
ensured that at least some of his ideas become part of the mainstream,
Post-Keynesians like Joan Robinson would latter bemoan the fact that he
sought a compromise rather than clean break with the orthodoxy. This
lead to the rise of the post-war neo-classical synthesis, the so-called
"Keynesian" argument that unemployment was caused by wages being
"sticky" and the means by which the right could undermine social
Keynesianism and ensure a return to neo-classical orthodoxy.

Given the absurd assumptions underlying the "free market" argument, a
wider critique is possible as it reflects reality no more than any other
part of the pro-capitalist ideology which passes for mainstream
economics.

As noted above, the argument that unemployment is caused by wages being
too high is part of the wider marginalist perspective. Flaws in that
will mean that its explanation of unemployment is equally flawed. So it
must be stressed that the marginalist theory of distribution lies at the
core of its theories of both output and unemployment. In that theory,
the marginal product of labour is interpreted as the labour demand curve
as the firm's demand for labour is the marginal physical product of
labour multiplied by the price of the output and this produces the
viewpoint that unemployment is caused by wages being too high. So given
the central role which marginal productivity theory plays in the
mainstream argument, it is useful to start our deeper critique by
re-iterating that, as indicated in [section C.2](secC2.html), Joan
Robinson and Piero Sraffa had successfully debunked this theory in the
1950s. *"Yet for psychological and political reasons,"* notes James K.
Galbraith, *"rather than for logical and mathematical ones, the capital
critique has not penetrated mainstream economics. It likely never will.
Today only a handful of economists seem aware of it."* [*"The
distribution of income"*, pp. 32-41, Richard P. F. Holt and Steven
Pressman (eds.), **A New Guide to Post Keynesian Economics**, p. 34]
Given that this underlies the argument that high wages cause high
unemployment, it means that the mainstream argument for cutting wages
has no firm theoretical basis.

It should also be noted that the assumption that adding more labour to
capital is always possible flows from the assumption of marginal
productivity theory which treats "capital" like an ectoplasm and can be
moulded into whatever form is required by the labour available (see
[section C.2.5](secC2.html#secc25) for more discussion). Hence Joan
Robinson's dismissal of this assumption, for *"the difference between
the future and the past is eliminated by making capital 'malleable' so
that mistakes can always be undone and equilibrium is always guaranteed.
. . with 'malleable' capital the demand for labour depends on the level
of wages."* [**Contributions to Modern Economics**, p. 6] Moreover,
*"labour and capital are not often as smoothly substitutable for each
other as the [neo-classical] model requires . . . You can't use one
without the other. You can't measure the marginal productivity of one
without the other."* Demand for capital and labour is, sometimes, a
**joint** demand and so it is often to adjust wages to a worker's
marginal productivity independent of the cost of capital. [Hugh
Stretton, **Economics: A New Introduction**, p. 401]

Then there is the role of diminishing returns. The assumption that the
demand curve for labour is always downward sloping with respect to
aggregate employment is rooted in the notion that industry operates, at
least in the short run, under conditions of diminishing returns.
However, diminishing returns are **not** a feature of industries in the
real world. Thus the assumption that the downward slopping marginal
product of labour curve is identical to the aggregate demand curve for
labour is not true as it is inconsistent with empirical evidence. *"In a
system at increasing returns,"* noted one economist, *"the direct
relation between real wages and employment tends to render the ordinary
mechanism of wage adjustment ineffective and unstable."* [Ferdinando
Targetti, **Nicholas Kaldor**, p. 344] In fact, as discussed in [section
C.1.2](secC1.html#secc12), without this assumption mainstream economics
cannot show that unemployment is, in fact, caused by real wages being
too high (along with many other things).

Thus, if we accept reality, we must end up *"denying the inevitability
of a negative relationship between real wages and employment."*
Post-Keynesian economists have not found any empirical links between the
growth of unemployment since the early in 1970s and changes in the
relationship between productivity and wages and so there is *"no
theoretical reason to expect a negative relationship between employment
and the real wage, even at the level of the individual firm."* Even the
beloved marginal analysis cannot be used in the labour market, as
*"[m]ost jobs are offered on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. Workers have
little or no scope to vary hours of work, thereby making marginal
trade-offs between income and leisure. There is thus no worker
sovereignty corresponding to the (very controversial) notion of consumer
sovereignty."* Over all, *"if a relationship exists between aggregate
employment and the real wage, it is employment that determines wages.
Employment and unemployment are product market variables, not labour
market variables. Thus attempts to restore full employment by cutting
wages are fundamentally misguided."* [John E. King, *"Labor and
Unemployment,"* pp. 65-78, Holt and Pressman (eds.), **Op. Cit.**, p.
68, pp. 67-8, p. 72, p. 68 and p. 72] In addition:

> *"Neo-classical theorists themselves have conceded that a negative
> relationship between the real wage and the level of employment can be
> established only in a one-commodity model; in a multi-commodity
> framework no such generalisation is possible. This confines
> neo-classical theory to an economy without money and makes it
> inapplicable to a capitalist or entrepreneurial economy."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 71]

And, of course, the whole analysis is rooted in the notion of perfect
competition. As Nicholas Kaldor mildly put it:

> *"If economics had been a 'science' in the strict sense of the word,
> the empirical observation that most firms operate in imperfect markets
> would have forced economists to scrap their existing theories and to
> start thinking on entirely new lines . . . unfortunately economists do
> not feel under the same compulsion to maintain a close correspondence
> between theoretical hypotheses and the facts of experience."*
> [**Further Essays on Economic Theory ad Policy**, p. 19]

Any real economy is significantly different from the impossible notion
of perfect competition and *"if there exists even one monopoly anywhere
in the system . . . it follows that others must be averaging less than
the marginal value of their output. So to concede the existence of
monopoly requires that one either drop the competitive model entirely or
construct an elaborate new theory . . . that divides the world into
monopolistic, competitive, and subcompetitive ('exploited') sectors."*
[James K. Galbraith, **Created Unequal**, p. 52] As noted in [section
C.4.3](secC4.html#secc43), mainstream economists have admitted that
monopolistic competition (i.e., oligopoly) is the dominant market form
but they cannot model it due to the limitations of the individualistic
assumptions of bourgeois economics. Meanwhile, while thundering against
unions the mainstream economics profession remains strangely silent on
the impact of big business and pro-capitalist monopolies like patents
and copyrights on distribution and so the impact of real wages on
unemployment.

All this means that *"neither the demand for labour nor the supply of
labour depends on the real wage. It follows from this that the labour
market is not a true market, for the price associated with it, the wage
rate, is incapable of performing any market-clearing function, and thus
variations in the wage rate cannot eliminate unemployment."* [King,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 65] As such, the *"conventional economic analysis of
markets . . . is unlikely to apply"* to the labour market and as a
result *"wages are highly unlikely to reflect workers' contributions to
production."* This is because economists treat labour as no different
from other commodities yet *"economic theory supports no such
conclusion."* At its most basic, labour is **not** produced for profit
and the *"supply curve for labour can 'slope backward' -- so that a fall
in wages can cause an increase in the supply of workers."* In fact, the
idea of a backward sloping supply curve for labour is just as easy to
derive from the assumptions used by economists to derive their standard
one. This is because workers may prefer to work less as the wage rate
rises as they will be better off even if they do not work more.
Conversely, very low wage rates are likely to produce a very high supply
of labour as workers need to work more to meet their basic needs. In
addition, as noted at the end of [section C.1.4](secC1.html#secc14),
economic theory itself shows that workers will not get a fair wage when
they face very powerful employers unless they organise unions. [Steve
Keen, **Debunking Economics**, pp. 111-2 and pp. 119-23]

Strong evidence that this model of the labour market can be found from
the history of capitalism. Continually we see capitalists turn to the
state to ensure low wages in order to ensure a steady supply of labour
(this was a key aim of state intervention during the rise of capitalism,
incidentally). For example, in central and southern Africa mining
companies tried to get locals to labour. They had little need for money,
so they worked a day or two then disappeared for the rest of the week.
To avoid simply introducing slavery, some colonial administrators
introduced and enforced a poll-tax. To earn enough to pay it, workers
had to work a full week. [Hugh Stretton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 403] Much the
same was imposed on British workers at the dawn of capitalism. As
Stephen Marglin points out, the *"indiscipline of the labouring classes,
or more bluntly, their laziness, was widely noted by eighteenth century
observers."* By laziness or indiscipline, these members of the ruling
class meant the situation where *"as wages rose, workers chose to work
less."* In economic terms, *"a backward bending labour supply curve is a
most natural phenomenon as long as the individual worker controls the
supply of labour."* However, *"the fact that higher wages led workers to
choose more leisure . . . was disastrous"* for the capitalists.
Unsurprisingly, the bosses did not meekly accept the workings of the
invisible hand. Their *"first recourse was to the law"* and they
*"utilised the legislative, police and judicial powers of the state"* to
ensure that working class people had to supply as many hours as the
bosses demanded. [*"What do Bosses do?"*, pp. 60-112, **Review of
Radical Political Economy**, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 91-4]

This means that the market supply curve *"could have any shape at all"*
and so economic theory *"fails to prove that employment is determined by
supply and demand, and reinforces the real world observation that
involuntary unemployment can exist"* as reducing the wage need not bring
the demand and supply of labour into alignment. While the possibility of
backward-bending labour supply curves is sometimes pointed out in
textbooks, the assumption of an upward sloping supply curve is taken as
the normal situation but *"there is no theoretical -- or empirical --
justification for this."* Sadly for the world, this assumption is used
to draw very strong conclusions by economists. The standard arguments
against minimum wage legislation, trade unions and demand management by
government are all based on it. Yet, as Keen notes, such important
policy positions *"should be based upon robust intellectual or empirical
foundations, rather than the flimsy substrate of mere fancy. Economists
are quite prone to dismiss alternative perspectives on labour market
policy on this very basis -- that they lack any theoretical or empirical
foundations. Yet their own policy positions are based as much on wishful
thinking as on wisdom."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 121-2 and p. 123]

Within a capitalist economy the opposite assumption to that taken by
economics is far more likely, namely that there **is** a backward
sloping labour supply curve. This is because the decision to work is
**not** one based on the choice between wages and leisure made by the
individual worker. Most workers do **not** choose whether they work or
not, and the hours spent working, by comparing their (given) preferences
and the level of real wages. They do **not** practice voluntary leisure
waiting for the real wage to exceed their so-called *"reservation"* wage
(i.e. the wage which will tempt them to forsake a life of leisure for
the disutility of work). Rather, most workers have to take a job because
they do not have a choice as the alternative is poverty (at best) or
starvation and homelessness (at worse). The real wage influences the
decision on how much labour to supply rather than the decision to work
or not. This is because as workers and their families have a certain
basic living standard to maintain and essential bills which need to be
paid. As earnings increase, basic costs are covered and so people are
more able to work less and so the supply of labour tends to fall.
Conversely, if real earnings fall because the real wage is less then the
supply of labour may **increase** as people work more hours and/or more
family members start working to make enough to cover the bills (this is
because, once in work, most people are obliged to accept the hours set
by their bosses). This is the opposite of what happens in "normal"
markets, where lower prices are meant to produce a **decrease** in the
amount of the commodity supplied. In other words, the labour market is
not a market, i.e. it reacts in different ways than other markets
(Stretton provides a good summary of this argument [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
403-4 and p. 491]).

So, as radical economists have correctly observe, such considerations
undercut the "free market" capitalist contention that labour unions and
state intervention are responsible for unemployment (or that depressions
will easily or naturally end by the workings of the market). To the
contrary, insofar as labour unions and various welfare provisions
prevent demand from falling as low as it might otherwise go during a
slump, they apply a brake to the downward spiral. Far from being
responsible for unemployment, they actually mitigate it. For example,
unions, by putting purchasing power in the hands of workers, stimulates
demand and keeps employment higher than the level it would have been.
Moreover, wages are generally spent immediately and completely whilst
profits are not. A shift from profits to wages may stimulate the economy
since more money is spent but there will be a delayed cut in consumption
out of profits. [Malcolm Sawyer, **The Economics of Michal Kalecki**, p.
118] All this should be obvious, as wages (and benefits) may be costs
for some firms but they are revenue for even more and labour is not like
other commodities and reacts in changes in price in different ways.

Given the dynamics of the labour "market" (if such a term makes much
sense given its atypical nature), any policies based on applying
"economics 101" to it will be doomed to failure. As such, any book
entitled **Economics in One Lesson** must be viewed with suspicion
unless it admits that what it expounds has little or no bearing to
reality and urges the reader to take at least the second lesson. Of
course, a few people actually do accept the simplistic arguments that
reside in such basic economics texts and think that they explain the
world (these people usually become right-"libertarians" and spend the
rest of their lives ignoring their own experience and reality in favour
of a few simple axioms). The wage-cutting argument (like most of
economics) asserts that any problems are due to people not listening to
economists and that there is no economic power, there are no "special
interests" -- it is just that people are stupid. Of course, it is
irrelevant that it is much easier to demand that workers' real wages be
reduced when you are sitting in a tenured post in academia. True to
their ideals and "science", it is refreshing to see how many of these
"free market" economists renounce tenure so that their wages can adjust
automatically as the market demand for their ideologically charged
comments changes.

So when economic theories extol suffering for future benefits, it is
always worth asking who suffers, and who benefits. Needless to say, the
labour market flexibility agenda is anti-union, anti-minimum wage, and
anti-worker protection. This agenda emerges from theoretical claims that
price flexibility can restore full employment, and it rests dubious
logic, absurd assumptions and on a false analogy comparing the labour
market with the market for peanuts. Which, ironically, is appropriate as
the logic of the model is that workers will end up working for peanuts!
As such, the "labour market" model has a certain utility as it removes
the problem of institutions and, above all, power from the perspective
of the economist. In fact, institutions such as unions can only be
considered as a problem in this model rather than a natural response to
the unique nature of the labour "market" which, despite the obvious
differences, most economists treat like any other.

To conclude, a cut in wages may deepen any slump, making it deeper and
longer than it otherwise would be. Rather than being the solution to
unemployment, cutting wages will make it worse (we will address the
question of whether wages being too high actually causes unemployment in
the first place, in the [next section](secC9.html#secc92)). Given that,
as we argued in [section C.8.2](secC8.html#secc82), inflation is caused
by insufficient profits for capitalists (they try to maintain their
profit margins by price increases) this spiralling effect of cutting
wages helps to explain what economists term *"stagflation"* -- rising
unemployment combined with rising inflation (as seen in the 1970s). As
workers are made unemployed, aggregate demand falls, cutting profit
margins even more and in response capitalists raise prices in an attempt
to recoup their losses. Only a very deep recession can break this cycle
(along with labour militancy and more than a few workers and their
families).

Thus the capitalist solution to crisis is based on working class people
paying for capitalism's contradictions. For, according to the mainstream
theory, when the production capacity of a good exceeds any reasonable
demand for it, the workers must be laid off and/or have their wages cut
to make the company profitable again. Meanwhile the company executives
-- the people responsible for the bad decisions to build lots of
factories -- continue to collect their fat salaries, bonuses and
pensions, and get to stay on to help manage the company through its
problems. For, after all, who better, to return a company to
profitability than those who in their wisdom ran it into bankruptcy?
Strange, though, no matter how high their salaries and bonuses get,
managers and executives **never** price **themselves** out of work.

All this means that working class people have two options in a slump --
accept a deeper depression in order to start the boom-bust cycle again
or get rid of capitalism and with it the contradictory nature of
capitalist production which produces the business cycle in the first
place (not to mention other blights such as hierarchy and inequality).
In the end, the only solution to unemployment is to get rid of the
system which created it by workers seizing their means of production and
abolishing the state. When this happens, then production for the profit
of the few will be ended and so, too, the contradictions this generates.

C.9.2 Is unemployment caused by wages being too high?
-----------------------------------------------------

As we noted in the [last section](secC9.html#secc91), most capitalist
economic theories argue that unemployment is caused by wages being too
high. Any economics student will tell you that labour is like any other
commodity and so if its price is too high then there will be less demand
for it, so producing an excess supply of it on the market. Thus high
wages will reduce the quantity of labour demanded and so create
unemployment -- a simple case of "supply and demand."

From this theory we would expect that areas and periods with high wages
will also have high levels of unemployment. Unfortunately for the
theory, this does not seem to be the case. Even worse for it, high wages
are generally associated with booms rather than slumps and this has been
known to mainstream economics since at least 1939 when in March of that
year **The Economic Journal** printed an article by Keynes about the
movement of real wages during a boom in which he evaluated the empirical
analysis of two labour economists (entitled *"Relative Movements of Real
Wages and Output"* this is contained as an Appendix of most modern
editions of **The General Theory**).

These studies showed that *"when money wages are rising, real wages have
usually risen too; whilst, when money wages are falling, real wages are
no more likely to rise than to fall."* Keynes admitted that in **The
General Theory** he was *"accepting, without taking care to check the
facts"*, a *"widely held"* belief. He discussed where this belief came
from, namely leading 19th century British economist Alfred Marshall who
had produced a *"generalisation"* from a six year period between 1880-86
which was not true for the subsequent business cycles of 1886 to 1914.
He also quotes another leading economist, Arthur Pigou, from 1927 on how
*"the upper halves of trade cycles have, on the whole, been associated
with higher rates of real wages than the lower halves"* and indicates
that he provided evidence on this from 1850 to 1910 (although this did
not stop Pigou reverting to the *"Marshallian tradition"* during the
Great Depression and blaming high unemployment on high wages). [**The
General Theory**, p. 394, p. 398 and p. 399] Keynes conceded the point,
arguing that he had tried to minimise differences between his analysis
and the standard perspective. He stressed that while he assumed
countercyclical real wages his argument did not depend on it and given
the empirical evidence provided by labour economists he accepted that
real wages were pro-cyclical in nature.

The reason why this is the case is obvious given the analysis in the
[last section](secC9.html#secc91). Labour does not control prices and so
cannot control its own real wage. Looking at the Great Depression, it
seems difficult to blame it on workers refusing to take pay cuts when by
1933 *"wages and salaries in U.S. manufacturing were less than half
their 1929 levels and, in automobiles and steel, were under 40 percent
of the 1929 levels."* In Detroit, there had been 475,000 auto-workers.
By 1931 *"almost half has been laid off."* [William Lazonick,
**Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**, p. 271] The notion of all
powerful unions or workers' resistance to wage cuts causing high
unemployment hardly fits these facts. Peter Temin provides information
on real wages in manufacturing during the depression years. Using 1929
as the base year, weekly average real wages (i.e., earnings divided by
the consumer price index) fell each year to reach a low of 85.5% by
1932. Hourly real wages remained approximately constant (rising to
100.1% in 1930 and then 102.6% in 1931 before falling to 99% in 1932).
The larger fall in weekly wages was due to workers having a shorter
working week. The *"effect of shorter hours and lower wages was to
decrease the income of employed workers."* Thus the notion that lowering
wages will increase employment seems as hard to support as the notion
that wages being too high caused the depression in the first place.
Temin argues, *"no part of the [neo-]classical story is accurate."*
[**Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression?**, pp. 139-40] It
should be noted that the consensus of economists is that during this
period the evidence seems to suggest that real wages **did** rise
overall. This was because the prices of commodities fell faster than did
the wages paid to workers. Which confirms Keynes, as he had argued that
workers cannot price themselves into work as they have no control over
prices. However, there is no reason to think that high real wages caused
the high unemployment as the slump itself forced producers to cut prices
(not to mention wages). Rather, the slump caused the increase in real
wages.

Since then, economists have generally confirmed that real wage are
procyclical. In fact, *"a great deal of empirical research has been
conducted in this area -- research which mostly contradicts the
neo-classical assumption of an inverse relation between real wages and
employment."* [Ferdinando Targetti, **Nicholas Kaldor**, p. 50] Nicholas
Kaldor, one of the first Keynesians, also stressed that the notion that
there is an inverse relationship between real wages and employment is
*"contradicted by numerous empirical studies which show that, in the
short period, changes in real wages are positively correlated with
changes in employment and not negatively."* [**Further Essays on
Economic Theory and Policy**, p. 114fn] As Hugh Stretton summarises in
his excellent introductory text on economics:

> "In defiance of market theory, the demand for labour tends strongly to
> vary **with** its price, not inversely to it. Wages are high when
> there is full employment. Wages -- especially for the least-skilled
> and lowest paid -- are lowest when there is least employment. The
> causes chiefly run from the employment to the wages, rather than the
> other way. Unemployment weakens the bargaining power, worsens the job
> security and working conditions, and lowers the pay of those still in
> jobs.
> "The lower wages do not induce employers to create more jobs . . .
> most business firms have no reason to take on more hands if wages
> decline. Only empty warehouses, or the prospect of more sales can get
> them to do that, and these conditions rarely coincide with falling
> employment and wages. The causes tend to work the other way:
> unemployment lowers wages, and the lower wages do not restore the lost
> employment." [**Economics: A New Introduction**, pp. 401-2]

Will Hutton, the British neo-Keynesian economist, summarises research by
two other economists that suggests high wages do not cause unemployment:

> "the British economists David Blanchflower and Andrew Oswald
> [examined] . . . the data in twelve countries about the actual
> relation between wages and unemployment -- and what they have
> discovered is another major challenge to the free market account of
> the labour market. Free market theory would predict that low wages
> would be correlated with low local unemployment; and high wages with
> high local unemployment.
> "Blanchflower and Oswald have found precisely the opposite
> relationship. The higher the wages, the lower the local unemployment
> -- and the lower the wages, the higher the local unemployment. As they
> say, this is not a conclusion that can be squared with free market
> text-book theories of how a competitive labour market should work."
> [**The State We're In**, p. 102]

Unemployment was highest where real wages were lowest and nowhere had
falling wages being followed by rising employment or falling
unemployment. Blanchflower and Oswald stated that their conclusion is
that employees *"who work in areas of high unemployment earn less, other
things constant, than those who are surrounded by low unemployment."*
[**The Wage Curve**, p. 360] This relationship, the exact opposite of
that predicted by "free market" capitalist economics, was found in many
different countries and time periods, with the curve being similar for
different countries. Thus, the evidence suggests that high unemployment
is associated with low earnings, not high, and vice versa.

Looking at less extensive evidence, if minimum wages and unions cause
unemployment, why did the South-eastern states of the USA (with a
**lower** minimum wage and weaker unions) have a **higher** unemployment
rate than North-western states during the 1960s and 1970s? Or why, when
the (relative) minimum wage declined under Reagan and Bush in the 1980s,
did chronic unemployment accompany it? [Allan Engler, **The Apostles of
Greed**, p. 107] Or the **Low Pay Network** report *"Priced Into
Poverty"* which discovered that in the 18 months before they were
abolished, the British Wages Councils (which set minimum wages for
various industries) saw a rise of 18,200 in full-time equivalent jobs
compared to a net loss of 39,300 full-time equivalent jobs in the 18
months afterwards. Given that nearly half the vacancies in former Wages
Council sectors paid less than the rate which it is estimated Wages
Councils would now pay, and nearly 15% paid less than the rate at
abolition, there should (by the "free market" argument) have been rises
in employment in these sectors as pay fell. The opposite happened. This
research shows that the falls in pay associated with Wages Council
abolition had not created more employment. Indeed, employment growth was
more buoyant prior to abolition than subsequently. So whilst Wages
Council abolition did not result in more employment, the erosion of pay
rates caused by their abolition resulted in more families having to
endure poverty pay. Significantly, the introduction of a national
minimum wage by the first New Labour government did not have the dire
impact "free market" capitalist economists and politicians predicted.

It should also be noted that an extensive analysis of the impact of
minimum wage increases at the state level in America by economists David
Card and Alan Kreuger found the facts contradicted the standard theory,
with rises in the minimum wage having a small positive impact on both
employment and wages for all workers. [**Myth and Measurement: The New
Economics of the Minimum Wage**] While their work was attacked by
business leaders and economists from think-tanks funded by them, Card
and Kreuger's findings that raising the lowest wages had no effect on
unemployment or decreased it proved to be robust. In particular, when
replying to criticism of their work by other economists who based their
work, in part, on data supplied by a business funded think-tank Card and
Krueger discovered that not only was that work consistent with their
original findings but that the *"only data set that indicates a
significant decline in employment"* was by some amazing coincidence
*"the small set of restaurants collected by"* the think tank. [*"Minimum
Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food Industry in New
Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply"*, pp. 1397-1420, **The American Economic
Review**, Vol. 90, No. 5, p. 1419] For a good overview of *"how the fast
food industry and its conservative allies sought to discredit two
distinguished economists, and how the attack backfired"* when *"the two
experts used by the fast food industry to impeach Card and Krueger,
effectively ratified them"* see John Schmitt's *"Behind the Numbers:
Cooked to Order."* [**The American Prospect**, May-June 1996, pp. 82-85]

(This does not mean that anarchists support the imposition of a legal
minimum wage. Most anarchists do not because it takes the responsibility
for wages from unions and other working class organisations, where it
belongs, and places it in the hands of the state. We mention these
examples in order to highlight that the "free market" capitalist
argument has serious flaws with it.)

Empirical evidence does not support the argument the "free market"
capitalist argument that unemployment is caused by real wages being too
high. The phenomenon that real wages tend to increase during the upward
swing of the business cycle (as unemployment falls) and fall during
recessions (when unemployment increases) renders the standard
interpretation that real wages govern employment difficult to maintain
(real wages are *"pro-cyclical,"* to use economic terminology). This
evidence makes it harder for economists to justify policies based on a
direct attack on real wages as the means to cure unemployment.

While this evidence may come as a shock to those who subscribe to the
arguments put forward by those who think capitalist economics reflect
the reality of that system, it fits well with the anarchist and other
socialist analysis. For anarchists, unemployment is a means of
disciplining labour and maintaining a suitable rate of profit (i.e.
unemployment is a key means of ensuring that workers are exploited). As
full employment is approached, labour's power increases, so reducing the
rate of exploitation and so increasing labour's share of the value it
produces (and so higher wages). Thus, from an anarchist point of view,
the fact that wages are higher in areas of low unemployment is not a
surprise, nor is the phenomenon of pro-cyclical real wages. After all,
as we noted in [section C.3](secC3.html), the ratio between wages and
profits are, to a large degree, a product of bargaining power and so we
would expect real wages to grow in the upswing of the business cycle,
fall in the slump and be high in areas of low unemployment.

The evidence therefore suggests that the "free market" capitalist claim
that unemployment is caused by unions, "too high" wages, and so on, is
false. Indeed, by stopping capitalists appropriating more of the income
created by workers, high wages maintain aggregate demand and contribute
to higher employment (although, of course, high employment cannot be
maintained indefinitely under wage slavery due to the rise in workers'
power this implies). Rather, unemployment is a key aspect of the
capitalist system and cannot be got rid off within it. The "free market"
capitalist "blame the workers" approach fails to understand the nature
and dynamic of the system (given its ideological role, this is
unsurprising). So high real wages for workers increases aggregate demand
and reduces unemployment from the level it would be if the wage rate was
cut. This is supported by most of the research into wage dynamics during
the business cycle and by the *"wage curve"* of numerous countries. This
suggests that the demand for labour is independent of the real wages and
so the price of labour (wages) is incapable of performing any market
clearing function. The supply and demand for labour are determined by
two different sets of factors. The relationship between wages and
unemployment flows from the latter to the former rather than the
reverse: the wage is influenced by the level of unemployment. Thus wages
are not the product of a labour market which does not really exist but
rather is the product of *"institutions, customs, privilege, social
relations, history, law, and above all power, with an admixture of
ingenuity and luck. But of course power, and particularly market or
monopoly power, changes with the general of demand, the rate of growth,
and the rate of unemployment. In periods of high employment, the weak
gain on the strong; in periods of high unemployment, the strong gain on
the weak."* [Galbraith, **Created Unequal**, p. 266]

This should be obvious enough. It is difficult for workers to resist
wage cuts and speeds-up when faced with the fear of mass unemployment.
As such, higher rates of unemployment *"reduce labour's bargaining power
vis-a-vis business, and this helps explain why wages have declined and
workers have not received their share of productivity growth"* (between
1970 and 1993, only the top 20% of the US population increased its share
of national income). [Thomas I. Palley, **Plenty of Nothing**, p. 55 and
p. 58] Strangely, though, this obvious fact seems lost on most
economists. In fact, if you took their arguments seriously then you
would have to conclude that depressions and recessions are the periods
during which working class people do the best! This is on two levels.
First, in neo-classical economics work is considered a disutility and
workers decide not to work at the market-clearing real wage because they
prefer leisure to working. Leisure is assumed to be intrinsically good
and the wage the means by which workers are encouraged to sacrifice it.
Thus high unemployment must be a good thing as it gives many more people
leisure time. Second, for those in work their real wages are higher than
before, so their income has risen. Alfred Marshall, for example, argued
that in depressions money wages fell but not as fast as prices. A
*"powerful friction"* stopped this, which *"establish[ed] a higher
standard of living among the working classes"* and a *"diminish[ing of]
the inequalities of wealth."* When asked whether during a period of
depression the employed working classes got more than they did before,
he replied *"[m]ore than they did before, on the average."* [quoted by
Keynes, **Op. Cit.**, p. 396]

Thus, apparently, working class people do worse in booms than in slumps
and, moreover, they can resist wage cuts more in the face of mass
unemployment than in periods approaching full employment. That the
theory which produced these conclusions could be taken remotely
seriously shows the dangers of deducing an economic ideology from a few
simple axioms rather than trusting in empirical evidence and common
sense derived from experience. Nor should it come as too great a
surprise, as "free market" capitalist economics tends to ignore (or
dismiss) the importance of economic power and the social context within
which individuals make their choices. As Bob Black acidly put it with
regards to the 1980s, it *"wasn't the **workers** who took these gains
[of increased productivity], not in higher wages, not in safer working
conditions, and not in shorter hours -- hours of work have **increased**
. . . It must be, then, that in the 80s and after workers have 'chosen'
lower wages, longer hours **and** greater danger on the job. Yeah,
sure."* [*"Smokestack Lightning,"* pp. 43-62, **Friendly Fire**, p. 61]

In the real world, workers have little choice but to accept a job as
they have no independent means to exist in a pure capitalist system and
so no wages means no money for buying such trivialities as food and
shelter. The decision to take a job is, for most workers, a non-decision
-- paid work is undertaken out of economic necessity and so we are not
in a position to refuse work because real wages are too low to be worth
the effort (the welfare state reduces this pressure, which is why the
right and bosses are trying to destroy it). With high unemployment, pay
and conditions will worsen while hours and intensity of labour will
increase as the fear of the sack will result in increased job insecurity
and so workers will be more willing to placate their bosses by obeying
and not complaining. Needless to say, empirical evidence shows that
*"when unemployment is high, inequality rises. And when unemployment is
low, inequality tends to fall."* [James K. Galbraith, **Op. Cit.**, p.
148] This is unsurprising as the *"wage curve"* suggests that it is
unemployment which drives wage levels, not the other way round. This is
important as higher unemployment would therefore create higher
inequality as workers are in no position to claim back productivity
increases and so wealth would flood upwards.

Then there is the issue of the backward-bending supply curve of labour
we discussed at the end of the [last section](secC9.html#secc91). As the
"labour market" is not really a market, cutting real wages will have the
opposite effect on the supply of labour than its supporters claim. It is
commonly found that as real wages fall, hours at work become longer and
the number of workers in a family increases. This is because the labour
supply curve is negatively slopped as families need to work more (i.e.,
provide more labour) to make ends meet. This means that a fall in real
wages may **increase** the supply of labour as workers are forced to
work longer hours or take second jobs simply to survive. The net effect
of increasing supply would be to **decrease** real wages even more and
so, potentially, start a vicious circle and make the recession deeper.
Looking at the US, we find evidence that supports this analysis. As the
wages for the bottom 80% of the population fell in real terms under
Reagan and Bush in the 1980s, the number of people with multiple jobs
increased as did the number of mothers who entered the labour market. In
fact, *"the only reason that family income was maintained is the massive
increase in labour force participation of married women . . . Put
simply, jobs paying family wages have been disappearing, and sustaining
a family now requires that both adults work . . . The result has been a
squeeze on the amount of time that people have for themselves . . .
there is a loss of life quality associated with the decline in time for
family . . . they have also been forced to work longer . . . Americans
are working longer just to maintain their current position, and the
quality of family life is likely declining. A time squeeze has therefore
accompanied the wage squeeze."* [Palley, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 63-4] That
is, the supply of labour **increased** as its price fell (Reagan's turn
to military Keynesianism and incomplete nature of the "reforms" ensured
that a deep spiral was avoided).

To understand why this is the case, it is necessary to think about how
the impact of eliminating the minimum wage and trade unions would
actually have. First, of course, there would be a drop in the wages of
the poorest workers as the assertion is that the minimum wage increases
unemployment by forcing wages up. The assertion is that the bosses would
then employ more workers as a result. However, this assumes that extra
workers could easily be added to the existing capital stock which may
not be the case. Assuming this is the case (and it **is** a big
assumption), what happens to the workers who have had their pay cut?
Obviously, they still need to pay their bills which means they either
cut back on consumption and/or seek more work (assuming that prices have
not fallen, as this would leave the real wage unchanged). If the former
happens, then firms may find that they face reduced demand for their
products and, consequently, have no need for the extra employees
predicted by the theory. If the latter happens, then the ranks of those
seeking work will increase as people look for extra jobs or people
outside the labour market (like mothers and children) are forced into
the job market. As the supply of workers increase, wages **must** drop
according to the logic of the "free market" position. This does not mean
that a recovery is impossible, just that in the short and medium terms
cutting wages will make a recession worse and be unlikely to **reduce**
unemployment for some time.

This suggests that a "free market" capitalism, marked by a fully
competitive labour market, no welfare programmes nor unemployment
benefits, and extensive business power to break unions and strikes would
see aggregate demand constantly rise and fall, in line with the business
cycle, and unemployment and inequality would follow suit. Moreover,
unemployment would be higher over most of the business cycle (and
particularly at the bottom of the slump) than under a capitalism with
social programmes, militant unions and legal rights to organise because
the real wage would not be able to stay at levels that could support
aggregate demand nor could the unemployed use their benefits to
stimulate the production of consumer goods. This suggests that a fully
competitive labour market, as in the 19th century, would increase the
instability of the system -- an analysis which was confirmed in during
the 1980s (*"the relationship between measured inequality and economic
stability . . . was weak but if anything it suggests that the more
egalitarian countries showed a more stable pattern of growth after
1979."* [Dan Corry and Andrew Glyn, *"The Macroeconomics of equality,
stability and growth"*, **Paying for Inequality**, Andrew Glyn and David
Miliband (eds.) pp. 212-213]).

So, in summary, the available evidence suggests that **high** wages are
associated with **low** levels of unemployment. While this should be the
expected result from any realistic analysis of the economic power which
marks capitalist economies, it does not provide much support for claims
that only by cutting real wages can unemployment be reduced. The "free
market" capitalist position and one based on reality have radically
different conclusions as well as political implications. Ultimately,
most laissez-faire economic analysis is unpersuasive both in terms of
the facts and their logic. While economics may be marked by axiomatic
reasoning which renders everything the markets does as optimal, the
problem is precisely that it is pure axiomatic reasoning with little or
no regard for the real world. Moreover, by some strange coincidence,
they usually involve policy implications which generally make the rich
richer by weakening the working class. Unsurprisingly, decades of
empirical evidence have not shifted the faith of those who think that
the simple axioms of economics take precedence over the real world nor
has this faith lost its utility to the economically powerful.

C.9.3 Are "flexible" labour markets the answer to unemployment?
---------------------------------------------------------------

The usual "free market" capitalist (or neo-liberal) argument is that
labour markets must become more "flexible" to solve the problem of
unemployment. This is done by weakening unions, reducing (or abolishing)
the welfare state, and so on. In defence of these policies, their
proponents point to the low unemployment rates of the USA and UK and
contrast them to the claimed economic woes of Europe (particularly
France and Germany). As we will indicate in this section, this stance
has more to do a touching faith that deregulating the labour market
brings the economy as a whole closer to the ideal of "perfect
competition" than a balanced analysis and assessment of the available
evidence. Moreover, it is always important to remember, as tenured
economists (talking of protective labour market institutions!) seem to
forget, that deregulation can and does have high economic (and not to
mention individual and social) costs too.

The underlying argument for flexible labour markets is the notion that
unemployment is cased by wages being too high and due to market
imperfections wages are sticky downwards. While both claims, as we have
seen above, are dubious both factually and logically this has not
stopped this position becoming the reigning orthodoxy in elite circles.
By market imperfections it is meant trade unions, laws which protect
labour, unemployment benefit and other forms of social welfare provision
(and definitely **not** big business, patent and copyright laws, or any
other pro-business state interventions). All these ensure that wages for
those employed are inflexible downwards and the living standards of
those unemployed are too high to induce them to seek work. This means
that orthodox economics is based on (to use John Kenneth Galbraith's
justly famous quip) the assumption that the rich do not work because
they are paid too little, while the poor do not work because they are
paid too much.

We should first point out that attacks on social welfare have a long
pedigree and have been conducted with much the same rationale -- it made
people lazy and gave them flexibility when seeking work. For example,
the British **Poor Law Report** of the 1830s *"built its case against
relief on the damage done by poor relief to personal morality and labour
discipline (much the same thing in the eyes of the commissioners)."*
[David McNally, **Against the Market**, p. 101] The report itself stated
that *"the greatest evil"* of the system was *"the spirit of laziness
and insubordination that it creates."* [quoted by McNally, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 101]

While the rhetoric used to justify attacks on welfare has changed
somewhat since then, the logic and rationale have not. They have as
their root the need to eliminate anything which provided working class
people any means for independence from the labour market. It has always
aimed to ensure that the fear of the sack remains a powerful tool in the
bosses arsenal and to ensure that their authority is not undermined.
Ironically, therefore, its underlying aims are to **decrease** the
options available to working class people, i.e. to reduce **our**
flexibility within the labour market by limiting our options to finding
a job fast or face dire poverty (or worse).

Secondly, there is a unspoken paradox to this whole process. If we look
at the stated, public, rationale behind "flexibility" we find a strange
fact. While the labour market is to be made more "flexible" and in line
with ideal of "perfect competition", on the capitalist side no attempt
is being made to bring **it** into line with that model. Let us not
forget that perfect competition (the theoretical condition in which all
resources, including labour, will be efficiently utilised) states that
there must be a large number of buyers and sellers. This is the case on
the sellers side of the "flexible" labour market, but this is **not**
the case on the buyers (where, as indicated in [section
C.4](secC4.html), oligopoly reigns). Most who favour labour market
"flexibility" are also those most against the breaking up of big
business and oligopolistic markets or are against attempts to stop
mergers between dominant companies in and across markets. Yet the model
requires **both** sides to be made up of numerous small firms without
market influence or power. So why expect making one side more "flexible"
will have a positive effect on the whole?

There is no logical reason for this to be the case and as we noted in
[section C.1.4](secC1.html#secc14), neo-classical economics agrees -- in
an economy with both unions and big business, removing the former while
retaining the latter will **not** bring it closer to the ideal of
perfect competition. With the resulting shift in power on the labour
market things will get worse as income is distributed from labour to
capital. Which is, we must stress, precisely what **has** happened since
the 1980s and the much lauded "reforms" of the labour market. It is a
bit like expecting peace to occur between two warring factions by
disarming one side and arguing that because the number of guns have been
halved peacefulness has doubled! Of course, the only "peace" that would
result would be the peace of the graveyard or a conquered people --
subservience can pass for peace, if you do not look too close. In the
end, calls for the "flexibility" of labour indicate the truism that,
under capitalism, labour exists to meet the requirements of capital (or
living labour exists to meet the needs of dead labour, a truly insane
way to organise a society).

Then there is the key question of comparing reality with the rhetoric.
As economist Andrew Glyn points out, the neo-liberal orthodoxy on this
issue *"has been strenuously promoted despite weak evidence for the
magnitude of its benefits and in almost total neglect of its costs."* In
fact, *"there is no evidence that the countries which carried out more
reforms secured significant falls in unemployment."* This is perhaps
unsurprising as *"there is plenty of support for such deregulation from
business even without strong evidence that unemployment would be
reduced."* As far as welfare goes, the relationship between unemployment
and benefits is, if anything, in the 'wrong' direction (higher benefits
do along with lower unemployment). Of course there are a host of other
influences on unemployment but *"if benefits were very important we
might expect **some** degree of correlation in the 'right' (positive)
direction . . . such a lack of simple relation with unemployment applies
to other likely suspects such as employment protection and union
membership."* [**Capitalism Unleashed**, p. 48, p. 121, p. 48 and p. 47]

Nor is it mentioned that the history of labour market flexibility is
somewhat at odds with the theory. It is useful to remember that American
unemployment was far worse than Europe's during the 1950s, 60s and 70s.
In fact, it did not get better than the European average until the
second half of the 1980s. [David R. Howell, *"Introduction"*, pp. 3-34,
**Fighting Unemployment**, David R. Howell (ed.), pp. 10-11] To
summarise:

> *"it appears to be only relatively recently that the maintained
> greater flexibility of US labour markets has apparently led to a
> superior performance in terms of lower unemployment, despite the fact
> this flexibility is no new phenomenon. Comparing, for example, the
> United States with the United Kingdom, in the 1960s the United States
> averaged 4.8 per cent, with the United Kingdom at 1.9 per cent; in the
> 1970s the United States rate rose to 6.1 per cent, with the United
> Kingdom rising to 4.3 per cent, and it was only in the 1980s that the
> ranking was reversed with the United States at 7.2 per cent and the
> United Kingdom at 10 per cent. . . Notice that this reversal of
> rankings in the 1980s took place despite all the best efforts of Mrs
> Thatcher to create labour market flexibility. . . [I]f labour market
> flexibility is important in explaining the level of unemployment. . .
> why does the level of unemployment remain so persistently high in a
> country, Britain, where active measures have been taken to create
> flexibility?"* [Keith Cowling and Roger Sugden, **Beyond Capitalism**,
> p. 9]

If we look at the fraction of the labour force without a job in America,
we find that in 1969 it was 3.4% (7.3% including the underemployed) and
**rose** to 6.1% in 1987 (16.8% including the underemployed). Using more
recent data, we find that, on average, the unemployment rate was 6.2% in
1990-97 compared to 5.0% in the period 1950-65. In other words, labour
market "flexibility" has not reduced unemployment levels, in fact
"flexible" labour markets have been associated with higher levels of
unemployment. Of course, we are comparing different time periods. A lot
changed between the 1960s and the 1990s and so comparing these periods
cannot be the whole answer. However, it does seem strange that the
period with stronger unions, higher minimum wages and more generous
welfare state should be associated with **lower** unemployment than the
subsequent "flexible" period. It is possible that the rise in
flexibility and the increase in unemployment may be unrelated. If we
look at different countries over the same time period we can see if
"flexibility" actually reduces unemployment. As one British economist
notes, this may not be the case:

> *"Open unemployment is, of course, lower in the US. But once we allow
> for all forms of non-employment [such as underemployment, jobless
> workers who are not officially registered as such and so on], there is
> little difference between Europe and the US: between 1988 and 1994, 11
> per cent of men aged 25-55 were not in work in France, compared with
> 13 per cent in the UK, 14 per cent in the US and 15 per cent in
> Germany."* [Richard Layard, quoted by John Gray, **False Dawn**, p.
> 113]

Also when evaluating the unemployment records of a country, other
factors than the "official" rate given by the government must taken into
account. Firstly, different governments have different definitions of
what counts as unemployment. As an example, the USA has a more
restrictive definition of who is unemployed than Germany. For example,
in 2005 Germany's unemployment rate was officially 11.2%. However, using
the US definition it was only around 9% (7% in what was formerly West
Germany). The offical figure was higher as it included people, such as
those involuntarily working part-time, as being unemployed who are
counted as being employed in the USA. America, in the same year, had an
unemployment rate of around 5%. So comparing unadjusted unemployment
figures will give a radically different picture of the problem than
using standardised ones. Sadly far too often business reporting in
newspapers fail to do this.

In addition, all estimates of America's unemployment record must take
into account its incarceration rates. The prison population is not
counted as part of the labour force and so is excluded when calculating
unemployment figures. This is particularly significant as those in
prison are disproportionately from demographic groups with very high
unemployment rates and so it is likely that a substantial portion of
these people would be unemployed if they were not in jail. If America
and the UK did not have the huge surge in prison population since the
1980s neo-liberal reforms, the unemployment rate in both countries would
be significantly higher. In the late 1990s, for example, more than a
million extra people would be seeking work if the US penal policies
resembled those of any other Western nation. [John Gray, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 113] England and Wales, unsurprisingly, tops the prison league table
for Western Europe. In 2005, 145 per 100,000 of their population was
incarcerated. In comparison, France had a rate of 88 while Germany had
one of 97. This would, obviously, reduce the numbers of those seeking
work on the labour market and, consequently, reduce the unemployment
statistics.

While the UK is praised for its "flexible" labour market in the 2000s,
many forget the price which was paid to achieve it and even more fail to
realise that the figures hide a somewhat different reality. It is
therefore essential to remember Britain's actual economic performance
during Thatcher's rule rather than the "economically correct" narrative
we have inherited from the media and economic "experts." When Thatcher
came to office in 1979 she did so promising to end the mass unemployment
experienced under Labour (which had doubled between 1974 and 1979).
Unemployment then tripled in her first term, rising to over 3 million in
1982 (for the first time since the 1930s, representing 1 in 8 people).
This was due in large part to the application of Monetarist dogma making
the recession far worse than it had to be. Unemployment remained at
record levels throughout the 1980s, only dropping to below its 1979
level in 1997 when New Labour took office. It gets worse. Faced with
unemployment rising to well over 10%, Thatcher's regime did what any
respectable government would -- it cooked the books. It changed how
unemployment was recorded in order to artificially lower the official
unemployment records. It also should be stressed that the UK
unemployment figures do not take into account the Thatcherite policy of
shunting as many people as possible off the unemployment roles and onto
sickness and incapacity benefits during the 1980s and 1990s (*"In some
countries, like the UK and the Netherlands, many [of the unemployed]
found their way onto sickness benefit . . . Across the UK, for example,
there was a strong positive correlation between numbers on sickness
benefits and the local unemployment rate."* [Glyn, **Op. Cit.**, p.
107]). Once these "hidden" people are included the unemployment figures
of Britain are similar to those countries, such as France and Germany,
who are more honest in recording who is and is not unemployed.

Eighteen years of high unemployment and a massive explosion in those on
incapacity benefits is hardly an advert for the benefits of "flexible"
labour market. However, a very deep recession, double-figure
unemployment for most of the decade, defeats for key strikes and unions
plus continued high unemployment for nearly two decades had an impact on
the labour movement. It made people willing to put up with anything in
order to remain in work. Hence Thatcher's "economic miracle" -- the
working class finally knew its place in the social hierarchy.

Thus, if a politician is elected who is hailed by the right as a "new
Thatcher", i.e., seeking to "reform" the economy (which is "economically
correct" speak for using the state to break working class militancy)
then there are some preconditions required before they force their
populations down the road to (private) serfdom. They will have to triple
unemployment in under three years and have such record levels last over
a decade, provoke the deepest recession since the 1930s, oversee the
destruction of the manufacturing sector and use the powers of the state
to break the mass protests and strikes their policies will provoke.
Whether they are successful depends on the willingness of working class
people to stand up for their liberties and rights and so impose, from
the streets, the changes that really needed -- changes that politicians
will not, indeed cannot, achieve.

Nor should it be forgotten that here are many European countries with
around the same, or lower, official unemployment rates as the UK with
much less "flexible" labour markets. Taking the period 1983 to 1995, we
find that around 30 per cent of the population of OECD Europe lived in
countries with average unemployment rates lower than the USA and around
70 per cent in countries with lower unemployment than Canada (whose
wages are only slightly less flexible than the USA). Furthermore, the
European countries with the lowest unemployment rates were not noted for
their labour market flexibility (Austria 3.7%, Norway 4.1%, Portugal
6.4%, Sweden 3.9% and Switzerland 1.7%). Britain, which probably had the
most flexible labour market had an average unemployment rate higher than
half of Europe. And the unemployment rate of Germany is heavily
influenced by areas which were formally in East Germany. Looking at the
former West German regions only, unemployment between 1983 and 1995 was
6.3%, compared to 6.6% in the USA (and 9.8% in the UK). This did not
change subsequently. There are many regulated European countries with
lower unemployment than the USA (in 2002, 10 of 18 European countries
had lower unemployment rates). Thus:

> *"Often overlooked in the 1990s in the rush to embrace market
> fundamentalism and to applaud the American model was the fact that
> several European countries with strong welfare states consistently
> reported unemployment rates well below that of the United States . . .
> At the same time, other European welfare sates, characterised by some
> of the lowest levels of wage inequality and the highest levels of
> social protection in the developed world, experienced substantial
> declines in unemployment over the 1990s, reaching levels that are now
> below that of the United States."* [David R. Howell, *"Conclusion"*,
> pp. 310-43, **Op. Cit.**, p. 310]

As such, it is important to remember that *"the empirical basis"* of the
neo-liberal OECD-IMF orthodoxy is *"limited."* [Howell, **Op. Cit.**, p.
337] In fact, the whole "Europe is in a state of decline" narrative
which is used to justify the imposition of neo-liberal reforms there is
better understood as the corporate media's clever ploy to push Europe
into the hands of the self-destructing neo-liberalism that is slowly
taking its toll on Britain and America rather than a serious analysis of
the real situation there.

Take, for example, the issue of high youth unemployment in many European
countries which reached international awareness during the French
anti-CPE protests in 2006. In fact, the percentage of prime-age workers
(25-54) in employment is pretty similar in "regulated" France, Germany
and Sweden as in "flexible" America and Britain (it is much higher for
women in Sweden). However, there are significant differences in youth
employment rates and this suggests where the apparent unemployment
problem lies in Europe. This problem is due to the statistical method
used to determine the unemployment figures. The standard measure of
unemployment divides the number unemployed by the numbers unemployed
plus employed. The flaw in this should be obvious. For example, assume
that 90% of French youths are in education and of the remaining 10%, 5%
are in work and 5% are unemployed. This last 10% are the "labour force"
and so we would get a massive 50% unemployment rate but this is due to
the low (5%) employment rate. Looking at the youth population as a
whole, only 5% are actually unemployed. [David R. Howell,
*"Introduction"*, pp. 3-34, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 13-14] By the standard
measure, French males age 15-24 had an unemployment rate of 20.8% in
2007, as compared to 11.8% in America. Yet this difference is mainly
because, in France (as in the rest of Europe), there are many more young
males not in the labour force (more are in school and fewer work part
time while studying). As those who are not in the labour market are not
counted in the standard measure, this gives an inflated value for youth
unemployment. A far better comparison would be to compare the number of
unemployed divided by the population of those in the same age group.
This results in the USA having a rate of 8.3% and France 8.6%.

Another source of the "decline" of Europe is usually linked to lower GDP
growth over the past few years compared to countries like Britain and
the USA. Yet this perspective fails to take into account internal income
distribution. Both the USA and UK are marked by large (and increasing)
inequality and that GDP growth is just as unequally distributed. In
America, for example, most of GDP growth since the 1980s has been
captured by the top 5% of the population while median wages have been
(at best) flat. Ignoring the enrichment of the elite in the USA and UK
would mean that GDP growth would be, at least for the bulk of the
population, better in Europe. This means that while Europe may have
grown more slowly, it benefits more than just the ruling class. Then
there are such factors as poverty and social mobility. Rates of poverty
are much worse in the neo-liberal countries, while social mobility has
fallen in the US and UK since the 1980s. There are less poor people in
Europe and they stay in poverty for shorter periods of time compared to
America and Britain.

Moreover, comparing Europe's income or GDP per person to the U.S. fails
to take into account the fact that Europeans work far less than
Americans or British people. So while France may have lagged America in
per capita income in 2007 (\$30,693 to \$43,144), it cannot be said that
working class people are automatically worse off as French workers have
a significantly shorter working week and substantially more holidays.
Less hours at work and longer holidays may impact negatively on GDP but
only an idiot would say that this means the economy is worse, never mind
the quality of life. Economists, it should be remembered, cannot say
that one person is worse off than another if she has less income due to
working fewer hours. So GDP per capita may be higher in the US, but only
because American workers work more hours and **not** because they are
more productive. Like other Europeans, the French have decided to work
less and enjoy it more. So it is important to remember that GDP is not
synonymous with well-being and that inequality can produce misleading
per capita income comparisons.

A far better indicator of economic welfare is productivity. It is
understandable that this is not used as a measure when comparing America
to Europe as it is as high, or higher, in France and other Western
European countries as it is in the US (and much higher than in the UK
where low wages and long hours boost the figure). And it should be
remembered that rising productivity in the US has not been reflecting in
rising wages since 1980. The gains of productivity, in other words, have
been accumulated by the boss class and not by the hard working American
people (whose working week has steadily increased during that period).
Moreover, France created more private sector jobs (+10% between 1996 and
2002, according to the OECD) than the UK (+6%) or the US (+5%).
Ironically, given the praise it receives for being a neo-liberal model,
the UK economy barely created any net employment in the private sector
between 2002 and 2007 (unemployment **had** dropped, but that was due to
increased state spending which led to a large rise in public sector
jobs).

Then there is the fact that some European countries **have** listened to
the neo-liberal orthodoxy and reformed their markets but to little
success. So it should be noted that *"there has in fact already been a
very considerable liberalisation and reform in Europe,"* both in product
and labour markets. In fact, during the 1990s Germany and Italy reformed
their labour markets *"roughly ten times"* as much as the USA. The
*"point is that reforms should have boosted productivity growth in
Europe,"* but they did not. If regulation *"was the fundamental problem,
some positive impact on labour productivity growth should have come
already from the very substantial deregulation already undertaken.
Deregulation should have contributed to an acceleration in productivity
growth in Europe whereas actually productivity growth declines. It is
hard to see how regulation, which was declining, could be the source of
Europe's slowdown."* [Glyn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 144]

So, perhaps, "flexibility" is not the solution to unemployment some
claim it is (after all, the lack of a welfare state in the 19th century
did not stop mass unemployment nor long depressions occurring). Indeed,
a strong case can be made (and has been by left-wing economists) that
the higher open unemployment in Europe has a lot less to do with "rigid"
structures and "pampered" citizens than it does with the fiscal and
monetary austerity produced by the excessively tight monetary policies
of the European Central Bank plus the requirements of the Maastricht
Treaty and the *"Growth and Stability pact"* which aims to reduce demand
expansion (i.e. wage rises) under the name of price stability (i.e., the
usual mantra of fighting inflation by lowering wage increases). So,
*"[i]n the face of tight monetary policy imposed first by the [German]
Bundesbank and then by the European Central Bank . . . it has been
essential to keep wages moderate and budget deficits limited. With
domestic demand severely constrained, many European countries
experiences particularly poor employment growth in the mid-1990s."*
[David R. Howell, *"Conclusion"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 337] This has been
essentially imposed by the EU bureaucrats onto the European population
and as these policies, like the EU itself, has the support of most of
Europe's ruling class such an explanation is off the political agenda.

So if "flexibility" does not result in lower unemployment, just what is
it good for? The net results of American labour market "flexibility"
were summarised by head the US Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan in 1997.
He was discussing the late 1990s boom (which was, in fact, the product
of the dot.com bubble rather than the dawn of a new era so many claimed
at the time). He explained why unemployment managed to fall below the
standard NAIRU rate without inflation increasing. In his words:

> *"Increases in hourly compensation . . . have continued to fall far
> short of what they would have been had historical relationships
> between compensation gains and the degree of labour market tightness
> held . . . As I see it, heightened job insecurity explains a
> significant part of the restraint on compensation and the consequent
> muted price inflation . . . The continued reluctance of workers to
> leave their jobs to seek other employment as the labour market has
> tightened provides further evidence of such concern, as does the
> tendency toward longer labour union contracts . . . The low level of
> work stoppages of recent years also attests to concern about job
> security . . . The continued decline in the share of the private
> workforce in labour unions has likely made wages more responsive to
> market forces . . . Owing in part to the subdued behaviour of wages,
> profits and rates of return on capital have risen to high levels."*
> [quoted by Jim Stanford, *"Testing the Flexibility Paradigm: Canadian
> Labor Market Performance in International Context,"* pp. 119-155,
> **Fighting Unemployment**, David R. Howell (ed.), pp. 139-40]

Under such circumstances, it is obvious why unemployment could drop and
inflation remain steady. Yet there is a massive contradiction in
Greenspan's account. As well as showing how keen the Federal Reserve
investigates the state of the class struggle, ready to intervene when
the workers may be winning, it also suggests that flexibility works just
one way:

> *"Some of the features highlighted by Greenspan reflect precisely a
> **lack** of flexibility in the labour market: a lack of response of
> compensation to tight labour markets, a reluctance of workers to leave
> their jobs, and the prevalence of long-term contracts that lock
> employment arrangements for six or more years at a time. And so
> Greenspan's portrayal of the unique features of the US model suggests
> that something more than flexibility is the key ingredient at work --
> or at least that 'flexibility' is being interpreted once again from an
> unbalanced and one-sided perspective. It is, rather, a high degree of
> labour market **discipline** that seems to be the operative force. US
> workers remain insecure despite a relatively low unemployment rate,
> and hence compensation gains . . . were muted. This implies a
> consequent redistribution of income from labour to capital . . .
> Greenspan's story is more about **fear** than it is about flexibility
> -- and hence this famous testimony has come to be known as Greenspan's
> 'fear factor' hypothesis, in which he concisely described the
> importance of labour market discipline for his conduct of monetary
> policy."* [Jim Stanford, **Op. Cit.**, p. 140]

So while this attack on the wages, working conditions and social welfare
is conducted under the pre-Keynesian notion of wages being *"sticky"*
downwards, the underlying desire is to impose a "flexibility" which
ensures that wages are *"sticky"* **upwards.** This suggests a certain
one-sidedness to the "flexibility" of modern labour markets: employers
enjoy the ability to practice flexpoilation but the flexibility of
workers to resist is reduced.

Rather than lack of "flexibility," the key factor in explaining high
unemployment in Europe is the anti-inflationary policies of its central
banks, which pursue high interest rates in order to "control" inflation
(i.e. wages). In contrast, America has more flexibility simply due to
the state of the working class there. With labour so effectively crushed
in America, with so many workers feeling they cannot change things or
buying into the individualistic premises of capitalism thanks to
constant propaganda by business funded think-tanks, the US central bank
can rely on job insecurity and ideology to keep workers in their place
in spite of relatively lower official unemployment. Meanwhile, as the
rich get richer many working class people spend their time making ends
meet and blaming everyone and everything but their ruling class for
their situation (*"US families must work even more hours to achieve the
standard of living their predecessors achieved 30 years ago."* [David R.
Howell, *"Conclusion"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 338]).

All this is unsurprising for anarchists as we recognise that
"flexibility" just means weakening the bargaining power of labour in
order to increase the power and profits of the rich (hence the
expression ***"flexploitation"***!). Increased "flexibility" has been
associated with **higher,** not lower unemployment. This, again, is
unsurprising, as a "flexible" labour market basically means one in which
workers are glad to have any job and face increased insecurity at work
(actually, ***"insecurity"*** would be a more honest word to use to
describe the ideal of a competitive labour market rather than
*"flexibility"* but such honesty would let the cat out of the bag). In
such an environment, workers' power is reduced meaning that capital gets
a larger share of the national income than labour and workers are less
inclined to stand up for their rights. This contributes to a fall in
aggregate demand, so increasing unemployment. In addition, we should
note that "flexibility" may have little effect on unemployment (although
not on profits) as a reduction of labour's bargaining power may result
in **more** rather than less unemployment. This is because firms can
fire "excess" workers at will, increase the hours of those who remain
and stagnating or falling wages reduces aggregate demand. Thus the
paradox of increased "flexibility" resulting in higher unemployment is
only a paradox in the neo-classical framework. From an anarchist
perspective, it is just the way the system works as is the paradox of
overwork and unemployment occurring at the same time.

So while "free market" economics protrays unions as a form of market
failure, an interference with the natural workings of the market system
and recommend that the state should eliminate them or ensure that they
are basically powerless to act, this simply does not reflect the real
world. Any real economy is marked by the economic power of big business
(in itself, according to neo-classical economics, a distortion of the
market). Unless workers organise then they are in a weak position and
will be even more exploited by their economic masters. Left-wing
economist Thomas I. Palley presents the correct analysis of working
class organisation when he wrote:

> "The reality is that unions are a correction of market failure, namely
> the massive imbalance of power that exists between individual workers
> and corporate capital. The importance of labour market bargaining
> power for the distribution of income, means that unions are a
> fundamental prop for widespread prosperity. Weakening unions does not
> create a 'natural' market: it just creates a market in which business
> has the power to dominate labour.
> "The notion of perfect natural markets is built on the assumption that
> market participants have no power. In reality, the process of labour
> exchange is characterised not only by the presence of power, but also
> by gross inequality of power. An individual worker is at a great
> disadvantage in dealing with large corporations that have access to
> massive pools of capital and can organise in a fashion that renders
> every individual dispensible . . . Unions help rectify the imbalance
> of power in labour markets, and they therefore correct market failure
> rather than causing it." {**Op. Cit.**, pp. 36-7]

The welfare state also increases the bargaining power of workers against
their firms and limits the ability of firms to replace striking workers
with scabs. Given this, it is understandable why bosses hate unions and
any state aid which undermines their economic power. Thus the
*"hallmark"* of the neo-liberal age *"is an economic environment that
pits citizen against citizen for the benefit of those who own and
manage"* a country. [**Op. Cit**, p. 203]

And we must add that whenever governments have attempted to make the
labour market *"fully competitive"* it has either been the product of
dictatorship (e.g. Chile under Pinochet) or occurred at the same time as
increased centralisation of state power and increased powers for the
police and employers (e.g. Britain under Thatcher, Reagan in the USA).
This is the agenda which is proscribed for Western Europe. In 2006, when
successful street protests stopped a proposed labour market reform in
France (the CPE), one American journalist, Elaine Sciolino, complained
that *"the government seems to fear its people; the people seem to fear
change."* [**New York Times**, March 17 2006] Such are the
contradictions of neo-liberalism. While proclaiming the need to reduce
state intervention, it requires increased state power to impose its
agenda. It needs to make people fear their government and fear for their
jobs. Once that has been achieved, then people who accept "change" (i.e.
the decisions of their economic, social and political bosses) without
question. That the French people do not want a British or American style
labour market, full of low-wage toilers who serve at the boss's pleasure
should not come as a surprise. Nor should the notion that elected
officials in a supposed democracy are meant to reflect the feelings of
the sovereign people be considered as unusual or irrational.

The anti-democratic nature of capitalist "flexiblity" applies across the
world. Latin American Presidents trying to introduce neo-liberalism into
their countries have had to follow suit and *"ride roughshod over
democratic institutions, using the tradition Latin American technique of
governing by decree in order to bypass congressional opposition. . .
Civil rights have also taken a battering. In Bolivia, the government
attempted to defuse union opposition . . . by declaring a state of siege
and imprisoning 143 strike leaders. . . In Colombia, the government used
anti-terrorist legislation in 1993 to try 15 trade union leaders
opposing the privatisation of the state telecommunications company. In
the most extreme example, Peru's Alberto Fujimori dealt with a
troublesome Congress by simply dissolving it . . . and seizing emergency
powers."* [Duncan Green, **The Silent Revolution**, p. 157]

This is unsurprising. People, when left alone, will create communities,
organise together to collectively pursue their own happiness, protect
their communities and environment. In other words, they will form
groups, associations and unions to control and influence the decisions
that affect them. In order to create a "fully competitive" labour
market, individuals must be atomised and unions, communities and
associations weakened, if not destroyed, in order to fully privatise
life. State power must be used to disempower the mass of the population,
restrict their liberty, control popular organisations and social protest
and so ensure that the free market can function without opposition to
the human suffering, misery and pain it would cause. People, to use
Rousseau's evil term, *"must be forced to be free."* And, unfortunately
for neo-liberalism, the countries that tried to reform their labour
market still suffered from high unemployment, plus increased social
inequality and poverty and where still subject to the booms and slumps
of the business cycle.

Of course, bosses and the elite are hardly going to present their desire
for higher profits and more power in those terms. Hence the need to
appear concerned about the fate of the unemployed. As such, it is
significant, of course, that right-wing economists only seem to become
concerned over unemployment when trade unions are organising or
politicians are thinking of introducing or raising the minimum wage.
Then they will talk about how these will raise unemployment and harm
workers, particularly those from ethnic minorities. Given that bosses
always oppose such policies, we must conclude that they are, in fact,
seeking a situation where there is full employment and finding willing
workers is hard to do. This seems, to say the least, an unlikely
situation. If bosses were convinced that, for example, raising the
minimum wage would increase unemployment rather than their wages bill
they would be supporting it wholeheartedly as it would allow them to
pressurise their workers into labouring longer and harder to remain in
employment. Suffice to say, bosses are in no hurry to see their pool of
wage slaves drained and so their opposition to trade unions and minimum
wages are the product of need for profits rather than some concern for
the unemployed.

This applies to family issues as well. In its support for "free markets"
you can get a taste of the schizophrenic nature of the conservative
right's approach to family values. On the one hand, they complain that
families do not spend enough time together as they are under financial
pressure and this results both parents going out to work and working
longer hours. Families will also suffer because businesses do not have
to offer paid maternity leave, paid time off, flexitime, paid holidays,
or other things that benefit them. However, the right cannot bring
themselves to advocate unions and strike action by workers (or state
intervention) to achieve this. Ironically, their support for "free
market" capitalism and "individualism" undermines their support for
"family values." Ultimately, that is because profits will always come
before parents.

All this is unsurprising as, ultimately, the only real solution to
unemployment and overwork is to end wage labour and the liberation of
humanity from the needs of capital. Anarchists argue that an economy
should exist to serve people rather than people existing to serve the
economy as under capitalism. This explains why capitalism has always
been marked by a focus on "what the economy wants" or "what is best for
the economy" as having a capitalist economy always results in profit
being placed over people. Thus we have the paradoxical situation, as
under neo-liberalism, where an economy is doing well while the bulk of
the population are not.

Finally, we must clarify the anarchist position on state welfare (we
support working class organisations, although we are critical of unions
with bureaucratic and top-down structures). As far as state welfare
goes, anarchists do not place it high on the list of things we are
struggling against (once the welfare state for the rich has been
abolished, then, perhaps, we will reconsider that). As we will discuss
in [section D.1.5](secD1.html#secd15), anarchists are well aware that
the current neo-liberal rhetoric of "minimising" the state is
self-serving and hides an attack on the living standards of working
class people. As such, we do not join in such attacks regardless of how
critical we may be of aspects of the welfare state for we seek genuine
reform from below by those who use it rather than "reform" from above by
politicians and bureaucrats in the interests of state and capital. We
also seek to promote alternative social institutions which, unlike the
welfare state, are under working class control and so cannot be cut by
decree from above. For further discussion, see sections
[J.5.15](secJ5.html#secj515) and [J.5.16](secJ5.html#secj516).

C.9.4 Is unemployment voluntary?
--------------------------------

Here we point out another aspect of the free market capitalist "blame
the workers" argument, of which the diatribes against unions and
workers' rights highlighted above is only a part. This is the assumption
that unemployment is not involuntary but is freely chosen by workers. As
Nicholas Kaldor put it, for "free market" economists involuntary
employment *"cannot exist because it is excluded by the assumptions."*
[**Further Essays on Applied Economics**, p. x] Many neo-classical
economists claim that unemployed workers calculate that their time is
better spent searching for more highly paid employment (or living on
welfare than working) and so desire to be jobless. That this argument is
taken seriously says a lot about the state of modern capitalist economic
theory, but as it is popular in many right-wing circles, we should
discuss it.

David Schweickart notes, these kinds of arguments ignore *"two
well-established facts: First, when unemployment rises, it is layoffs,
not [voluntary] quits, that are rising. Second, unemployed workers
normally accept their first job offer. Neither of these facts fits well
with the hypothesis that most unemployment is a free choice of
leisure."* [**Against Capitalism**, p. 108] When a company fires a
number of its workers, it can hardly be said that the sacked workers
have calculated that their time is better spent looking for a new job.
They have no option. Of course, there are numerous jobs advertised in
the media. Does this not prove that capitalism always provides jobs for
those who want them? Hardly, as the number of jobs advertised must have
some correspondence to the number of unemployed and the required skills
and those available. If 100 jobs are advertised in an areas reporting
1,000 unemployed, it can scarcely be claimed that capitalism tends to
full employment. This hardly gives much support to the right-wing claim
that unemployment is "voluntary" and gives an obvious answer to
right-wing economist Robert Lucas's quest *"to explain why people
allocate time to . . . unemployment, we need to know why they prefer it
to all other activities."* [quoted by Schweickart, **Op. Cit.**, p. 108]
A puzzle indeed! Perhaps this unworldly perspective explains why there
has been no real effort to verify the assertion that unemployment is
"voluntary leisure."

Somewhat ironically, given the desire for many on the right to deny the
possibility of involuntary unemployment this perspective became
increasingly influential at precisely the same time as the various
theories of the so-called "natural rate" of unemployment did (see
[section C.9](secC9.html)). Thus, at the same time as unemployment was
proclaimed as being a "voluntary" choice economics was also implicitly
arguing that this was nonsense, that unemployment **is** an essential
disciplinary tool within capitalism to keep workers in their place
(sorry, to fight inflation).

In addition, it is worthwhile to note that the right-wing assumption
that higher unemployment benefits and a healthy welfare state promote
unemployment is not supported by the evidence. As a moderate member of
the British Conservative Party notes, the *"OECD studied seventeen
industrial countries and found no connect between a country's
unemployment rate and the level of its social-security payments."*
[**Dancing with Dogma**, p. 118] Moreover, the economists David
Blanchflower and Andrew Oswald *"Wage Curve"* for many different
countries is approximately the same for each of the fifteen countries
they looked at. This also suggests that labour market unemployment is
independent of social-security conditions as their "wage curve" can be
considered as a measure of wage flexibility. Both of these facts suggest
that unemployment is involuntary in nature and cutting social-security
will **not** affect unemployment.

Another factor in considering the nature of unemployment is the effect
of decades of "reform" of the welfare state conducted in both the USA
and UK since 1980. During the 1960s the welfare state was far more
generous than it was in the 1990s and unemployment was lower. If
unemployment was "voluntary" and due to social-security being high, we
would expect a decrease in unemployment as welfare was cut (this was,
after all, the rationale for cutting it in the first place). In fact,
the reverse occurred, with unemployment rising as the welfare state was
cut. Lower social-security payments did not lead to lower unemployment,
quite the reverse in fact.

Faced with these facts, some may conclude that as unemployment is
independent of social security payments then the welfare state can be
cut. However, this is not the case as the size of the welfare state does
affect the poverty rates and how long people remain in poverty. In the
USA, the poverty rate was 11.7% in 1979 and rose to 13% in 1988, and
continued to rise to 15.1% in 1993. The net effect of cutting the
welfare state was to help **increase** poverty. Similarly, in the UK
during the same period, to quote the ex-Thatcherite John Gray, there
*"was the growth of an underclass. The percentage of British
(non-pensioner) households that are wholly workless -- that is, none of
whose members is active in the productive economy -- increased from 6.5
per cent in 1975 to 16.4 per cent in 1985 and 19.1 per cent in 1994. . .
Between 1992 and 1997 there was a 15 per cent increase in unemployed
lone parents. . . This dramatic growth of an underclass occurred as a
direct consequence of neo-liberal welfare reforms, particularly as they
affected housing."* [**False Dawn**, p. 30] This is the opposite of the
predictions of right-wing theories and rhetoric.

As Gray correctly argues, the *"message of the American [and other] New
Right has always been that poverty and the under class are products of
the disincentive effects of welfare, not the free market."* He goes on
to note that it *"has never squared with the experience of the countries
of continental Europe where levels of welfare provision are far more
comprehensive than those of the United States have long co-existed with
the absence of anything resembling an American-style underclass. It does
not touch at virtually any point the experience of other Anglo-Saxon
countries."* He points to the example of New Zealand where *"the
theories of the American New Right achieved a rare and curious feat --
self-refutation by their practical application. Contrary to the New
Right's claims, the abolition of nearly all universal social services
and the stratification of income groups for the purpose of targeting
welfare benefits selectively created a neo-liberal poverty trap."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 42]

So while the level of unemployment benefits and the welfare state may
have little impact on the level of unemployment (which is to be expected
if the nature of unemployment is essentially involuntary), it **does**
have an effect on the nature, length and persistency of poverty. Cutting
the welfare state increases poverty and the time spent in poverty (and
by cutting redistribution, it also increases inequality).

If we look at the relative size of a nation's social security transfers
as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product and its relative poverty rate
we find a correlation. Those nations with a high level of spending have
lower rates of poverty. In addition, there is a correlation between the
spending level and the number of persistent poor. Those nations with
high spending levels have more of their citizens escape poverty. For
example, Sweden has a single-year poverty rate of 3% and a poverty
escape rate of 45% and Germany has figures of 8% and 24% (and a
persistent poverty rate of 2%). In contrast, the USA has figures of 20%
and 15% (and a persistent poverty rate of 42%).

Given that a strong welfare state acts as a kind of floor under the wage
and working conditions of labour, it is easy to see why capitalists and
the supporters of "free market" capitalism seek to undermine it. By
undermining the welfare state, by making labour "flexible," profits and
power can be protected from working people standing up for their rights
and interests. Little wonder the claimed benefits of "flexibility" have
proved to be so elusive for the vast majority while inequality has
exploded. The welfare state, in other words, reduces the attempts of the
capitalist system to commodify labour and increases the options
available to working class people. While it did not reduce the need to
get a job, the welfare state did undermine dependence on any particular
employee and so increased workers' independence and power. It is no
coincidence that the attacks on unions and the welfare state was and is
framed in the rhetoric of protecting the *"right of management to
manage"* and of driving people back into wage slavery. In other words,
an attempt to increase the commodification of labour by making work so
insecure that workers will not stand up for their rights.

Unemployment has tremendous social costs, with the unemployed facing
financial insecurity and the possibility of indebtedness and poverty.
Many studies have found that unemployment results in family
distribution, ill health (both physical and mental), suicide, drug
addition, homelessness, malnutrition, racial tensions and a host of
other, negative, impacts. Given all this, given the dire impact of
joblessness, it strains belief that people would **choose** to put
themselves through it. The human costs of unemployment are well
documented. There is a stable correlation between rates of unemployment
and the rates of mental-hospital admissions. There is a connection
between unemployment and juvenile and young-adult crime. The effects on
an individual's self-respect and the wider implications for their
community and society are massive. As David Schweickart concludes the
*"costs of unemployment, whether measured in terms of the cold cash of
lost production and lost taxes or in the hotter units of alienation,
violence, and despair, are likely to be large under Laissez Faire."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 109]

Of course, it could be argued that the unemployed should look for work
and leave their families, home towns, and communities in order to find
it. However, this argument merely states that people should change their
whole lives as required by "market forces" (and the wishes -- *"animal
spirits,"* to use Keynes' term -- of those who own capital). In other
words, it just acknowledges that capitalism results in people losing
their ability to plan ahead and organise their lives (and that, in
addition, it can deprive them of their sense of identity, dignity and
self-respect as well), portraying this as somehow a requirement of life
(or even, in some cases, noble).

It seems that capitalism is logically committed to viciously
contravening the very values upon which it claims it be built, namely
the respect for the innate worth and separateness of individuals. This
is hardly surprising, as capitalism is based on reducing individuals to
the level of another commodity (called "labour"). To requote Karl
Polanyi:

> *"In human terms such a postulate [of a labour market] implied for the
> worker extreme instability of earnings, utter absence of professional
> standards, abject readiness to be shoved and pushed about
> indiscriminately, complete dependence on the whims of the market.
> [Ludwig Von] Mises justly argued that if workers 'did not act as trade
> unionists, but reduced their demands and changed their locations and
> occupations according to the labour market, they would eventually find
> work.' This sums up the position under a system based on the postulate
> of the commodity character of labour. It is not for the commodity to
> decide where it should be offered for sale, to what purpose it should
> be used, at what price it should be allowed to change hands, and in
> what manner it should be consumed or destroyed."* [**The Great
> Transformation**, p. 176]

However, people are **not** commodities but living, thinking, feeling
individuals. The "labour market" is more a social institution than an
economic one and people and work more than mere commodities. If we
reject the neo-liberals' assumptions for the nonsense they are, their
case fails. Capitalism, ultimately, cannot provide full employment
simply because labour is **not** a commodity (and as we discussed in
[section C.7](secC7.html), this revolt against commodification is a key
part of understanding the business cycle and so unemployment).
