C.6 Can market dominance by Big Business change?
================================================

Capital concentration, of course, does not mean that in a given market,
dominance will continue forever by the same firms, no matter what.
However, the fact that the companies that dominate a market can change
over time is no great cause for joy (no matter what supporters of free
market capitalism claim). This is because when market dominance changes
between companies all it means is that **old** Big Business is replaced
by **new** Big Business:

> *"Once oligopoly emerges in an industry, one should not assume that
> sustained competitive advantage will be maintained forever. . . once
> achieved in any given product market, oligopoly creates barriers to
> entry that can be overcome only by the development of even more
> powerful forms of business organisation that can plan and co-ordinate
> even more complex specialised divisions of labour."* [William
> Lazonick, **Business Organisation and the Myth of the Market
> Economy**, p. 173]

The assumption that the "degree of monopoly" will rise over time is an
obvious one to make and, in general, the history of capitalism has
tended to support doing so. While periods of rising concentration will
be interspersed with periods of constant or falling levels, the general
trend will be upwards (we would expect the degree of monopoly to remain
the same or fall during booms and rise to new levels in slumps). Yet
even if the "degree of monopoly" falls or new competitors replace old
ones, it is hardly a great improvement as changing the company hardly
changes the impact of capital concentration or Big Business on the
economy. While the faces may change, the system itself remains the same.
As such, it makes little real difference if, for a time, a market is
dominated by 6 large firms rather than, say, 4. While the **relative**
level of barriers may fall, the **absolute** level may increase and so
restrict competition to established big business (either national or
foreign) and it is the absolute level which maintains the class monopoly
of capital over labour.

Nor should we expect the "degree of monopoly" to constantly increase,
there will be cycles of expansion and contraction in line with the age
of the market and the business cycle. It is obvious that at the start of
a specific market, there will be a relative high "degree of monopoly" as
a few pioneering create a new industry. Then the level of concentration
will fall as competitors entry the market. Over time, the numbers of
firms will drop due to failure and mergers. This process is accelerated
during booms and slumps. In the boom, more companies feel able to try
setting up or expanding in a specific market, so driving the "degree of
monopoly" down. However, in the slump the level of concentration will
rise as more and more firms go to the wall or try and merge to survive
(for example, there were 100 car producers in the USA in 1929, ten years
later there were only three). So our basic point is **not** dependent on
any specific tendency of the degree of monopoly. It can fall somewhat
as, say, five large firms come to dominate a market rather than, say,
three over a period of a few years. The fact remains that barriers to
competition remain strong and deny any claims that any real economy
reflects the "perfect competition" of the textbooks.

So even in a in a well-developed market, one with a high degree of
monopoly (i.e. high market concentration and capital costs that create
barriers to entry into it), there can be decreases as well as increases
in the level of concentration. However, how this happens is significant.
New companies can usually only enter under four conditions:

Usually some or all of these processes are at work at once and some can
have contradictory results. Take, for example, the rise of
"globalisation" and its impact on the "degree of monopoly" in a given
national market. On the national level, "degree of monopoly" may fall as
foreign companies invade a given market, particularly one where the
national producers are in decline (which has happened to a small degree
in UK manufacturing in the 1990s, for example). However, on the
international level the degree of concentration may well have risen as
only a few companies can actually compete on a global level. Similarly,
while the "degree of monopoly" within a specific national market may
fall, the balance of (economic) power within the economy may shift
towards capital and so place labour in a weaker position to advance its
claims (this has, undoubtedly, been the case with "globalisation" -- see
[section D.5.3](seD5.html#secd53)).

Let us consider the US steel industry as an example. The 1980s saw the
rise of the so-called "mini-mills" with lower capital costs. The
mini-mills, a new industry segment, developed only after the US steel
industry had gone into decline due to Japanese competition. The creation
of Nippon Steel, matching the size of US steel companies, was a key
factor in the rise of the Japanese steel industry, which invested
heavily in modern technology to increase steel output by 2,216% in 30
years (5.3 million tons in 1950 to 122.8 million by 1980). By the mid
1980s, the mini-mills and imports each had a quarter of the US market,
with many previously steel-based companies diversifying into new
markets.

Only by investing \$9 billion to increase technological competitiveness,
cutting workers wages to increase labour productivity, getting relief
from stringent pollution control laws and (very importantly) the US
government restricting imports to a quarter of the total home market
could the US steel industry survive. The fall in the value of the dollar
also helped by making imports more expensive. In addition, US steel
firms became increasingly linked with their Japanese "rivals," resulting
in increased centralisation (and so concentration) of capital.

Therefore, only because competition from foreign capital created space
in a previously dominated market, driving established capital out,
combined with state intervention to protect and aid home producers, was
a new segment of the industry able to get a foothold in the local
market. With many established companies closing down and moving to other
markets, and once the value of the dollar fell which forced import
prices up and state intervention reduced foreign competition, the
mini-mills were in an excellent position to increase US market share. It
should also be noted that this period in the US steel industry was
marked by increased "co-operation" between US and Japanese companies,
with larger companies the outcome. This meant, in the case of the
mini-mills, that the cycle of capital formation and concentration would
start again, with bigger companies driving out the smaller ones through
competition.

Nor should we assume that an oligopolistic markets mean the end of all
small businesses. Far from it. Not only do small firms continue to
exist, big business itself may generate same scale industry around it
(in the form of suppliers or as providers of services to its workers).
We are not arguing that small businesses do not exist, but rather than
their impact is limited compared to the giants of the business world. In
fact, within an oligopolistic market, existing small firms always
present a problem as some might try to grow beyond their established
niches. However, the dominant firms will often simply purchase the
smaller one firm, use its established relationships with customers or
suppliers to limit its activities or stand temporary losses and so cut
its prices below the cost of production until it runs competitors out of
business or establishes its price leadership, before raising prices
again.

As such, our basic point is **not** dependent on any specific tendency
of the degree of monopoly. It can fall somewhat as, say, six large firms
come to dominate a market rather than, say, four. The fact remains that
barriers to competition remain strong and deny any claims that any real
economy reflects the "perfect competition" of the textbooks. So, while
the actual companies involved may change over time, the economy as a
whole will always be marked by Big Business due to the nature of
capitalism. That's the way capitalism works -- profits for the few at
the expense of the many.
