C.1 What is wrong with economics?
=================================

In a nutshell, a lot. While economists like to portray their discipline
as "scientific" and "value free", the reality is very different. It is,
in fact, very far from a science and hardly "value free." Instead it is,
to a large degree, deeply ideological and its conclusions almost always
(by a strange co-incidence) what the wealthy, landlords, bosses and
managers of capital want to hear. The words of Kropotkin still ring true
today:

> *"Political Economy has always confined itself to stating facts
> occurring in society, and justifying them in the interest of the
> dominant class . . . Having found [something] profitable to
> capitalists, it has set it up as a **principle.**"* [**The Conquest of
> Bread**, p. 181]

This is at its best, of course. At its worse economics does not even
bother with the facts and simply makes the most appropriate assumptions
necessary to justify the particular beliefs of the economists and,
usually, the interests of the ruling class. This is the key problem with
economics: it is **not** a science. It is **not** independent of the
class nature of society, either in the theoretical models it builds or
in the questions it raises and tries to answer. This is due, in part, to
the pressures of the market, in part due to the assumptions and
methodology of the dominant forms of economics. It is a mishmash of
ideology and genuine science, with the former (unfortunately) being the
bulk of it.

The argument that economics, in the main, is not a science it not one
restricted to anarchists or other critics of capitalism. Some economists
are well aware of the limitations of their profession. For example,
Steve Keen lists many of the flaws of mainstream (neoclassical)
economics in his excellent book **Debunking Economics**, noting that
(for example) it is based on a *"dynamically irrelevant and factually
incorrect instantaneous static snap-shot"* of the real capitalist
economy. [**Debunking Economics**, p. 197] The late Joan Robinson argued
forcefully that the neoclassical economist *"sets up a 'model' on
arbitrarily constructed assumptions, and then applies 'results' from it
to current affairs, without even trying to pretend that the assumptions
conform to reality."* [**Collected Economic Papers**, vol. 4, p. 25]
More recently, economist Mark Blaug has summarised many of the problems
he sees with the current state of economics:

> "Economics has increasing become an intellectual games played for its
> own sake and not for its practical consequences. Economists have
> gradually converted the subject into a sort of social mathematics in
> which analytical rigor as understood in math departments is everything
> and empirical relevance (as understood in physics departments) is
> nothing . . . general equilibrium theory . . . using economic terms
> like 'prices', 'quantities', 'factors of production,' and so on, but
> that nevertheless is clearly and even scandalously unrepresentative of
> any recognisable economic system. . .
>
> "Perfect competition never did exist and never could exist because,
> even when firms are small, they do not just take the price but strive
> to make the price. All the current textbooks say as much, but then
> immediately go on to say that the 'cloud-cuckoo' fantasyland of
> perfect competition is the benchmark against which we may say
> something significant about real-world competition . . . But how can
> an idealised state of perfection be a benchmark when we are never told
> how to measure the gap between it and real-world competition? It is
> implied that all real-world competition is 'approximately' like
> perfect competition, but the degree of the approximation is never
> specified, even vaguely . . .
>
> "Think of the following typical assumptions: perfectly infallible,
> utterly omniscient, infinitely long-lived identical consumers; zero
> transaction costs; complete markets for all time-stated claims for all
> conceivable events, no trading of any kind at disequilibrium prices;
> infinitely rapid velocities of prices and quantities; no radical,
> incalculable uncertainty in real time but only probabilistically
> calculable risk in logical time; only linearly homogeneous production
> functions; no technical progress requiring embodied capital
> investment, and so on, and so on -- all these are not just unrealistic
> but also unrobust assumptions. And yet they figure critically in
> leading economic theories." [*"Disturbing Currents in Modern
> Economics",* **Challenge!**, Vol. 41, No. 3, May-June, 1998]

So neoclassical ideology is based upon special, virtually ad hoc,
assumptions. Many of the assumptions are impossible, such as the popular
assertion that individuals can accurately predict the future (as
required by "rational expectations" and general equilibrium theory),
that there are a infinite number of small firms in every market or that
time is an unimportant concept which can be abstracted from. Even when
we ignore those assumptions which are obviously nonsense, the remaining
ones are hardly much better. Here we have a collection of apparently
valid positions which, in fact, rarely have any basis in reality. As we
discuss in [section C.1.2](secC1.html#secc12), an essential one, without
which neoclassical economics simply disintegrates, has very little basis
in the real world (in fact, it was invented simply to ensure the theory
worked as desired). Similarly, markets often adjust in terms of
quantities rather than price, a fact overlooked in general equilibrium
theory. Some of the assumptions are mutually exclusive. For example, the
neo-classical theory of the supply curve is based on the assumption that
some factor of production cannot be changed in the short run. This is
essential to get the concept of diminishing marginal productivity which,
in turn, generates a rising marginal cost and so a rising supply curve.
This means that firms **within** an industry cannot change their capital
equipment. However, the theory of perfect competition requires that in
the short period there are no barriers to entry, i.e. that anyone
**outside** the industry can create capital equipment and move into the
market. These two positions are logically inconsistent.

In other words, although the symbols used in mainstream may have
economic sounding names, the theory has no point of contact with
empirical reality (or, at times, basic logic):

> *"Nothing in these abstract economic models actually **works** in the
> real world. It doesn't matter how many footnotes they put in, or how
> many ways they tinker around the edges. The whole enterprise is
> totally rotten at the core: it has no relation to reality."* [Noam
> Chomsky, **Understanding Power**, pp. 254-5]

As we will indicate, while its theoretical underpinnings are claimed to
be universal, they are specific to capitalism and, ironically, they fail
to even provide an accurate model of that system as it ignores most of
the real features of an actual capitalist economy. So if an economist
does not say that mainstream economics has no bearing to reality, you
can be sure that what he or she tells you will be more likely ideology
than anything else. "Economic reality" is not about facts; it's about
faith in capitalism. Even worse, it is about blind faith in what the
economic ideologues say about capitalism. The key to understanding
economists is that they believe that if it is in an economic textbook,
then it must be true -- particularly if it confirms any initial
prejudices. The opposite is usually the case.

The obvious fact that the real world is not like that described by
economic text books can have some funny results, particularly when
events in the real world contradict the textbooks. For most economists,
or those who consider themselves as such, the textbook is usually
preferred. As such, much of capitalist apologetics is faith-driven.
Reality has to be adjusted accordingly.

A classic example was the changing positions of pundits and "experts" on
the East Asian economic miracle. As these economies grew spectacularly
during the 1970s and 1980s, the experts universally applauded them as
examples of the power of free markets. In 1995, for example, the
right-wing Heritage Foundation's index of economic freedom had four
Asian countries in its top seven countries. The **Economist** explained
at the start of 1990s that Taiwan and South Korea had among the least
price-distorting regimes in the world. Both the Word Bank and IMF
agreed, downplaying the presence of industrial policy in the region.
This was unsurprising. After all, their ideology said that free markets
would produce high growth and stability and so, logically, the presence
of both in East Asia must be driven by the free market. This meant that,
for the true believers, these nations were paradigms of the free market,
reality not withstanding. The markets agreed, putting billions into
Asian equity markets while foreign banks loaned similar vast amounts.

In 1997, however, all this changed when all the Asian countries
previously qualified as "free" saw their economies collapse. Overnight
the same experts who had praised these economies as paradigms of the
free market found the cause of the problem -- extensive state
intervention. The free market paradise had become transformed into a
state regulated hell! Why? Because of ideology -- the free market is
stable and produces high growth and, consequently, it was impossible for
any economy facing crisis to be a free market one! Hence the need to
disown what was previously praised, without (of course) mentioning the
very obvious contradiction.

In reality, these economies had always been far from the free market.
The role of the state in these "free market" miracles was extensive and
well documented. So while East Asia *"had not only grown faster and done
better at reducing poverty than any other region of the world . . . it
had also been more stable,"* these countries *"had been successful not
only in spite of the fact that they had not followed most of the
dictates of the Washington Consensus [i.e. neo-liberalism], but
**because** they had not."* The government had played *"important roles
. . . far from the minimalist [ones] beloved"* of neo-liberalism. During
the 1990s, things had changed as the IMF had urged a *"excessively rapid
financial and capital market liberalisation"* for these countries as
sound economic policies. This *"was probably the single most important
cause of the [1997] crisis"* which saw these economies suffer meltdown,
*"the greatest economic crisis since the Great Depression"* (a meltdown
worsened by IMF aid and its underlying dogmas). Even worse for the
believers in market fundamentalism, those nations (like Malaysia) that
refused IMF suggestions and used state intervention has a *"shorter and
shallower"* downturn than those who did not. [Joseph Stiglitz,
**Globalisation and its Discontents**, p. 89, p. 90, p. 91 and p. 93]
Even worse, the obvious conclusion from these events is more than just
the ideological perspective of economists, it is that "the market" is
not all-knowing as investors (like the experts) failed to see the
statist policies so bemoaned by the ideologues of capitalism **after**
1997.

This is not to say that the models produced by neoclassical economists
are not wonders of mathematics or logic. Few people would deny that a
lot of very intelligent people have spent a lot of time producing some
quite impressive mathematical models in economics. It is a shame that
they are utterly irrelevant to reality. Ironically, for a theory claims
to be so concerned about allocating scarce resources efficiently,
economics has used a lot of time and energy refining the analyses of
economies which have not, do not, and will not ever exist. In other
words, scare resources have been inefficiently allocated to produce
waste.

Why? Perhaps because there is a demand for such nonsense? Some
economists are extremely keen to apply their methodology in all sorts of
areas outside the economy. No matter how inappropriate, they seek to
colonise every aspect of life. One area, however, seems immune to such
analysis. This is the market for economic theory. If, as economists
stress, every human activity can be analysed by economics then why not
the demand and supply of economics itself? Perhaps because if that was
done some uncomfortable truths would be discovered?

Basic supply and demand theory would indicate that those economic
theories which have utility to others would be provided by economists.
In a system with inequalities of wealth, effective demand is skewed in
favour of the wealthy. Given these basic assumptions, we would predict
that only these forms of economists which favour the requirements of the
wealthy would gain dominance as these meet the (effective) demand. By a
strange co-incidence, this is **precisely** what has happened. This did
and does not stop economists complaining that dissidents and radicals
were and are biased. As Edward Herman points out:

> *"Back in 1849, the British economist Nassau Senior chided those
> defending trade unions and minimum wage regulations for expounding an
> 'economics of the poor.' The idea that he and his establishment
> confreres were putting forth an 'economics of the rich' never occurred
> to him; he thought of himself as a scientist and spokesperson of true
> principles. This self-deception pervaded mainstream economics up to
> the time of the Keynesian Revolution of the 1930s. Keynesian
> economics, though quickly tamed into an instrument of service to the
> capitalist state, was disturbing in its stress on the inherent
> instability of capitalism, the tendency toward chronic unemployment,
> and the need for substantial government intervention to maintain
> viability. With the resurgent capitalism of the past 50 years,
> Keynesian ideas, and their implicit call for intervention, have been
> under incessant attack, and, in the intellectual counterrevolution led
> by the Chicago School, the traditional laissez-faire
> ('let-the-fur-fly') economics of the rich has been re-established as
> the core of mainstream economics."* [**The Economics of the Rich** ]

Herman goes on to ask *"[w]hy do the economists serve the rich?"* and
argues that *"[f]or one thing, the leading economists are among the
rich, and others seek advancement to similar heights. Chicago School
economist Gary Becker was on to something when he argued that economic
motives explain a lot of actions frequently attributed to other forces.
He of course never applied this idea to economics as a profession . .
."* There are a great many well paying think tanks, research posts,
consultancies and so on that create an *"'effective demand' that should
elicit an appropriate supply resource."*

Elsewhere, Herman notes the *"class links of these professionals to the
business community were strong and the ideological element was realised
in the neoclassical competitive model . . . Spin-off negative effects on
the lower classes were part of the 'price of progress.' It was the elite
orientation of these questions [asked by economics], premises, and the
central paradigm [of economic theory] that caused matters like
unemployment, mass poverty, and work hazards to escape the net of
mainstream economist interest until well into the twentieth century."*
Moreover, *"the economics profession in the years 1880-1930 was by and
large strongly conservative, reflecting in its core paradigm its class
links and sympathy with the dominant business community, fundamentally
anti-union and suspicious of government, and tending to view competition
as the true and durable state of nature."* [Edward S. Herman, *"The
Selling of Market Economics,"* pp. 173-199, **New Ways of Knowing**,
Marcus G. Raskin and Herbert J. Bernstein (eds.),p. 179-80 and p. 180]

Rather than scientific analysis, economics has always been driven by the
demands of the wealthy (*"How did [economics] get instituted? As a
weapon of class warfare."* [Chomsky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 252]). This works
on numerous levels. The most obvious is that most economists take the
current class system and wealth/income distribution as granted and
generate general *"laws"* of economics from a specific historical
society. As we discuss in the [next section](secC1.html#secc11), this
inevitably skews the "science" into ideology and apologetics. The
analysis is also (almost inevitably) based on individualistic
assumptions, ignoring or downplaying the key issues of groups,
organisations, class and the economic and social power they generate.
Then there are the assumptions used and questions raised. As Herman
argues, this has hardly been a neutral process:

> *"the theorists explicating these systems, such as Carl Menger, Leon
> Walras, and Alfred Marshall, were knowingly assuming away formulations
> that raised disturbing questions (income distribution, class and
> market power, instability, and unemployment) and creating theoretical
> models compatible with their own policy biases of status quo or modest
> reformism . . . Given the choice of 'problem,' ideology and other
> sources of bias may still enter economic analysis if the answer is
> predetermined by the structure of the theory or premises, or if the
> facts are selected or bent to prove the desired answer."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 176]

Needless to say, economics is a "science" with deep ramifications within
society. As a result, it comes under pressure from outside influences
and vested interests far more than, say, anthropology or physics. This
has meant that the wealthy have always taken a keen interest that the
"science" teaches the appropriate lessons. This has resulted in a demand
for a "science" which reflects the interests of the few, not the many.
Is it **really** just a co-incidence that the lessons of economics are
just what the bosses and the wealthy would like to hear? As
non-neoclassical economist John Kenneth Galbraith noted in 1972:

> *"Economic instruction in the United States is about a hundred years
> old. In its first half century economists were subject to censorship
> by outsiders. Businessmen and their political and ideological acolytes
> kept watch on departments of economics and reacted promptly to heresy,
> the latter being anything that seemed to threaten the sanctity of
> property, profits, a proper tariff policy and a balanced budget, or
> that suggested sympathy for unions, public ownership, public
> regulation or, in any organised way, for the poor."* [**The Essential
> Galbraith**, p. 135]

It is **really** surprising that having the wealthy fund (and so
control) the development of a "science" has produced a body of theory
which so benefits their interests? Or that they would be keen to educate
the masses in the lessons of said "science", lessons which happen to
conclude that the best thing workers should do is obey the dictates of
the bosses, sorry, the market? It is really just a co-incidence that the
repeated use of economics is to spread the message that strikes, unions,
resistance and so forth are counter-productive and that the best thing
worker can do is simply wait patiently for wealth to trickle down?

This co-incidence has been a feature of the "science" from the start.
The French Second Empire in the 1850s and 60s saw *"numerous private
individuals and organisation, municipalities, and the central government
encouraged and founded institutions to instruct workers in economic
principles."* The aim was to *"impress upon [workers] the salutary
lessons of economics."* Significantly, the *"weightiest motive"* for so
doing *"was fear that the influence of socialist ideas upon the working
class threatened the social order."* The revolution of 1848 *"convinced
many of the upper classes that the must prove to workers that attacks
upon the economic order were both unjustified and futile."* Another
reason was the recognition of the right to strike in 1864 and so workers
*"had to be warned against abuse of the new weapon."* The instruction
*"was always with the aim of refuting socialist doctrines and exposing
popular misconceptions. As one economist stated, it was not the purpose
of a certain course to initiate workers into the complexities of
economic science, but to define principles useful for 'our conduct in
the social order.'"* The interest in such classes was related to the
level of *"worker discontent and agitation."* The impact was less than
desired: *"The future Communard Lefrancais referred mockingly to the
economists . . . and the 'banality' and 'platitudes' of the doctrine
they taught. A newspaper account of the reception given to the economist
Joseph Garnier states that Garnier was greeted with shouts of: 'He is an
economist' . . . It took courage, said the article, to admit that one
was an economist before a public meeting."* [David I. Kulstein,
*"Economics Instruction for Workers during the Second Empire,"* pp.
225-234, **French Historical Studies**, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 225, p. 226,
p. 227 and p. 233]

This process is still at work, with corporations and the wealthy funding
university departments and posts as well as their own *"think tanks"*
and paid PR economists. The control of funds for research and teaching
plays it part in keeping economics the *"economics of the rich."*
Analysing the situation in the 1970s, Herman notes that the *"enlarged
private demand for the services of economists by the business community
. . . met a warm supply response."* He stressed that *"if the demand in
the market is for specific policy conclusions and particular viewpoints
that will serve such conclusions, the market will accommodate this
demand."* Hence *"blatantly ideological models . . . are being spewed
forth on a large scale, approved and often funded by large vested
interests"* which helps *"shift the balance between ideology and science
even more firmly toward the former."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 184, p. 185 and
p. 179] The idea that "experts" funded and approved by the wealthy would
be objective scientists is hardly worth considering. Unfortunately, many
people fail to exercise sufficient scepticism about economists and the
economics they support. As with most experts, there are two obvious
questions with which any analysis of economics should begin: *"Who is
funding it?"* and *"Who benefits from it?"*

However, there are other factors as well, namely the hierarchical
organisation of the university system. The heads of economics
departments have the power to ensure the continuation of their
ideological position due to the position as hirer and promoter of staff.
As economics *"has mixed its ideology into the subject so well that the
ideologically unconventional usually appear to appointment committees to
be scientifically incompetent."* [Benjamin Ward, **What's Wrong with
Economics?**, p. 250] Galbraith termed this *"a new despotism,"* which
consisted of *"defining scientific excellence in economics not as what
is true but as whatever is closest to belief and method to the scholarly
tendency of the people who already have tenure in the subject. This is a
pervasive test, not the less oppress for being, in the frequent case,
both self-righteous and unconscious. It helps ensure, needless to say,
the perpetuation of the neoclassical orthodoxy."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 135]
This plays a key role in keeping economics an ideology rather than a
science:

> *"The power inherent in this system of quality control within the
> economics profession is obviously very great. The discipline's censors
> occupy leading posts in economics departments at the major
> institutions . . . Any economist with serious hopes of obtaining a
> tenured position in one of these departments will soon be made aware
> of the criteria by which he is to be judged . . . the entire academic
> program . . . consists of indoctrination in the ideas and techniques
> of the science."* [Ward, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 29-30]

All this has meant that the "science" of economics has hardly changed in
its basics in over one hundred years. Even notions which have been
debunked (and have been acknowledged as such) continue to be taught:

> "The so-called mainline teaching of economic theory has a curious
> self-sealing capacity. Every breach that is made in it by criticism is
> somehow filled up by admitting the point but refusing to draw any
> consequence from it, so that the old doctrines can be repeated as
> before. Thus the Keynesian revolution was absorbed into the doctrine
> that, 'in the long run,' there is a natural tendency for a market
> economy to achieve full employment of available labour and full
> utilisation of equipment; that the rate of accumulation is determined
> by household saving; and that the rate of interest is identical with
> the rate of profit on capital. Similarly, Piero Sraffa's demolition of
> the neoclassical production function in labour and 'capital' was
> admitted to be unanswerable, but it has not been allowed to affect the
> propagation of the 'marginal productivity' theory of wages and
> profits.
> "The most sophisticated practitioners of orthodoxy maintain that the
> whole structure is an exercise in pure logic which has no application
> to real life at all. All the same they give their pupils the
> impression that they are being provided with an instrument which is
> valuable, indeed necessary, for the analysis of actual problems."
> [Joan Robinson, **Op. Cit.**, vol. 5, p. 222]

The social role of economics explains this process, for *"orthodox
traditional economics . . . was a plan for explaining to the privileged
class that their position was morally right and was necessary for the
welfare of society. Even the poor were better off under the existing
system that they would be under any other . . . the doctrine [argued]
that increased wealth of the propertied class brings about an automatic
increase of income to the poor, so that, if the rich were made poorer,
the poor would necessarily become poorer too."* [Robinson, **Op. Cit.**,
vol. 4, p. 242]

In such a situation, debunked theories would continue to be taught
simply because what they say has a utility to certain sections of
society:

> *"Few issues provide better examples of the negative impact of
> economic theory on society than the distribution of income. Economists
> are forever opposing 'market interventions' which might raise the
> wages of the poor, while defending astronomical salary levels for top
> executives on the basis that if the market is willing to pay them so
> much, they must be worth it. In fact, the inequality which is so much
> a characteristic of modern society reflects power rather than justice.
> This is one of the many instances where unsound economic theory makes
> economists the champions of policies which, is anything, undermine the
> economic foundations of modern society."* [Keen, **Op. Cit.**, p. 126]

This argument is based on the notion that wages equal the marginal
productivity of labour. This is supposed to mean that as the output of
workers increase, their wages rise. However, as we note in [section
C.1.5](secC1.html#secc15), this law of economics has been violated for
the last thirty-odd years in the US. Has this resulted in a change in
the theory? Of course not. Not that the theory is actually correct. As
we discuss in [section C.2.5](secC2.html#secc25), marginal productivity
theory has been exposed as nonsense (and acknowledged as flawed by
leading neo-classical economists) since the early 1960s. However, its
utility in defending inequality is such that its continued use does not
really come as a surprise.

This is not to suggest that mainstream economics is monolithic. Far from
it. It is riddled with argument and competing policy recommendations.
Some theories rise to prominence, simply to disappear again (*"See, the
'science' happens to be a very flexible one: you can change it to do
whatever you feel like, it's that kind of 'science.'"* [Chomsky, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 253]). Given our analysis that economics is a commodity and
subject to demand, this comes as no surprise. Given that the capitalist
class is always in competition within itself and different sections have
different needs at different times, we would expect a diversity of
economics beliefs within the "science" which rise and fall depending on
the needs and relative strengths of different sections of capital.
While, overall, the "science" will support basic things (such as
profits, interest and rent are **not** the result of exploitation) but
the actual policy recommendations will vary. This is not to say that
certain individuals or schools will not have their own particular dogmas
or that individuals rise above such influences and act as real
scientists, of course, just that (in general) supply is not independent
of demand or class influence.

Nor should we dismiss the role of popular dissent in shaping the
"science." The class struggle has resulted in a few changes to
economics, if only in terms of the apologetics used to justify
non-labour income. Popular struggles and organisation play their role as
the success of, say, union organising to reduce the working day
obviously refutes the claims made against such movements by economists.
Similarly, the need for economics to justify reforms can become a
pressing issue when the alternative (revolution) is a possibility. As
Chomsky notes, during the 19th century (as today) popular struggle
played as much of a role as the needs of the ruling class in the
development of the "science":

> *"[Economics] changed for a number of reasons. For one thing, these
> guys had won, so they didn't need it so much as an ideological weapon
> anymore. For another, they recognised that they themselves needed a
> powerful interventionist state to defend industry form the hardships
> of competition in the open market -- as they had always **had** in
> fact. And beyond that, eliminating people's 'right to live' was
> starting to have some negative side-effects. First of all, it was
> causing riots all over the place . . . Then something even worse
> happened -- the population started to organise: you got the beginning
> of an organised labour movement . . . then a socialist movement
> developed. And at that point, the elites . . . recognised that the
> game had to be called off, else they **really** would be in trouble .
> . . it wasn't until recent years that laissez-faire ideology was
> revived again -- and again, it was a weapon of class warfare . . . And
> it doesn't have any more validity than it had in the early nineteenth
> century -- in fact it has even **less.** At least in the early
> nineteenth century . . . [the] assumptions had **some** relation to
> reality. Today those assumptions have **not** relation to reality."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 253-4]

Whether the *"economics of the rich"* or the *"economics of the poor"*
win out in academia is driven far more by the state of the class war
than by abstract debating about unreal models. Thus the rise of
monetarism came about due to its utility to the dominant sections of the
ruling class rather than it winning any intellectual battles (it was
decisively refuted by leading Keynesians like Nicholas Kaldor who saw
their predicted fears become true when it was applied -- see [section
C.8](secC8.html)). Hopefully by analysing the myths of capitalist
economics we will aid those fighting for a better world by giving them
the means of counteracting those who claim the mantle of "science" to
foster the *"economics of the rich"* onto society.

To conclude, neo-classical economics shows the viability of an unreal
system and this is translated into assertions about the world that we
live in. Rather than analyse reality, economics evades it and asserts
that the economy works *"as if"* it matched the unreal assumptions of
neoclassical economics. No other science would take such an approach
seriously. In biology, for example, the notion that the world can be
analysed *"as if"* God created it is called Creationism and rightly
dismissed. In economics, such people are generally awarded
professorships or even the (so-called) Nobel prize in economics (Keen
critiques the *"as if"* methodology of economics in chapter 7 of his
**Debunking Economics** ). Moreover, and even worse, policy decisions
will be enacted based on a model which has no bearing in reality -- with
disastrous results (for example, the rise and fall of Monetarism).

Its net effect to justify the current class system and diverts serious
attention from critical questions facing working class people (for
example, inequality and market power, what goes on in production, how
authority relations impact on society and in the workplace). Rather than
looking to how things are produced, the conflicts generated in the
production process and the generation as well as division of
products/surplus, economics takes what was produced as given, as well as
the capitalist workplace, the division of labour and authority relations
and so on. The individualistic neoclassical analysis by definition
ignores such key issues as economic power, the possibility of a
structural imbalance in the way economic growth is distributed,
organisation structure, and so on.

Given its social role, it comes as no surprise that economics is not a
genuine science. For most economists, the *"scientific method (the
inductive method of natural sciences) [is] utterly unknown to them."*
[Kropotkin, **Anarchism**, p. 179] The argument that most economics is
not a science is not limited to just anarchists or other critics of
capitalism. Many dissident economics recognise this fact as well,
arguing that the profession needs to get its act together if it is to be
taken seriously. Whether it could retain its position as defender of
capitalism if this happens is a moot point as many of the theorems
developed were done so explicitly as part of this role (particularly to
defend non-labour income -- see [section C.2](secC2.html)). That
economics can become much broader and more relevant is always a
possibility, but to do so would mean to take into account an unpleasant
reality marked by class, hierarchy and inequality rather than logic
deductions derived from Robinson Crusoe. While the latter can produce
mathematical models to reach the conclusions that the market is already
doing a good job (or, at best, there are some imperfections which can be
counterbalanced by the state), the former cannot.

Anarchists, unsurprisingly, take a different approach to economics. As
Kropotkin put it, *"we think that to become a science, Political Economy
has to be built up in a different way. It must be treated as a natural
science, and use the methods used in all exact, empirical sciences."*
[**Evolution and Environment**, p. 93] This means that we must start
with the world as it is, not as economics would like it to be. It must
be placed in historical context and key facts of capitalism, like wage
labour, not taken for granted. It must not abstract from such key facts
of life as economic and social power. In a word, economics must reject
those features which turn it into a sophisticated defence of the status
quo. Given its social role within capitalism (and the history and
evolution of economic thought), it is doubtful it will ever become a
real science simply because it if did it would hardly be used to defend
that system.

C.1.1 Is economics really value free?
-------------------------------------

Modern economists try and portray economics as a "value-free science."
Of course, it rarely dawns on them that they are usually just taking
existing social structures for granted and building economic dogmas
around them, so justifying them. At best, as Kropotkin pointed out:

> "[A]ll the so-called laws and theories of political economy are in
> reality no more than statements of the following nature: 'Granting
> that there are always in a country a considerable number of people who
> cannot subsist a month, or even a fortnight, without earning a salary
> and accepting for that purpose the conditions of work imposed upon
> them by the State, or offered to them by those whom the State
> recognises as owners of land, factories, railways, etc., then the
> results will be so and so.'
> "So far academic political economy has been only an enumeration of
> what happens under these conditions -- without distinctly stating the
> conditions themselves. And then, having described **the facts** which
> arise in our society under these conditions, they represent to us
> these **facts** as rigid, **inevitable economic laws.**"
> [**Anarchism**, p. 179]

In other words, economists usually take the political and economic
aspects of capitalist society (such as property rights, inequality and
so on) as given and construct their theories around it. At best. At
worse, economics is simply speculation based on the necessary
assumptions required to prove the desired end. By some strange
coincidence these ends usually bolster the power and profits of the few
and show that the free market is the best of all possible worlds. Alfred
Marshall, one of the founders of neoclassical economics, once noted the
usefulness of economics to the elite:

> *"From Metaphysics I went to Ethics, and found that the justification
> of the existing conditions of society was not easy. A friend, who had
> read a great deal of what are called the Moral Sciences, constantly
> said: 'Ah! if you understood Political Economy you would not say
> that'"* [quoted by Joan Robinson, **Collected Economic Papers**, vol.
> 4, p. 129]

Joan Robinson added that *"[n]owadays, of course, no one would put it so
crudely. Nowadays, the hidden persuaders are concealed behind scientific
objectivity, carefully avoiding value judgements; they are persuading
all the better so."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 129] The way which economic
theory systematically says what bosses and the wealthy want to hear is
just one of those strange co-incidences of life, one which seems to
befall economics with alarming regularity.

How does economics achieve this strange co-incidence, how does the
"value free" "science" end up being wedded to producing apologetics for
the current system? A key reason is the lack of concern about history,
about how the current distribution of income and wealth was created.
Instead, the current distribution of wealth and income is taken for
granted.

This flows, in part, from the static nature of neoclassical economics.
If your economic analysis starts and ends with a snapshot of time, with
a given set of commodities, then how those commodities get into a
specific set of hands can be considered irrelevant -- particularly when
you modify your theory to exclude the possibility of proving income
redistribution will increase overall utility (see [section
C.1.3](secC1.html#secc13)). It also flows from the social role of
economics as defender of capitalism. By taking the current distribution
of income and wealth as given, then many awkward questions can be
automatically excluded from the "science."

This can be seen from the rise of neoclassical economics in the 1870s
and 1880s. The break between classical political economy and economics
was marked by a change in the kind of questions being asked. In the
former, the central focus was on distribution, growth, production and
the relations between social classes. The exact determination of
individual prices was of little concern, particularly in the short run.
For the new economics, the focus became developing a rigorous theory of
price determination. This meant abstracting from production and looking
at the amount of goods available at any given moment of time. Thus
economics avoided questions about class relations by asking questions
about individual utility, so narrowing the field of analysis by asking
politically harmless questions based on unrealistic models (for all its
talk of rigour, the new economics did not provide an answer to how real
prices were determined any more than classical economics had simply
because its abstract models had no relation to reality).

It did, however, provide a naturalistic justification for capitalist
social relations by arguing that profit, interest and rent are the
result of individual decisions rather than the product of a specific
social system. In other words, economics took the classes of capitalism,
internalised them within itself, gave them universal application and, by
taking for granted the existing distribution of wealth, justified the
class structure and differences in market power this produces. It does
not ask (or investigate) **why** some people own all the land and
capital while the vast majority have to sell their labour on the market
to survive. As such, it internalises the class structure of capitalism.
Taking this class structure as a given, economics simply asks the
question how much does each "factor" (labour, land, capital) contribute
to the production of goods.

Alfred Marshall justified this perspective as follows:

> *"In the long run the earnings of each agent (of production) are, as a
> rule, sufficient only to recompense the sum total of the efforts and
> sacrifices required to produce them . . . with a partial exception in
> the case of land . . . especially much land in old countries, if we
> could trace its record back to their earliest origins. But the attempt
> would raise controversial questions in history and ethics as well as
> in economics; and the aims of our present inquiry are prospective
> rather than retrospective."* [**Principles of Economics**, p. 832]

Which is wonderfully handy for those who benefited from the theft of the
common heritage of humanity. Particularly as Marshall himself notes the
dire consequences for those without access to the means of life on the
market:

> *"When a workman is in fear of hunger, his need of money is very
> great; and, if at starting he gets the worst of the bargaining, it
> remains great . . . That is all the more probably because, while the
> advantage in bargaining is likely to be pretty well distributed
> between the two sides of a market for commodities, it is more often on
> the side of the buyers than on that of the sellers in a market for
> labour."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 335-6]

Given that market exchanges will benefit the stronger of the parties
involved, this means that inequalities become stronger and more secure
over time. Taking the current distribution of property as a given (and,
moreover, something that must not be changed) then the market does not
correct this sort of injustice. In fact, it perpetuates it and,
moreover, it has no way of compensating the victims as there is no
mechanism for ensuring reparations. So the impact of previous acts of
aggression has an impact on how a specific society developed and the
current state of the world. To dismiss *"retrospective"* analysis as it
raises *"controversial questions"* and *"ethics"* is not value-free or
objective science, it is pure ideology and skews any *"prospective"*
enquiry into apologetics.

This can be seen when Marshall noted that labour *"is often sold under
special disadvantages, arising from the closely connected group of facts
that labour power is 'perishable,' that the sellers of it are commonly
poor and have no reserve fund, and that they cannot easily withhold it
from the market."* Moreover, the *"disadvantage, wherever it exists, is
likely to be cumulative in its effects."* Yet, for some reason, he still
maintains that *"wages of every class of labour tend to be equal to the
net product due to the additional labourer of this class."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 567, p. 569 and p. 518] Why should it, given the noted fact
that workers are at a disadvantage in the market place? Hence Malatesta:

> *"Landlords, capitalists have robbed the people, with violence and
> dishonesty, of the land and all the means of production, and in
> consequence of this initial theft can each day take away from workers
> the product of their labour."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and
> Ideas**, p. 168]

As such, how could it possibly be considered "scientific" or
"value-free" to ignore history? It is hardly *"retrospective"* to
analyse the roots of the current disadvantage working class people have
in the current and *"prospective"* labour market, particularly given
that Marshall himself notes their results. This is a striking example of
what Kropotkin deplored in economics, namely that in the rare situations
when social conditions were *"mentioned, they were forgotten
immediately, to be spoken of no more."* Thus reality is mentioned, but
any impact this may have on the distribution of income is forgotten for
otherwise you would have to conclude, with the anarchists, that the
*"appropriation of the produce of human labour by the owners of capital
[and land] exists only because millions of men [and women] have
literally nothing to live upon, unless they sell their labour force and
their intelligence at a price that will make the net profit of the
capitalist and 'surplus value' possible."* [**Evolution and
Environment**, p. 92 and p. 106]

This is important, for respecting property rights is easy to talk about
but it only faintly holds some water if the existing property ownership
distribution is legitimate. If it is illegitimate, if the current
property titles were the result of theft, corruption, colonial conquest,
state intervention, and other forms of coercion then things are
obviously different. That is why economics rarely, if ever, discusses
this. This does not, of course, stop economists arguing against current
interventions in the market (particularly those associated with the
welfare state). In effect, they are arguing that it is okay to reap the
benefits of past initiations of force but it is wrong to try and rectify
them. It is as if someone walks into a room of people, robs them at gun
point and then asks that they should respect each others property rights
from now on and only engage in voluntary exchanges with what they had
left. Any attempt to establish a moral case for the "free market" in
such circumstances would be unlikely to succeed. This is free market
capitalist economics in a nutshell: never mind past injustices, let us
all do the best we can given the current allocations of resources.

Many economists go one better. Not content in ignoring history, they
create little fictional stories in order to justify their theories or
the current distribution of wealth and income. Usually, they start from
isolated individual or a community of approximately equal individuals (a
community usually without any communal institutions). For example, the
"waiting" theories of profit and interest (see [section
C.2.7](secC2.html#secc27)) requires such a fiction to be remotely
convincing. It needs to assume a community marked by basic equality of
wealth and income yet divided into two groups of people, one of which
was industrious and farsighted who abstained from directly consuming the
products created by their **own** labour while the other was lazy and
consumed their income without thought of the future. Over time, the
descendants of the diligent came to own the means of life while the
descendants of the lazy and the prodigal have, to quote Marx, *"nothing
to sell but themselves."* In that way, modern day profits and interest
can be justified by appealing to such *"insipid childishness."*
[**Capital**, vol. 1, p. 873] The real history of the rise of capitalism
is, as we discuss in [section F.8](secF8.html), grim.

Of course, it may be argued that this is just a model and an abstraction
and, consequently, valid to illustrate a point. Anarchists disagree.
Yes, there is often the need for abstraction in studying an economy or
any other complex system, but this is not an abstraction, it is
propaganda and a historical invention used not to illustrate an abstract
point but rather a specific system of power and class. That these little
parables and stories have all the necessary assumptions and abstractions
required to reach the desired conclusions is just one of those
co-incidences which seem to regularly befall economics.

The strange thing about these fictional stories is that they are given
much more credence than real history within economics. Almost always,
fictional "history" will always top actual history in economics. If the
actual history of capitalism is mentioned, then the defenders of
capitalism will simply say that we should not penalise current holders
of capital for actions in the dim and distant past (that current and
future generations of workers are penalised goes unmentioned). However,
the fictional "history" of capitalism suffers from no such dismissal,
for invented actions in the dim and distant past justify the current
owners holdings of wealth and the income that generates. In other words,
heads I win, tails you loose.

Needless to say, this (selective) myopia is not restricted to just
history. It is applied to current situations as well. Thus we find
economists defending current economic systems as "free market" regimes
in spite of obvious forms of state intervention. As Chomsky notes:

> *"when people talk about . . . free-market 'trade forces' inevitably
> kicking all these people out of work and driving the whole world
> towards a kind of a Third World-type polarisation of wealth . . .
> that's true if you take a narrow enough perspective on it. But if you
> look into the factors that **made** things the way they are, it
> doesn't even come **close** to being true, it's not remotely in touch
> with reality. But when you're studying economics in the ideological
> institutions, that's all irrelevant and you're not supposed to ask
> questions like these."* [**Understanding Power**, p. 260]

To ignore all that and simply take the current distribution of wealth
and income as given and then argue that the "free market" produces the
best allocation of resources is staggering. Particularly as the claim of
*"efficient allocation"* does not address the obvious question:
"efficient" for whose benefit? For the idealisation of freedom in and
through the market ignores the fact that this freedom is very limited in
scope to great numbers of people as well as the consequences to the
individuals concerned by the distribution of purchasing power amongst
them that the market throws up (rooted, of course in the original
endowments). Which, of course, explains why, even **if** these parables
of economics were true, anarchists would still oppose capitalism. We
extend Thomas Jefferson's comment that the *"earth belongs always to the
living generation"* to economic institutions as well as political -- the
past should not dominate the present and the future (Jefferson: *"Can
one generation bind another and all others in succession forever? I
think not. The Creator has made the earth for the living, not for the
dead. Rights and powers can only belong to persons, not to things, not
to mere matter unendowed with will"*). For, as Malatesta argued, people
should *"not have the right . . . to subject people to their rule and
even less of bequeathing to the countless successions of their
descendants the right to dominate and exploit future generations."*
[**At the Cafe**, p. 48]

Then there is the strange co-incidence that "value free" economics
generally ends up blaming all the problems of capitalism on workers.
Unemployment? Recession? Low growth? Wages are too high! Proudhon summed
up capitalist economic theory well when he stated that *"Political
economy -- that is, proprietary despotism -- can never be in the wrong:
it must be the proletariat."* [**System of Economical Contradictions**,
p. 187] And little has changed since 1846 (or 1776!) when it comes to
economics "explaining" capitalism's problems (such as the business cycle
or unemployment).

As such, it is hard to consider economics as "value free" when
economists regularly attack unions while being silent or supportive of
big business. According to neo-classical economic theory, both are meant
to be equally bad for the economy but you would be hard pressed to find
many economists who would urge the breaking up of corporations into a
multitude of small firms as their theory demands, the number who will
thunder against "monopolistic" labour is substantially higher
(ironically, as we note in [section C.1.4](secC1.html#secc14), their own
theory shows that they must urge the break up of corporations or support
unions for, otherwise, unorganised labour **is** exploited). Apparently
arguing that high wages are always bad but high profits are always good
is value free.

So while big business is generally ignored (in favour of arguments that
the economy works *"as if"* it did not exist), unions are rarely given
such favours. Unlike, say, transnational corporations, unions are
considered monopolistic. Thus we see the strange situation of economists
(or economics influenced ideologies like right-wing "libertarians")
enthusiastically defending companies that raise their prices in the wake
of, say, a natural disaster and making windfall profits while, at the
same time, attacking workers who decide to raise their wages by striking
for being selfish. It is, of course, unlikely that they would let
similar charges against bosses pass without comment. But what can you
expect from an ideology which presents unemployment as a good thing
(namely, increased leisure -- see [section C.1.5](secC1.html#secc15))
and being rich as, essentially, a **disutility** (the pain of abstaining
from present consumption falls heaviest on those with wealth -- see
[section C.2.7](secC2.html#secc27)).

Ultimately, only economists would argue, with a straight face, that the
billionaire owner of a transnational corporation is exploited when the
workers in his sweatshops successfully form a union (usually in the face
of the economic and political power wielded by their boss). Yet that is
what many economists argue: the transnational corporation is not a
monopoly but the union is and monopolies exploit others! Of course, they
rarely state it as bluntly as that. Instead they suggest that unions get
higher wages for their members be forcing other workers to take less pay
(i.e. by exploiting them). So when bosses break unions they are doing
this **not** to defend their profits and power but really to raise the
standard of other, less fortunate, workers? Hardly. In reality, of
course, the reason why unions are so disliked by economics is that
bosses, in general, hate them. Under capitalism, labour is a cost and
higher wages means less profits (all things being equal). Hence the need
to demonise unions, for one of the less understood facts is that while
unions increase wages for members, they also increase wages for
non-union workers. This should not be surprising as non-union companies
have to raise wages stop their workers unionising and to compete for the
best workers who will be drawn to the better pay and conditions of union
shops (as we discuss in [section C.9](secC9.html), the neoclassical
model of the labour market is seriously flawed).

Which brings us to another key problem with the claim that economics is
"value free," namely the fact that it takes the current class system of
capitalism and its distribution of wealth as not only a fact but as an
ideal. This is because economics is based on the need to be able to
differentiate between each factor of production in order to determine if
it is being used optimally. In other words, the given class structure of
capitalism is required to show that an economy uses the available
resources efficiently or not. It claims to be "value free" simply
because it embeds the economic relationships of capitalist society into
its assumptions about nature.

Yet it is impossible to define profit, rent and interest independently
of the class structure of any given society. Therefore, this *"type of
distribution is the peculiarity of capitalism. Under feudalism the
surplus was extracted as land rent. In an artisan economy each commodity
is produced by a men with his own tools; the distinction between wages
and profits has no meaning there."* This means that *"the very essence
of the theory is bound up with a particular institution -- wage labour.
The central doctrine is that 'wages tend to equal marginal product of
labour.' Obviously this has no meaning for a peasant household where all
share the work and the income of their holding according to the rules of
family life; nor does it apply in a [co-operative] where, the workers'
council has to decide what part of net proceeds to allot to investment,
what part to a welfare found and what part to distribute as wage."*
[Joan Robinson, **Collected Economic Papers**, p. 26 and p. 130]

This means that the "universal" principles of economics end up by making
any economy which does **not** share the core social relations of
capitalism inherently "inefficient." If, for example, workers own all
three "factors of production" (labour, land and capital) then the
"value-free" laws of economics concludes that this will be inefficient.
As there is only "income", it is impossible to say which part of it is
attributable to labour, land or machinery and, consequently, if these
factors are being efficiently used. This means that the "science" of
economics is bound up with the current system and its specific class
structure and, therefore, as a *"ruling class paradigm, the competitive
model"* has the *"substantial"* merit that *"it can be used to rule off
the agenda any proposals for substantial reform or intervention
detrimental to large economic interests . . . as the model allows (on
its assumptions) a formal demonstration that these would reduce
efficiency."* [Edward S. Herman, *"The Selling of Market Economics,"*
pp. 173-199, **New Ways of Knowing**, Marcus G. Raskin and Herbert J.
Bernstein (eds.), p. 178]

Then there are the methodological assumptions based on individualism. By
concentrating on individual choices, economics abstracts from the social
system within which such choices are made and what influences them.
Thus, for example, the analysis of the causes of poverty is turned
towards the failings of individuals rather than the system as a whole
(to be poor becomes a personal stigma). That the reality on the ground
bears little resemblance to the myth matters little -- when people with
two jobs still fail to earn enough to feed their families, it seems
ridiculous to call them lazy or selfish. It suggests a failure in the
system, not in the poor themselves. An individualistic analysis is
guaranteed to exclude, by definition, the impact of class, inequality,
social hierarchies and economic/social power and any analysis of any
inherent biases in a given economic system, its distribution of wealth
and, consequently, its distribution of income between classes.

This abstracting of individuals from their social surroundings results
in the generating economic "laws" which are applicable for all
individuals, in all societies, for all times. This results in all
concrete instances, no matter how historically different, being treated
as expressions of the same universal concept. In this way the uniqueness
of contemporary society, namely its basis in wage labour, is ignored
(*"The period through which we are passing . . . is distinguished by a
special characteristic -- WAGES."* [Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 199]).
Such a perspective cannot help being ideological rather than scientific.
By trying to create a theory applicable for all time (and so,
apparently, value free) they just hide the fact their theory assumes and
justifies the inequalities of capitalism (for example, the assumption of
given needs and distribution of wealth and income secretly introduces
the social relations of the current society back into the model,
something which the model had supposedly abstracted from). By stressing
individualism, scarcity and competition, in reality economic analysis
reflects nothing more than the dominant ideological conceptions found in
capitalist society. Every few economic systems or societies in the
history of humanity have actually reflected these aspects of capitalism
(indeed, a lot of state violence has been used to create these
conditions by breaking up traditional forms of society, property rights
and customs in favour of those desired by the current ruling elite).

The very general nature of the various theories of profit, interest and
rent should send alarm bells ringing. Their authors construct these
theories based on the deductive method and stress how they are
applicable in **every** social and economic system. In other words, the
theories are just that, theories derived independently of the facts of
the society they are in. It seems somewhat strange, to say the least, to
develop a theory of, say, interest independently of the class system
within which it is charged but this is precisely what these "scientists"
do. It is understandable why. By ignoring the current system and its
classes and hierarchies, the economic aspects of this system can be
justified in terms of appeals to universal human existence. This will
raise less objections than saying, for example, that interest exists
because the rich will only part with their money if they get more in
return and the poor will pay for this because they have little choice
due to their socio-economic situation. Far better to talk about "time
preference" rather than the reality of class society (see [section
C.2.6](secC2.html#secc26)).

Neoclassical economics, in effect, took the "political" out of
"political economy" by taking capitalist society for granted along with
its class system, its hierarchies and its inequalities. This is
reflected in the terminology used. These days even the term capitalism
has gone out of fashion, replaced with the approved terms *"market
system,"* the *"free market"* or *"free enterprise."* Yet, as Chomsky
noted, terms such as *"free enterprise"* are used *"to designate a
system of autocratic governance of the economy in which neither the
community nor the workforce has any role (a system we would call
'fascist' if translated to the political sphere)."* [**Language and
Politics**, p. 175] As such, it seems hardly "value-free" to proclaim a
system free when, in reality, most people are distinctly not free for
most of their waking hours and whose choices outside production are
influenced by the inequality of wealth and power which that system of
production create.

This shift in terminology reflects a political necessity. It effectively
removes the role of wealth (capital) from the economy. Instead of the
owners and manager of capital being in control or, at the very least,
having significant impact on social events, we have the impersonal
activity of *"the markets"* or *"market forces."* That such a change in
terminology is the interest of those whose money accords them power and
influence goes without saying. By focusing on the market, economics
helps hide the real sources of power in an economy and attention is
drawn away from such a key questions of how money (wealth) produces
power and how it skews the "free market" in its favour. All in all, as
dissident economist John Kenneth Galbraith once put it, *"[w]hat
economists believe and teach is rarely hostile to the institutions that
reflect the dominant economic power. Not to notice this takes effort,
although many succeed."* [**The Essential Galbraith**, p. 180]

This becomes obvious when we look at how the advice economics gives to
working class people. In theory, economics is based on individualism and
competition yet when it comes to what workers should do, the "laws" of
economics suddenly switch. The economist will now deny that competition
is a good idea and instead urge that the workers co-operate (i.e. obey)
their boss rather than compete (i.e. struggle over the division of
output and authority in the workplace). They will argue that there is
*"harmony of interests"* between worker and boss, that it is in the
**self**-interest of workers **not** to be selfish but rather to do
whatever the boss asks to further **the bosses** interests (i.e.
profits).

That this perspective implicitly recognises the **dependent** position
of workers, goes without saying. So while the sale of labour is
portrayed as a market exchange between equals, it is in fact an
authority relation between servant and master. The conclusions of
economics is simply implicitly acknowledging that authoritarian
relationship by identifying with the authority figure in the
relationship and urging obedience to them. It simply suggests workers
make the best of it by refusing to be independent individuals who need
freedom to flourish (at least during working hours, outside they can
express their individuality by shopping).

This should come as no surprise, for, as Chomsky notes, economics is
rooted in the notion that *"you only harm the poor by making them
believe that they have rights other than what they can win on the
market, like a basic right to live, because that kind of right
interferes with the market, and with efficiency, and with growth and so
on -- so ultimately people will just be worse off if you try to
recognise them."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 251] Economics teaches that you must
accept change without regard to whether it is appropriate it not. It
teaches that you must not struggle, you must not fight. You must simply
accept whatever change happens. Worse, it teaches that resisting and
fighting back are utterly counter-productive. In other words, it teaches
a servile mentality to those subject to authority. For business,
economics is ideal for getting their employees to change their attitudes
rather than collectively change how their bosses treat them, structure
their jobs or how they are paid -- or, of course, change the system.

Of course, the economist who says that they are conducting "value free"
analysis are indifferent to the kinds of relationships within society is
being less than honest. Capitalist economic theory is rooted in very
specific assumptions and concepts such as "economic man" and "perfect
competition." It claims to be "value-free" yet its preferred terminology
is riddled with value connotations. For example, the behaviour of
"economic man" (i.e., people who are self-interested utility
maximisation machines) is described as *"rational."* By implication,
then, the behaviour of real people is *"irrational"* whenever they
depart from this severely truncated account of human nature and society.
Our lives consist of much more than buying and selling. We have goals
and concerns which cannot be bought or sold in markets. In other words,
humanity and liberty transcend the limits of property and, as a result,
economics. This, unsurprisingly, affects those who study the "science"
as well:

> "Studying economics also seems to make you a nastier person.
> Psychological studies have shown that economics graduate students are
> more likely to 'free ride' -- shirk contributions to an experimental
> 'public goods' account in the pursuit of higher private returns --
> than the general public. Economists also are less generous that other
> academics in charitable giving. Undergraduate economics majors are
> more likely to defect in the classic prisoner's dilemma game that are
> other majors. And on other tests, students grow less honest --
> expressing less of a tendency, for example, to return found money --
> after studying economics, but not studying a control subject like
> astronomy.
> "This is no surprise, really. Mainstream economics is built entirely
> on a notion of self-interested individuals, rational self-maximisers
> who can order their wants and spend accordingly. There's little room
> for sentiment, uncertainty, selflessness, and social institutions.
> Whether this is an accurate picture of the average human is open to
> question, but there's no question that capitalism as a system and
> economics as a discipline both reward people who conform to the
> model." [Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p, 143]

So is economics "value free"? Far from it. Given its social role, it
would be surprising that it were. That it tends to produce policy
recommendations that benefit the capitalist class is not an accident. It
is rooted in the fibre of the "science" as it reflects the assumptions
of capitalist society and its class structure. Not only does it take the
power and class structures of capitalism for granted, it also makes them
the ideal for any and every economy. Given this, it should come as no
surprise that economists will tend to support policies which will make
the real world conform more closely to the standard (usually
neoclassical) economic model. Thus the models of economics become more
than a set of abstract assumptions, used simply as a tool in theoretical
analysis of the casual relations of facts. Rather they become political
goals, an ideal towards which reality should be forced to travel.

This means that economics has a dual character. On the one hand, it
attempts to prove that certain things (for example, that free market
capitalism produces an optimum allocation of resources or that, given
free competition, price formation will ensure that each person's income
corresponds to their productive contribution). On the other, economists
stress that economic "science" has nothing to do with the question of
the justice of existing institutions, class structures or the current
economic system. And some people seem surprised that this results in
policy recommendations which consistently and systematically favour the
ruling class.

C.1.2 Is economics a science?
-----------------------------

In a word, no. If by "scientific" it is meant in the usual sense of
being based on empirical observation and on developing an analysis that
was consistent with and made sense of the data, then most forms of
economics are not a science.

Rather than base itself on a study of reality and the generalisation of
theory based on the data gathered, economics has almost always been
based on generating theories rooted on whatever assumptions were
required to make the theory work. Empirical confirmation, if it happens
at all, is usually done decades later and if the facts contradict the
economics, so much the worse for the facts.

A classic example of this is the neo-classical theory of production. As
noted previously, neoclassical economics is focused on individual
evaluations of existing products and, unsurprisingly, economics is
indelibly marked by *"the dominance of a theoretical vision that treats
the inner workings of the production process as a 'black box.'"* This
means that the *"neoclassical theory of the 'capitalist' economy makes
no qualitative distinction between the corporate enterprise that employs
tens of thousands of people and the small family undertaking that does
no employ any wage labour at all. As far as theory is concerned, it is
technology and market forces, not structures of social power, that
govern the activities of corporate capitalists and petty proprietors
alike."* [William Lazonick, **Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**,
p. 34 and pp. 33-4] Production in this schema just happens -- inputs go
in, outputs go out -- and what happens inside is considered irrelevant,
a technical issue independent of the social relationships those who do
the actual production form between themselves -- and the conflicts that
ensure.

The theory does have a few key assumptions associated with it, however.
First, there are diminishing returns. This plays a central role. In
mainstream diminishing returns are required to produce a downward
sloping demand curve for a given factor. Second, there is a rising
supply curve based on rising marginal costs produced by diminishing
returns. The average variable cost curve for a firm is assumed to be
U-shaped, the result of first increasing and then diminishing returns.
These are logically necessary for the neo-classical theory to work.

Non-economists would, of course, think that these assumptions are
generalisations based on empirical evidence. However, they are not. Take
the U-shaped average cost curve. This was simply invented by A. C.
Pigou, *"a loyal disciple of [leading neo-classical Alfred] Marshall and
quite innocent of any knowledge of industry. He therefore constructed a
U-shaped average cost curve for a firm, showing economies of scale up to
a certain size and rising costs beyond it."* [Joan Robinson, **Collected
Economic Papers**, vol. 5, p. 11] The invention was driven by need of
the theory, not the facts. With increasing returns to scale, then large
firms would have cost advantages against small ones and would drive them
out of business in competition. This would destroy the concept of
perfect competition. However, the invention of the average cost curve
allowed the theory to work as "proved" that a competitive market could
**not** become dominated by a few large firms, as feared.

The model, in other words, was adjusted to ensure that it produced the
desired result rather than reflect reality. The theory was required to
prove that markets remained competitive and the existence of diminishing
marginal returns to scale of production **did** tend by itself to limit
the size of individual firms. That markets did become dominated by a few
large firms was neither here nor there. It did not happen in theory and,
consequently, that was the important thing and so *"when the great
concentrations of power in the multinational corporations are bringing
the age of national employment policy to an end, the text books are
still illustrated by U-shaped curves showing the limitation on the size
of firms in a perfectly competitive market."* [Joan Robinson,
**Contributions to Modern Economics**, p. 5]

To be good, a theory must have two attributes: They accurately describe
the phenomena in question and they make accurate predictions. Neither
holds for Pigou's invention: reality keeps getting in the way. Not only
did the rise of a few large firms dominating markets indirectly show
that the theory was nonsense, when empirical testing was finally done
decades after the theory was proposed it showed that in most cases the
opposite is the case: that there were constant or even falling costs in
production. Just as the theories of marginality and diminishing marginal
returns taking over economics, the real world was showing how wrong it
was with the rise of corporations across the world.

So the reason why the market become dominated by a few firms should be
obvious enough: actual corporate price is utterly different from the
economic theory. This was discovered when researchers did what the
original theorists did not think was relevant: they actually asked firms
what they did and the researchers consistently found that, for the vast
majority of manufacturing firms their average costs of production
declined as output rose, their marginal costs were always well below
their average costs, and substantially smaller than 'marginal revenue',
and the concept of a 'demand curve' (and therefore its derivative
'marginal revenue') was simply irrelevant.

Unsurprisingly, real firms set their prices prior to sales, based on a
mark-up on costs at a target rate of output. In other words, they did
not passively react to the market. These prices are an essential feature
of capitalism as prices are set to maintain the long-term viability of
the firm. This, and the underlying reality that per-unit costs fell as
output levels rose, resulted in far more stable prices than were
predicted by traditional economic theory. One researcher concluded that
administered prices *"differ so sharply from the behaviour to be
expected from"* the theory *"as to challenge the basic conclusions"* of
it. He warned that until such time as *"economic theory can explain and
take into account the implications"* of this empirical data, *"it
provides a poor basis for public policy."* Needless to say, this did not
disturb neo-classical economists or stop them providing public policy
recommendations. [Gardiner C. Means, *"The Administered-Price Thesis
Reconfirmed",* **The American Economic Review**, pp. 292-306, Vol. 62,
No. 3, p. 304]

One study in 1952 showed firms a range of hypothetical cost curves, and
asked firms which ones most closely approximated their own costs. Over
90% of firms chose a graph with a declining average cost rather than one
showing the conventional economic theory of rising marginal costs. These
firms faced declining average cost, and their marginal revenues were
much greater than marginal cost at all levels of output. Unsurprisingly,
the study's authors concluded if this sample was typical then it was
*"obvious that short-run marginal price theory should be revised in the
light of reality."* We are still waiting. [Eiteman and Guthrie, *"The
Shape of the Average Cost Curve",* **The American Economic Review**, pp.
832-8, Vol. 42, No. 5, p. 838]

A more recent study of the empirical data came to the same conclusions,
arguing that it is *"overwhelming bad news . . . for economic theory."*
While economists treat rising marginal cost as the rule, 89% of firms in
the study reported marginal costs which were either constant or declined
with output. As for price elasticity, it is not a vital operational
concept for corporations. In other words, the *"firms that sell 40
percent of GDP believe their demand is totally insensitive to price"*
while *"only about one-sixth of GDP is sold under conditions of elastic
demand."* [A.S. Blinder, E. Cabetti, D. Lebow and J. Rudd, **Asking
About Prices**, p. 102 and p. 101]

Thus empirical research has concluded that actual price setting has
nothing to do with clearing the market by equating market supply to
market demand (i.e. what economic theory sees as the role of prices).
Rather, prices are set to enable the firm to continue as a going concern
and equating supply and demand in any arbitrary period of time is
irrelevant to a firm which hopes to exist for the indefinite future. As
Lee put it, basing himself on extensive use of empirical research,
*"market prices are not market-clearing or profit-maximising prices, but
rather are enterprise-, and hence transaction-reproducing prices."*
Rather than a non-existent equilibrium or profit maximisation at a given
moment determining prices, the market price is *"set and the market
managed for the purpose of ensuring continual transactions for those
enterprises in the market, that is for the benefit of the business
leaders and their enterprises."* A significant proportion of goods have
prices based on mark-up, normal cost and target rate of return pricing
procedures and are relatively stable over time. Thus *"the existence of
stable, administered market prices implies that the markets in which
they exist are not organised like auction markets or like the early
retail markets and oriental bazaars"* as imagined in mainstream economic
ideology. [Frederic S. Lee, **Post Keynesian Price Theory**, p. 228 and
p. 212]

Unsurprisingly, most of these researchers were highly critical the
conventional economic theory of markets and price setting. One viewed
the economists' concepts of perfect competition and monopoly as virtual
nonsense and *"the product of the itching imaginations of uninformed and
inexperienced armchair theorisers."* [Tucker, quoted by Lee, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 73f] Which **was** exactly how it was produced.

No other science would think it appropriate to develop theory utterly
independently of phenomenon under analysis. No other science would wait
decades before testing a theory against reality. No other science would
then simply ignore the facts which utterly contradicted the theory and
continue to teach that theory as if it were a valid generalisation of
the facts. But, then, economics is not a science.

This strange perspective makes sense once it is realised how key the
notion of diminishing costs is to economics. In fact, if the assumption
of increasing marginal costs is abandoned then so is perfect competition
and *"the basis of which economic laws can be constructed . . . is shorn
away,"* causing the *"wreckage of the greater part of general
equilibrium theory."* This will have *"a very destructive consequence
for economic theory,"* in the words of one leading neo-classical
economist. [John Hicks, **Value and Capital**, pp. 83-4] As Steve Keen
notes, this is extremely significant:

> "Strange as it may seem . . . this is a very big deal. If marginal
> returns are constant rather than falling, then the neo-classical
> explanation of everything collapses. Not only can economic theory no
> longer explain how much a firm produces, it can explain nothing else.
>
> "Take, for example, the economic theory of employment and wage
> determination . . . The theory asserts that the real wage is
> equivalent to the marginal product of labour . . . An employer will
> employ an additional worker if the amount the worker adds to output --
> the worker's marginal product -- exceeds the real wage . . . [This]
> explains the economic predilection for blaming everything on wages
> being too high -- neo-classical economics can be summed up, as [John
> Kenneth] Galbraith once remarked, in the twin propositions that the
> poor don't work hard enough because they're paid too much, and the
> rich don't work hard enough because they're not paid enough . . .
>
> "If in fact the output to employment relationship is relatively
> constant, then the neo-classical explanation for employment and output
> determination collapses. With a flat production function, the marginal
> product of labour will be constant, and it will **never** intersect
> the real wage. The output of the form then can't be explained by the
> cost of employing labour. . . [This means that] neo-classical
> economics simply cannot explain anything: neither the level of
> employment, nor output, nor, ultimately, what determines the real wage
> . . .the entire edifice of economics collapses." [**Debunking
> Economics**, pp. 76-7]

It should be noted that the empirical research simply confirmed an
earlier critique of neo-classical economics presented by Piero Sraffa in
1926. He argued that while the neo-classical model of production works
in theory only if we accept its assumptions. If those assumptions do not
apply in practice, then it is irrelevant. He therefore *"focussed upon
the economic assumptions that there were 'factors of production' which
were fixed in the short run, and that supply and demand were independent
of each other. He argued that these two assumptions could be fulfilled
simultaneously. In circumstances where it was valid to say some factor
of production was fixed in the short term, supply and demand could not
independent, so that every point on the supply curve would be associated
with a different demand curve. On the other hand, in circumstances where
supply and demand could justifiably be treated as independent, then it
would be impossible for any factor of production to be fixed. Hence the
marginal costs of production would be constant."* He stressed firms
would have to be irrational to act otherwise, foregoing the chance to
make profits simply to allow economists to build their models of how
they should act. [Keen, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 66-72]

Another key problem in economics is that of time. This has been known,
and admitted, by economists for some time. Marshall, for example, stated
that *"the element of **time**"* was *"the source of many of the
greatest difficulties of economics."* [**Principles of Economics**, p.
109] The founder of general equilibrium theory, Walras, recognised that
the passage of time wrecked his whole model and stated that we *"shall
resolve the . . . difficulty purely and simply by ignoring the time
element at this point."* This was due, in part, because production
*"requires a certain lapse of time."* [**Elements of Pure Economics**,
p. 242] This was generalised by Gerard Debreu (in his Nobel Prize for
economics winning **Theory of Value** ) who postulated that everyone
makes their sales and purchases for all time in one instant.

Thus the cutting edge of neo-classical economics, general equilibrium
ignores both time **and** production. It is based on making time stop,
looking at finished goods, getting individuals to bid for them and, once
all goods are at equilibrium, allowing the transactions to take place.
For Walras, this was for a certain moment of time and was repeated, for
his followers it happened once for all eternity. This is obviously not
the way markets work in the real world and, consequently, the dominant
branch of economics is hardly scientific. Sadly, the notion of
individuals having full knowledge of both now and the future crops up
with alarming regularly in the "science" of economics.

Even if we ignore such minor issues as empirical evidence and time,
economics has problems even with its favoured tool, mathematics. As
Steve Keen has indicated, economists have *"obscured reality using
mathematics because they have practised mathematics badly, and because
they have not realised the limits of mathematics."* indeed, there are
*"numerous theorems in economics that reply upon mathematically
fallacious propositions."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 258 and p. 259] For a
theory born from the desire to apply calculus to economics, this is
deeply ironic. As an example, Keen points to the theory of perfect
competition which assumes that while the demand curve for the market as
a whole is downward sloping, an individual firm in perfect competition
is so small that it cannot affect the market price and, consequently,
faces a horizontal demand curve. Which is utterly impossible. In other
words, economics breaks the laws of mathematics.

These are just two examples, there are many, many more. However, these
two are pretty fundamental to the whole edifice of modern economic
theory. Much, if not most, of mainstream economics is based upon
theories which have little or no relation to reality. Kropotkin's
dismissal of *"the metaphysical definitions of the academical
economists"* is as applicable today. [**Evolution and Environment**, p.
92] Little wonder dissident economist Nicholas Kaldor argued that:

> *"The Walrasian [i.e. general] equilibrium theory is a highly
> developed intellectual system, much refined and elaborated by
> mathematical economists since World War II -- an intellectual
> experiment . . . But it does not constitute a scientific hypothesis,
> like Einstein's theory of relativity or Newton's law of gravitation,
> in that its basic assumptions are axiomatic and not empirical, and no
> specific methods have been put forward by which the validity or
> relevance of its results could be tested. The assumptions make
> assertions about reality in their implications, but these are not
> founded on direct observation, and, in the opinion of practitioners of
> the theory at any rate, they cannot be contradicted by observation or
> experiment."* [**The Essential Kaldor**, p. 416]

C.1.3 Can you have an economics based on individualism?
-------------------------------------------------------

In a word, no. No economic system is simply the sum of its parts. The
idea that capitalism is based on the subjective evaluations of
individuals for goods flies in the face of both logic and the way
capitalism works. In other words, modern economists is based on a
fallacy. While it would be expected for critics of capitalism to
conclude this, the ironic thing is that economists themselves have
proven this to be the case.

Neoclassical theory argues that marginal utility determines demand and
price, i.e. the price of a good is dependent on the intensity of demand
for the marginal unit consumed. This was in contrast to classic
economics, which argued that price (exchange value) was regulated by the
cost of production, ultimately the amount of labour used to create it.
While realistic, this had the political drawback of implying that
profit, rent and interest were the product of unpaid labour and so
capitalism was exploitative. This conclusion was quickly seized upon by
numerous critics of capitalism, including Proudhon and Marx. The rise of
marginal utility theory meant that such critiques could be ignored.

However, this change was not unproblematic. The most obvious problem
with it is that it leads to circular reasoning. Prices are supposed to
measure the "marginal utility" of the commodity, yet consumers need to
know the price **first** in order to evaluate how best to maximise their
satisfaction. Hence it *"obviously rest[s] on circular reasoning.
Although it tries to explain prices, prices [are] necessary to explain
marginal utility."* [Paul Mattick, **Economics, Politics and the Age of
Inflation**, p.58] In the end, as Jevons (one of the founders of the new
economics) acknowledged, the price of a commodity is the only test we
have of the utility of the commodity to the producer. Given that
marginality utility was meant to explain those prices, the failure of
the theory could not be more striking.

However, this is the least of its problems. At first, the neoclassical
economists used cardinal utility as their analysis tool. Cardinal
utility meant that it was measurable between individuals, i.e. that the
utility of a given good was the same for all. While this allowed prices
to be determined, it caused obvious political problems as it obviously
justified the taxation of the wealthy. As cardinal utility implied that
the "utility" of an extra dollar to a poor person was clearly greater
than the loss of one dollar to a rich man, it was appropriated by
reformists precisely to justify social reforms and taxation.

Capitalist economists had, yet again, created a theory that could be
used to attack capitalism and the income and wealth hierarchy it
produces. As with classical economics, socialists and other social
reformists used the new theories to do precisely that, appropriating it
to justify the redistribution of income and wealth downward (i.e. back
into the hands of the class who had created it in the first place).
Combine this with the high levels of class conflict at the time and it
should come as no surprise that the "science" of economics was suitably
revised.

There was, of course, a suitable "scientific" rationale for this
revision. It was noted that as individual evaluations are inherently
subjective, it is obvious that cardinal utility was impossible in
practice. Of course, cardinality was not totally rejected. Neoclassical
economics retained the idea that capitalists maximise profits, which is
a cardinal quantity. However for demand utility became "ordinal," that
is utility was considered an individual thing and so could not be
measured. This resulted in the conclusion that there was no way of
making interpersonal comparisons between individuals and, consequently,
no basis for saying a pound in the hands of a poor person had more
utility than if it had remained in the pocket of a billionaire. The
economic case for taxation was now, apparently, closed. While you may
think that income redistribution was a good idea, it was now proven by
"science" that this little more than a belief as all interpersonal
comparisons were now impossible. That this was music to the ears of the
wealthy was, of course, just one of those strange co-incidences which
always seems to plague economic "science."

The next stage of the process was to abandon then ordinal utility in
favour of "indifference curves" (the continued discussion of "utility"
in economics textbooks is primarily heuristic). In this theory consumers
are supposed to maximise their utility by working out which bundle of
goods gives them the highest level of satisfaction based on the twin
constraints of income and given prices (let us forget, for the moment,
that marginal utility was meant to determines prices in the first
place). To do this, it is assumed that incomes and tastes are
independent and that consumers have pre-existing preferences for all
possible bundles.

This produces a graph that shows different quantities of two different
goods, with the "indifference curves" showing the combinations of goods
which give the consumer the same level of satisfaction (hence the name,
as the consumer is "indifferent" to any combination along the curve).
There is also a straight line representing relative prices and the
consumer's income and this budget line shows the uppermost curve the
consumer can afford to reach. That these indifference curves could not
be observed was not an issue although leading neo-classical economist
Paul Samuelson provided an apparent means see these curves by his
concept of *"revealed preference"* (a basic tautology). There is a
reason why "indifference curves" cannot be observed. They are literally
impossible for human beings to calculate once you move beyond a
trivially small set of alternatives and it is impossible for actual
people to act as economists argue they do. Ignoring this slight problem,
the "indifference curve" approach to demand can be faulted for another,
even more basic, reason. It does not prove what it seeks to show:

> *"Though mainstream economics began by assuming that this hedonistic,
> individualist approach to analysing consumer demand was intellectually
> sound, **it ended up proving that it was not.** The critics were
> right: society is more than the sum of its individual members."*
> [Steve Keen, **Debunking Economics**, p. 23]

As noted above, to fight the conclusion that redistributing wealth would
result in a different level of social well-being, economists had to show
that *"altering the distribution of income did not alter social welfare.
They worked out that two conditions were necessary for this to be true:
(a) that all people have the same tastes; (b) that each person's tastes
remain the same as her income changes, so that every additional dollar
of income was spent exactly the same way as all previous dollars."* The
former assumption *"in fact amounts to assuming that there is only one
person in society"* or that *"society consists of a multitude of
identical drones"* or clones. The latter assumption *"amounts to
assuming that there is only one commodity -- since otherwise spending
patterns would necessary change as income rose."* [Keen, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 24] This is the real meaning of the assumption that all goods and
consumers can be considered *"representative."* Sadly, such individuals
and goods do not exist. Thus:

> *"Economics can prove that 'the demand curve slows downward in price'
> for a single individual and a single commodity. But in a society
> consisting of many different individuals with many different
> commodities, the 'market demand curve' is more probably jagged, and
> slopes every which way. One essential building block of the economic
> analysis of markets, the demand curve, therefore does not have the
> characteristics needed for economic theory to be internally consistent
> . . . most mainstream academic economists are aware of this problem,
> but they pretend that the failure can be managed with a couple of
> assumptions. Yet the assumptions themselves are so absurd that only
> someone with a grossly distorted sense of logic could accept them.
> That grossly distorted sense of logic is acquired in the course of a
> standard education in economics."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 25-7]

Rather than produce a *"social indifference map which had the same
properties as the individual indifference maps"* by adding up all the
individual maps, economics *"proved that this consistent summation from
individual to society could **not** be achieved."* Any sane person would
have rejected the theory at this stage, but not economists. Keen states
the obvious: *"That economists, in general, failed to draw this
inference speaks volumes for the unscientific nature of economic
theory."* They simply invented *"some fudge to disguise the gapping hole
they have uncovered in the theory."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 40 and p. 48]
Ironically, it took over one hundred years and advanced mathematical
logic to reach the same conclusion that the classical economists took
for granted, namely that individual utility could not be measured and
compared. However, instead of seeking exchange value (price) in the
process of production, neoclassical economists simply that made a few
absurd assumptions and continued on its way as if nothing was wrong.

This is important because *"economists are trying to prove that a market
economy necessarily maximises social welfare. If they can't prove that
the market demand curve falls smoothly as price rises, they can't prove
that the market maximises social welfare."* In addition, *"the concept
of a social indifference curve is crucial to many of the key notions of
economics: the argument that free trade is necessarily superior to
regulated trade, for example, is first constructed using a social
indifference curve. Therefore, if the concept of a social indifference
curve itself is invalid, then so too are many of the most treasured
notions of economics."* [Keen, **Op. Cit.**, p. 50] This means much of
economic theory is invalidated and with it the policy recommendations
based on it.

This elimination of individual differences in favour of a society of
clones by marginalism is not restricted to demand. Take the concept of
the *"representative firm"* used to explain supply. Rather than a
theoretical device to deal with variety, it ignores diversity. It is a
heuristic concept which deals with a varied collection of firms by
identifying a single set of distinct characteristics which are deemed to
represent the essential qualities of the industry as a whole. It is
**not** a single firm or even a typical or average firm. It is an
imaginary firm which exhibits the "representative" features of the
entire industry, i.e. it treats an industry as if it were just one firm.
Moreover, it should be stressed that this concept is driven by the needs
to prove the model, not by any concern over reality. The *"real
weakness"* of the *"representative firm"* in neo-classical economics is
that it is *"no more than a firm which answers the requirements expected
from it by the supply curve"* and because it is *"nothing more than a
small-scale replica of the industry's supply curve that it is unsuitable
for the purpose it has been called into being."* [Kaldor, **The
Essential Kaldor**, p. 50]

Then there is neoclassical analysis of the finance market. According to
the Efficient Market Hypothesis, information is disseminated equally
among all market participants, they all hold similar interpretations of
that information and all can get access to all the credit they need at
any time at the same rate. In other words, everyone is considered to be
identical in terms of what they know, what they can get and what they do
with that knowledge and cash. This results in a theory which argues that
stock markets accurately price stocks on the basis of their unknown
future earnings, i.e. that these identical expectations by identical
investors are correct. In other words, investors are able to correctly
predict the future and act in the same way to the same information. Yet
if everyone held identical opinions then there would be no trading of
shares as trading obviously implies **different** opinions on how a
stock will perform. Similarly, in reality investors are credit rationed,
the rate of borrowing tends to rise as the amount borrowed increases and
the borrowing rate normally exceeds the leading rate. The developer of
the theory was honest enough to state that the *"consequence of
accommodating such aspects of reality are likely to be disastrous in
terms of the usefulness of the resulting theory . . . The theory is in a
shambles."* [W.F Sharpe, quoted by Keen, **Op. Cit.**, p. 233]

Thus the world was turned into a single person simply to provide a
theory which showed that stock markets were "efficient" (i.e. accurately
reflect unknown future earnings). In spite of these slight problems, the
theory was accepted in the mainstream as an accurate reflection of
finance markets. Why? Well, the implications of this theory are deeply
political as it suggests that finance markets will never experience
bubbles and deep slumps. That this contradicts the well-known history of
the stock market was considered unimportant. Unsurprisingly, *"as time
went on, more and more data turned up which was not consistent with"*
the theory. This is because the model's world *"is clearly not our
world."* The theory *"cannot apply in a world in which investors differ
in their expectations, in which the future is uncertain, and in which
borrowing is rationed."* It *"should never have been given any
credibility -- yet instead it became an article of faith for academics
in finance, and a common belief in the commercial world of finance."*
[Keen, **Op. Cit.**, p. 246 and p. 234]

This theory is at the root of the argument that finance markets should
be deregulated and as many funds as possible invested in them. While the
theory may benefit the minority of share holders who own the bulk of
shares and help them pressurise government policy, it is hard to see how
it benefits the rest of society. Alternative, more realistic theories,
argue that finance markets show endogenous instability, result in bad
investment as well as reducing the overall level of investment as
investors will not fund investments which are not predicted to have a
sufficiently high rate of return. All of which has a large and negative
impact on the real economy. Instead, the economic profession embraced a
highly unreal economic theory which has encouraged the world to indulge
in stock market speculation as it argues that they do not have bubbles,
booms or bursts (that the 1990s stock market bubble finally burst like
many previous ones is unlikely to stop this). Perhaps this has to do the
implications for economic theory for this farcical analysis of the stock
market? As two mainstream economists put it:

> *"To reject the Efficient Market Hypothesis for the whole stock market
> . . . implies broadly that production decisions based on stock prices
> will lead to inefficient capital allocations. More generally, if the
> application of rational expectations theory to the virtually 'idea'
> conditions provided by the stock market fails, then what confidence
> can economists have in its application to other areas of economics . .
> . ?"* [Marsh and Merton, quoted by Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p.
> 161]

Ultimately, neoclassical economics, by means of the concept of
"representative" agent, has proved that subjective evaluations could not
be aggregated and, as a result, a market supply and demand curves cannot
be produced. In other words, neoclassical economics has shown that if
society were comprised of one individual, buying one good produced by
one factory then it could accurately reflect what happened in it. *"It
is stating the obvious,"* states Keen, *"to call the representative
agent an 'ad hoc' assumption, made simply so that economists can pretend
to have a sound basis for their analysis, when in reality they have no
grounding whatsoever."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 188]

There is a certain irony about the change from cardinal to ordinal
utility and finally the rise of the impossible nonsense which are
"indifference curves." While these changes were driven by the need to
deny the advocates of redistributive taxation policies the mantel of
economic science to justify their schemes, the fact is by rejecting
cardinal utility, it becomes impossible to say whether state action like
taxes decreases utility at all. With ordinal utility and its related
concepts, you cannot actually show that government intervention actually
harms "social utility." All you can say is that they are indeterminate.
While the rich may lose income and the poor gain, it is impossible to
say anything about social utility without making an interpersonal
(cardinal) utility comparison. Thus, ironically, ordinal utility based
economics provides a much weaker defence of free market capitalism by
removing the economist of the ability to call any act of government
"inefficient" and they would have to be evaluated in, horror of horrors,
non-economic terms. As Keen notes, it is *"ironic that this ancient
defence of inequality ultimately backfires on economics, by making its
impossible to construct a market demand curve which is independent on
the distribution of income . . . economics cannot defend any one
distribution of income over any other. A redistribution of income that
favours the poor over the rich cannot be formally opposed by economic
theory."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 51]

Neoclassical economics has also confirmed that the classical perspective
of analysing society in terms of classes is also more valid than the
individualistic approach it values. As one leading neo-classical
economist has noted, if economics is *"to progress further we may well
be forced to theorise in terms of groups who have collectively coherent
behaviour."* Moreover, the classical economists would not be surprised
by the admission that *"the addition of production **can** help"*
economic analysis nor the conclusion that the *"idea that we should
start at the level of the isolated individual is one which we may well
have to abandon . . . If we aggregate over several individuals, such a
model is unjustified."* [Alan Kirman, *"The Intrinsic Limits of Modern
Economy Theory",* pp. 126-139, The Economic Journal, Vol. 99, No. 395,
p. 138, p. 136 and p. 138]

So why all the bother? Why spend over 100 years driving economics into a
dead-end? Simply because of political reasons. The advantage of the
neoclassical approach was that it abstracted away from production (where
power relations are clear) and concentrated on exchange (where power
works indirectly). As libertarian Marxist Paul Mattick notes, the
*"problems of bourgeois economics seemed to disappear as soon as one
ignored production and attended only to the market . . . Viewed apart
from production, the price problem can be dealt with purely in terms of
the market."* [**Economic Crisis and Crisis Theory**, p. 9] By ignoring
production, the obvious inequalities of power produced by the dominant
social relations within capitalism could be ignored in favour of looking
at abstract individuals as buyers and sellers. That this meant ignoring
such key concepts as time by forcing economics into a static, freeze
frame, model of the economy was a price worth paying as it allowed
capitalism to be justified as the best of all possible worlds:

> *"On the one hand, it was thought essential to represent the winning
> of profit, interest, and rent as participation in the creation of
> wealth. On the other, it was thought desirable to found the authority
> of economics on the procedures of natural science. This second desire
> prompted a search for general economic laws independent of time and
> circumstances. If such laws could be proven, the existing society
> would thereby be legitimated and every idea of changing it refuted.
> Subjective value theory promised to accomplish both tasks at once.
> Disregarding the exchange relationship peculiar to capitalism -- that
> between the sellers and buyers of labour power -- it could explain the
> division of the social product, under whatever forms, as resulting
> from the needs of the exchangers themselves."* [Mattick, **Op. Cit.**,
> p. 11]

The attempt to ignore production implied in capitalist economics comes
from a desire to hide the exploitative and class nature of capitalism.
By concentrating upon the "subjective" evaluations of individuals, those
individuals are abstracted away from real economic activity (i.e.
production) so the source of profits and power in the economy can be
ignored ([section C.2](secC2.html) indicates why exploitation of labour
in production is the source of profit, interest and rent and **not**
exchanges in the market).

Hence the flight from classical economics to the static, timeless world
of individuals exchanging pre-existing goods on the market. The
evolution of capitalist economics has always been towards removing any
theory which could be used to attack capitalism. Thus classical
economics was rejected in favour of utility theory once socialists and
anarchists used it to show that capitalism was exploitative. Then this
utility theory was modified over time in order to purge it of
undesirable political consequences. In so doing, they ended up not only
proving that an economics based on individualism was impossible but also
that it cannot be used to oppose redistribution policies after all.

C.1.4 What is wrong with equilibrium analysis?
----------------------------------------------

The dominant form of economic analysis since the 1880s has been
equilibrium analysis. While equilibrium had been used by classical
economics to explain what regulated market prices, it did not consider
it as reflecting any real economy. This was because classical economics
analysed capitalism as a mode of production rather than as a mode of
exchange, as a mode of circulation, as neo-classical economics does. It
looked at the process of creating products while neo-classical economics
looked at the price ratios between already existing goods (this explains
why neo-classical economists have such a hard time understanding
classical or Marxist economics, the schools are talking about different
things and why they tend to call any market system "capitalism"
regardless of whether wage labour predominates of not). The classical
school is based on an analysis of markets based on production of
commodities through time. The neo-classical school is based on an
analysis of markets based on the exchange of the goods which exist at
any moment of time.

This indicates what is wrong with equilibrium analysis, it is
essentially a static tool used to analyse a dynamic system. It assumes
stability where none exists. Capitalism is always unstable, always out
of equilibrium, since *"growing out of capitalist competition, to
heighten exploitation, . . . the relations of production . . . [are] in
a state of perpetual transformation, which manifests itself in changing
relative prices of goods on the market. Therefore the market is
continuously in disequilibrium, although with different degrees of
severity, thus giving rise, by its occasional approach to an equilibrium
state, to the illusion of a tendency toward equilibrium."* [Mattick,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 51] Given this obvious fact of the real economy, it
comes as no surprise that dissident economists consider equilibrium
analysis as *"a major obstacle to the development of economics as a
**science** -- meaning by the term 'science' a body of theorems based on
assumptions that are **empirically** derived (from observations) and
which embody hypotheses that are capable of verification both in regard
to the assumptions and the predictions."* [Kaldor, **The Essential
Kaldor**, p. 373]

Thus the whole concept is an unreal rather than valid abstraction of
reality. Sadly, the notions of "perfect competition" and (Walrasian)
"general equilibrium" are part and parcel of neoclassical economics. It
attempts to show, in the words of Paul Ormerod, *"that under certain
assumptions the free market system would lead to an allocation of a
given set of resources which was in a very particular and restricted
sense optimal from the point of view of every individual and company in
the economy."* [**The Death of Economics**, p. 45] This was what
Walrasian general equilibrium proved. However, the assumptions required
prove to be somewhat unrealistic (to understate the point). As Ormerod
points out:

> *"[i]t cannot be emphasised too strongly that . . . the competitive
> model is far removed from being a reasonable representation of Western
> economies in practice. . . [It is] a travesty of reality. The world
> does not consist, for example, of an enormous number of small firms,
> none of which has any degree of control over the market . . . The
> theory introduced by the marginal revolution was based upon a series
> of postulates about human behaviour and the workings of the economy.
> It was very much an experiment in pure thought, with little empirical
> rationalisation of the assumptions."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 48]

Indeed, *"the weight of evidence"* is *"against the validity of the
model of competitive general equilibrium as a plausible representation
of reality."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 62] For example, to this day, economists
still start with the assumption of a multitude of firms, even worse, a
"continuum" of them exist in **every** market. How many markets are
there in which there is an infinite number of traders? This means that
from the start the issues and problems associated with oligopoly and
imperfect competition have been abstracted from. This means the theory
does not allow one to answer interesting questions which turn on the
asymmetry of information and bargaining power among economic agents,
whether due to size, or organisation, or social stigmas, or whatever
else. In the real world, oligopoly is common place and asymmetry of
information and bargaining power the norm. To abstract from these means
to present an economic vision at odds with the reality people face and,
therefore, can only propose solutions which harm those with weaker
bargaining positions and without information.

General equilibrium is an entirely static concept, a market marked by
perfect knowledge and so inhabited by people who are under no inducement
or need to act. It is also timeless, a world without a future and so
with no uncertainty (any attempt to include time, and so uncertainty,
ensures that the model ceases to be of value). At best, economists
include "time" by means of comparing one static state to another, i.e.
*"the features of one non-existent equilibrium were compared with those
of a later non-existent equilibrium."* [Mattick, **Op. Cit.**, p. 22]
How the economy actually changed from one stable state to another is
left to the imagination. Indeed, the idea of any long-run equilibrium is
rendered irrelevant by the movement towards it as the equilibrium also
moves. Unsurprisingly, therefore, to construct an equilibrium path
through time requires all prices for all periods to be determined at the
start and that everyone foresees future prices correctly for eternity --
including for goods not invented yet. Thus the model cannot easily or
usefully account for the reality that economic agents do not actually
know such things as future prices, future availability of goods, changes
in production techniques or in markets to occur in the future, etc.
Instead, to achieve its results -- proofs about equilibrium conditions
-- the model assumes that actors have perfect knowledge at least of the
probabilities of all possible outcomes for the economy. The opposite is
obviously the case in reality:

> *"Yet the main lessons of these increasingly abstract and unreal
> theoretical constructions are also increasingly taken on trust . . .
> It is generally taken for granted by the great majority of academic
> economists that the economy always approaches, or is near to, a state
> of 'equilibrium' . . . all propositions which the **pure**
> mathematical economist has shown to be valid only on assumptions that
> are manifestly unreal -- that is to say, directly contrary to
> experience and not just 'abstract.' In fact, equilibrium theory has
> reached the stage where the pure theorist has successfully (though
> perhaps inadvertently) demonstrated that the main implications of this
> theory cannot possibly hold in reality, but has not yet managed to
> pass his message down the line to the textbook writer and to the
> classroom."* [Kaldor, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 376-7]

In this timeless, perfect world, "free market" capitalism will prove
itself an efficient method of allocating resources and all markets will
clear. In part at least, General Equilibrium Theory is an abstract
answer to an abstract and important question: Can an economy relying
only on price signals for market information be orderly? The answer of
general equilibrium is clear and definitive -- one can describe such an
economy with these properties. However, no actual economy has been
described and, given the assumptions involved, none could ever exist. A
theoretical question has been answered involving some amount of
intellectual achievement, but it is a answer which has no bearing to
reality. And this is often termed the "high theory" of equilibrium.
Obviously most economists must treat the real world as a special case.

Little wonder, then, that Kaldor argued that his *"basic objection to
the theory of general equilibrium is not that it is abstract -- all
theory is abstract and must necessarily be so since there can be no
analysis without abstraction -- but that it starts from the wrong kind
of abstraction, and therefore gives a misleading 'paradigm' . . . of the
world as it is; it gives a misleading impression of the nature and the
manner of operation of economic forces."* Moreover, belief that
equilibrium theory is the only starting point for economic analysis has
survived *"despite the increasing (**not** diminishing) arbitrariness of
its based assumptions -- which was forced upon its practitioners by the
ever more precise cognition of the needs of logical consistency. In
terms of gradually converting an 'intellectual experiment' . . . into a
scientific theory -- in other words, a set of theorems directly related
to observable phenomena -- the development of theoretical economics was
one of continual **de**gress, not **pro**gress . . . The process . . .
of **relaxing** the unreal basis assumptions . . . has not yet started.
Indeed, [they get] . . . thicker and more impenetrable with every
successive reformation of the theory."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 399 and pp.
375-6]

Thus General Equilibrium theory analyses an economic state which there
is no reason to suppose will ever, or has ever, come about. It is,
therefore, an abstraction which has no discernible applicability or
relevance to the world as it is. To argue that it can give insights into
the real world is ridiculous. While it is true that there are certain
imaginary intellectual problems for which the general equilibrium model
is well designed to provide precise answers (if anything really could),
in practice this means the same as saying that if one insists on
analysing a problem which has no real world equivalent or solution, it
may be appropriate to use a model which has no real-world application.
Models derived to provide answers to imaginary problems will be
unsuitable for resolving practical, real-world economic problems or even
providing a useful insight into how capitalism works and develops.

This can have devastating real world impact, as can be seen from the
results of neoclassical advice to Eastern Europe and other countries in
their transition from state capitalism (Stalinism) to private
capitalism. As Joseph Stiglitz documents it was a disaster for all but
the elite due to the *"market fundamentalism preached"* by economists It
resulted in *"a marked deterioration"* in most peoples *"basic standard
of living, reflected in a host of social indicators"* and well as large
drops in GDP. [**Globalisation and its discontents**, p. 138 and p. 152]
Thus real people can be harmed by unreal theory. That the advice of
neoclassical economists has made millions of people look back at
Stalinism as "the good old days" should be enough to show its
intellectual and moral bankruptcy.

What can you expect? Mainstream economic theory begins with axioms and
assumptions and uses a deductive methodology to arrive at conclusions,
its usefulness in discovering how the world works is limited. The
deductive method is **pre-scientific** in nature. The axioms and
assumptions can be considered fictitious (as they have negligible
empirical relevance) and the conclusions of deductive models can only
really have relevance to the structure of those models as the models
themselves bear no relation to economic reality:

> *"Some theorists, even among those who reject general equilibrium as
> useless, praise its logical elegance and completeness . . . But if any
> proposition drawn from it is applied to an economy inhabited by human
> beings, it immediately becomes self-contradictory. Human life does not
> exist outside history and no one had correct foresight of his own
> future behaviour, let alone of the behaviour of all the other
> individuals which will impinge upon his. I do not think that it is
> right to praise the logical elegance of a system which becomes
> self-contradictory when it is applied to the question that it was
> designed to answer."* [Joan Robinson, **Contributions to Modern
> Economics**, pp. 127-8]

Not that this deductive model is internally sound. For example, the
assumptions required for perfect competition are mutually exclusive. In
order for the market reach equilibrium, economic actors need to able to
affect it. So, for example, if there is an excess supply some companies
must lower their prices. However, such acts contradict the basic
assumption of "perfect competition," namely that the number of buyers
and sellers is so huge that no one individual actor (a firm or a
consumer) can determine the market price by their actions. In other
words, economists assume that the impact of each firm is zero but yet
when these zeroes are summed up over the whole market the total is
greater than zero. This is impossible. Moreover, the *"requirements of
equilibrium are carefully examined in the Walrasian argument but there
is no way of demonstrating that a market which starts in an
out-of-equilibrium position will tend to get into equilibrium, except by
putting further very severe restrictions on the already highly abstract
argument."* [Joan Robinson, **Collected Economic Papers**, vol. 5, p.
154] Nor does the stable unique equilibrium actually exist for,
ironically, *"mathematicians have shown that, under fairly general
conditions, general equilibrium is unstable."* [Keen, **Debunking
Economics**, p. 173]

Another major problem with equilibrium theory is the fact that it does
not, in fact, describe a capitalist economy. It should go without saying
that models which focus purely on exchange cannot, by definition, offer
a realistic analysis, never mind description, of the capitalism or the
generation of income in an industrialised economy. As Joan Robinson
summarises:

> "The neo-classical theory . . . pretends to derive a system of prices
> from the relative scarcity of commodities in relation to the demand
> for them. I say **pretend** because this system cannot be applied to
> capitalist production.
>
> "The Walrasian conception of equilibrium arrived at by higgling and
> haggling in a market illuminates the account of prisoners of war
> swapping the contents of their Red Cross parcels.
>
> "It makes sense also, with some modifications, in an economy of
> artisans and small traders . . .
>
> "Two essential characteristics of industrial capitalism are absent in
> these economic systems -- the distinction between income from work and
> income from property and the nature of investments made in the light
> of uncertain expectations about a long future." [**Collected Economic
> Papers**, vol. 5, p. 34]

Even such basic things as profits and money have a hard time fitting
into general equilibrium theory. In a perfectly competitive equilibrium,
super-normal profit is zero so profit fails to appear. Normal profit is
assumed to be the contribution capital makes to output and is treated as
a cost of production and notionally set as the zero mark. A capitalism
without profit? Or growth, *"since there is no profit or any other sort
of surplus in the neoclassical equilibrium, there can be no expanded
reproduction of the system."* [Mattick, **Op. Cit.**, p. 22] It also
treats capitalism as little more than a barter economy. The concept of
general equilibrium is incompatible with the actual role of money in a
capitalist economy. The assumption of *"perfect knowledge"* makes the
keeping of cash reserves as a precaution against unexpected developments
would not be necessary as the future is already known. In a world where
there was absolute certainty about the present and future there would be
no need for a medium of exchange like money at all. In the real world,
money has a real effect on production an economic stability. It is, in
other words, not neutral (although, conveniently, in a fictional world
with neutral money *"crises **do not occur**"* and it *"assumed away the
very matter under investigation,"* namely depressions. [Keynes, quoted
by Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, p. 199]).

Given that general equilibrium theory does not satisfactorily encompass
such things as profit, money, growth, instability or even firms, how it
can be considered as even an adequate representation of any real
capitalist economy is hard to understand. Yet, sadly, this perspective
has dominated economics for over 100 years. There is almost no
discussion of how scarce means are organised to yield outputs, the whole
emphasis is on exchanges of ready made goods. This is unsurprising, as
this allows economics to abstract from such key concepts as power, class
and hierarchy. It shows the *"the bankruptcy of academic economic
teaching. The structure of thought which it expounds was long ago proven
to be hollow. It consisted of a set of propositions which bore hardly
any relation to the structure and evolution of the economy that they
were supposed to depict."* [Joan Robinson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 90]

Ultimately, equilibrium analysis simply presents an unreal picture of
the real world. Economics treat a dynamic system as a static one,
building models rooted in the concept of equilibrium when a
non-equilibrium analysis makes obvious sense. As Steven Keen notes, it
is not only the real world that has suffered, so has economics:

> *"This obsession with equilibrium has imposed enormous costs on
> economics . . . unreal assumptions are needed to maintain conditions
> under which there will be a unique, 'optimal' equilibrium . . . If you
> believe you can use unreality to model reality, then eventually your
> grip on reality itself can become tenuous."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 177]

Ironically, given economists usual role in society as defenders of big
business and the elite in general, there is one conclusion of general
equilibrium theory which does have some relevance to the real world. In
1956, two economists *"demonstrated that serious problems exist for the
model of competitive equilibrium if any of its assumptions are
breached."* They were *"not dealing with the fundamental problem of
whether a competitive equilibrium exists,"* rather they wanted to know
what happens if the assumptions of the model were violated. Assuming
that two violations existed, they worked out what would happen if only
one of them were removed. The answer was a shock for economists -- *"If
just one of many, or even just one of two [violations] is removed, it is
not possible to prejudge the outcome. The economy as a whole can
theoretically be worse off it just one violation exists than it is when
two such violations exist."* In other words, any single move towards the
economists' ideal market may make the world worse off. [Ormerod, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 82-4]

What Kelvin Lancaster and Richard Lipsey had shown in their paper *"The
General Theory of the Second Best"* [**Review of Economic Studies**,
December 1956] has one obvious implication, namely that neoclassical
economics itself has shown that trade unions were essential to stop
workers being exploited under capitalism. This is because the
neoclassical model requires there to be a multitude of small firms and
no unions. In the real world, most markets are dominated by a few big
firms. Getting rid of unions in such a less than competitive market
would result in the wage being less than the price for which the
marginal worker's output can be sold, i.e. workers are exploited by
capital. In other words, economics has **itself** disproved the
neoclassical case against trade unions. Not that you would know that
from neoclassical economists, of course. In spite of knowing that, in
their own terms, breaking union power while retaining big business would
result, in the exploitation of labour, neoclassical economists lead the
attack on "union power" in the 1970s and 1980s. The subsequent explosion
in inequality as wealth flooded upwards provided empirical confirmation
of this analysis.

Strangely, though, most neoclassical economists are still as anti-union
as ever -- in spite of both their own ideology and the empirical
evidence. That the anti-union message is just what the bosses want to
hear can just be marked up as yet another one of those strange
co-incidences which the value-free science of economics is so prone to.
Suffice to say, if the economics profession ever questions general
equilibrium theory it will be due to conclusions like this becoming
better known in the general population.

C.1.5 Does economics really reflect the reality of capitalism?
--------------------------------------------------------------

As we discussed in [section C.1.2](secC1.html#secc12), mainstream
economics is rooted in capitalism and capitalist social relations. It
takes the current division of society into classes as both given **as
well as** producing the highest form of efficiency. In other words,
mainstream economics is rooted in capitalist assumptions and,
unsurprisingly, its conclusions are, almost always, beneficial to
capitalists, managers, landlords, lenders and the rich rather than
workers, tenants, borrowers and the poor.

However, on another level mainstream capitalist economics simply does
**not** reflect capitalism at all. While this may seem paradoxical, it
is not. Neoclassical economics has always been marked by apologetics.
Consequently, it must abstract or ignore from the more unpleasant and
awkward aspects of capitalism in order to present it in the best
possible light.

Take, for example, the labour market. Anarchists, like other socialists,
have always stressed that under capitalism workers have the choice
between selling their liberty/labour to a boss or starving to death (or
extreme poverty, assuming some kind of welfare state). This is because
they do not have access to the means of life (land and workplaces)
unless they sell their labour to those who own them. In such
circumstances, it makes little sense to talk of liberty as the only real
liberty working people have is, if they are lucky, agreeing to be
exploited by one boss rather than another. How much an person works,
like their wages, will be based on the relative balance of power between
the working and capitalist classes in a given situation.

Unsurprisingly, neoclassical economics does not portray the choice
facing working class people in such a realistic light. Rather, it argues
that the amount of hours an individual works is based on their
preference for income and leisure time. Thus the standard model of the
labour market is somewhat paradoxical in that there is no actual labour
in it. There is only income, leisure and the preference of the
individual for more of one or the other. It is leisure that is assumed
to be a "normal good" and labour is just what is left over after the
individual "consumes" all the leisure they want. This means that working
resolves itself into the vacuous double negative of not-not-working and
the notion that all unemployment is voluntary.

That this is nonsense should be obvious. How much "leisure" can someone
indulge in without an income? How can an economic theory be considered
remotely valid when it presents unemployment (i.e. no income) as the
ultimate utility in an economy where everything is (or should be)
subject to a price? Income, then, has an overwhelming impact upon the
marginal utility of leisure time. Equally, this perspective cannot
explain why the prospect of job loss is seen with such fear by most
workers. If the neoclassical (non-)analysis of the labour market were
true, workers would be happy to be made unemployed. In reality, fear of
the sack is a major disciplining tool within capitalism. That free
market capitalist economists have succeeded in making unemployment
appear as a desirable situation suggests that its grip on the reality of
capitalism is slim to say the least (here, as in many other areas,
Keynes is more realistic although most of his followers have capitulated
faced with neoclassical criticism that standard Keynesian theory had bad
micro-economic foundations rather than admit that later was nonsense and
the former *"an emasculated version of Keynes"* inflicted on the world
by J.R. Hicks. [Keen, **Op. Cit.**, p. 211]).

However, this picture of the "labour" market does hide the reality of
working class dependency and, consequently, the power of the capitalist
class. To admit that workers do not exercise any free choice over
whether they work or not and, once in work, have to accept the work
hours set by their employers makes capitalism seem less wonderful than
its supporters claim. Ultimately, this fiction of the labour market
being driven by the workers' desire for "leisure" and that all
unemployment is "voluntary" is rooted in the need to obscure the fact
that unemployment is an essential feature of capitalism and,
consequently, is endemic to it. This is because it is the fundamental
disciplinary mechanism of the system (*"it is a whip in [the bosses']
hands, constantly held over you, so you will slave hard for him and
'behave' yourself,"* to quote Alexander Berkman). As we argued in
[section B.4.3](secB4.html#secb43), capitalism **must** have
unemployment in order to ensure that workers will obey their bosses and
not demand better pay and conditions (or, even worse, question why they
have bosses in the first place). It is, in other words, *"inherent in
the wage system"* and *"the fundamental condition of successful
capitalist production."* While it is *"dangerous and degrading"* to the
worker, it is *"very advantageous to the boss"* and so capitalism
*"can't exist without it."* [Berkman, **What is Anarchism?**, p. 26] The
experience of state managed full employment between (approximately) 1950
and 1970 confirms this analysis, as does the subsequent period (see
[section C.7.1](secC7.html#secc71)).

For the choice of leisure and labour to be a reality, then workers need
an independent source of income. The model, in other words, assumes that
workers need to be enticed by the given wage and this is only the case
when workers have the option of working for themselves, i.e. that they
own their own means of production. If this were the case, then it would
not be capitalism. In other words, the vision of the labour market in
capitalist economics assumes a non-capitalist economy of artisans and
peasant farmers -- precisely the kind of economy capitalism destroyed
(with the help of the state). An additional irony of this neoclassical
analysis is that those who subscribe to it most are also those who
attack the notion of a generous welfare state (or oppose the idea of
welfare state in all forms). Their compliant is that with a welfare
state, the labour market becomes "inefficient" as people can claim
benefits and so need not seek work. Yet, logically, they should support
a generous welfare state as it gives working people a genuine choice
between labour and leisure. That bosses find it hard to hire people
should be seen as a good thing as work is obviously being evaluated as a
"disutility" rather than as a necessity. As an added irony, as we
discuss in [section C.9](secC9.html), the capitalist analysis of the
labour market is **not** based on any firm empirical evidence nor does
it have any real logical basis (it is just an assumption). In fact, the
evidence we do have points against it and in favour of the socialist
analysis of unemployment and the labour market.

One of the reasons why neoclassical economics is so blas about
unemployment is because it argues that it should never happen. That
capitalism has always been marked by unemployment and that this rises
and falls as part of the business cycle is a inconvenient fact which
neoclassical economics avoided seriously analysing until the 1930s. This
flows from Say's law, the argument that supply creates its own demand.
This theory, and its more formally put Walras' Law, is the basis on
which the idea that capitalism could never face a general economic
crisis is rooted in. That capitalism has **always** been marked by boom
and bust has never put Say's Law into question except during the 1930s
and even then it was quickly put back into the centre of economic
ideology.

For Say, *"every producer asks for money in exchange for his products
only for the purpose of employing that money again immediately in the
purchase of another product."* However, this is not the case in a
capitalist economy as capitalists seek to accumulate wealth and this
involves creating a difference between the value of commodities someone
desired to sell and buy on the market. While Say asserts that people
simply want to consume commodities, capitalism is marked by the desire
(the need) to accumulate. The ultimate aim is **not** consumption, as
Say asserted (and today's economists repeat), but rather to make as much
profit as possible. To ignore this is to ignore the essence of
capitalism and while it may allow the economist to reason away the
contradictions of that system, the reality of the business cycle cannot
be ignored.

Say's law, in other words, assumes a world without **capital**:

> *"what is a given stock of capital? In this context, clearly, it is
> the actual equipment and stocks of commodities that happen to be in
> existence today, the result of recent or remote past history, together
> with the know-how, skill of labour, etc., that makes up the state of
> technology. Equipment . . . is designed for a particular range of
> uses, to be operated by a particular labour force. There is not a
> great deal of play in it. The description of the stock of equipment in
> existence at any moment as 'scare means with alternative uses' is
> rather exaggerated. The uses in fact are fairly specific, though they
> may be changed over time. But they **can** be utilised, at any moment,
> by offering less or more employment to labour. This is a
> characteristic of the wage economy. In an artisan economy, where each
> producer owns his own equipment, each produces what he can and sells
> it for what it will fetch. Say's law, that goods are the demand for
> goods, was ceasing to be true at the time he formulated it."* [Joan
> Robinson, **Collected Economic Papers**, vol. 4, p. 133]

As Keen notes, Say's law *"evisage[s] an exchange-only economy: an
economy in which goods exist at the outset, but where no production
takes place. The market simply enables the exchange of pre-existing
goods."* However, once we had capital to the economy, things change as
capitalists wish *"to supply more than they demand, and to accumulate
the difference as profit which adds to their wealth."* This results in
an excess demand and, consequently, the possibility of a crisis. Thus
mainstream capitalist economics *"is best suited to the economic
irrelevance of an exchange-only economy, or a production economy in
which growth does not occur. If production and growth do occur, then
they take place outside the market, when ironically the market is the
main intellectual focus of neoclassical economics. Conventional
economics is this a theory which suits a static economy . . . when what
is needed are theories to analyse dynamic economies."* [**Debunking
Economics**, p. 194, p. 195 and p. 197]

Ultimately, capital assets are not produced for their own stake but in
expectation of profits. This obvious fact is ignored by Say's law, but
was recognised by Marx (and subsequently acknowledged by Keynes as being
correct). As Keen notes, unlike Say and his followers, *"Marx's
perspective thus integrates production, exchange and credit as holistic
aspects of a capitalist economy, and therefore as essential elements of
any theory of capitalism. Conventional economics, in contrast, can only
analyse an exchange economy in which money is simply a means to make
barter easier."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 195-6]

Rejecting Say's Law as being applicable to capitalism means recognising
that the capitalist economy is not stable, that it can experience booms
and slumps. That this reflects the reality of that economy should go
without saying. It also involves recognising that it can take time for
unemployed workers to find new employment, that unemployment can by
involuntary and that bosses can gain advantages from the fear of
unemployment by workers.

That last fact, the fear of unemployment is used by bosses to get
workers to accept reductions in wages, hours and benefits, is key factor
facing workers in any real economy. Yet, according to the economic
textbooks, workers should have been falling over themselves to maximise
the utility of leisure and minimise the disutility of work. Similarly,
workers should not fear being made unemployed by globalisation as the
export of any jobs would simply have generated more economic activity
and so the displaced workers would immediately be re-employed (albeit at
a lower wage, perhaps). Again, according to the economic textbooks,
these lower wages would generate even more economic activity and thus
lead, in the long run, to higher wages. If only workers had only
listened to the economists then they would realise that that not only
did they actually gain (in the long run) by their wages, hours and
benefits being cut, many of them also gained (in the short term)
increased utility by not having to go to work. That is, assuming the
economists know what they are talking about.

Then there is the question of income. For most capitalist economics, a
given wage is supposed to be equal to the *"marginal contribution"* that
an individual makes to a given company. Are we **really** expected to
believe this? Common sense (and empirical evidence) suggests otherwise.
Consider Mr. Rand Araskog, the CEO of ITT in 1990, who in that year was
paid a salary of \$7 million. Is it conceivable that an ITT accountant
calculated that, all else being the same, the company's \$20.4 billion
in revenues that year would have been \$7 million less without Mr.
Araskog -- hence determining his marginal contribution to be \$7
million? This seems highly unlikely.

Which feeds into the question of exploding CEO pay. While this has
affected most countries, the US has seen the largest increases (followed
by the UK). In 1979 the CEO of a UK company earned slightly less than 10
times as much as the average worker on the shop floor. By 2002 a boss of
a FTSE 100 company could expect to make 54 times as much as the typical
worker. This means that while the wages for those on the shopfloor went
up a little, once inflation is taken into account, the bosses wages
arose from 200,000 per year to around 1.4m a year. In America, the
increase was even worse. In 1980, the ratio of CEO to worker pay 50 to
1. Twenty years later it was 525 to 1, before falling back to 281 to 1
in 2002 following the collapse of the share price bubble. [Larry
Elliott, *"Nice work if you can get it: chief executives quietly enrich
themselves for mediocrity,"* **The Guardian**, 23 January, 2006]

The notion of marginal productivity is used to justify many things on
the market. For example, the widening gap between high-paid and low-paid
Americans (it is argued) simply reflects a labour market efficiently
rewarding more productive people. Thus the compensation for corporate
chief executives climbs so sharply because it reflects their marginal
productivity. The strange thing about this kind of argument is that, as
we indicate in [section C.2.5](secC2.html#secc25), the problem of
defining and measuring capital wrecked the entire neoclassical theory of
marginal factor productivity and with it the associated marginal
productivity theory of income back in the 1960s -- and was admitted as
the leading neo-classical economists of the time. That marginal
productivity theory is still invoked to justify capitalist inequalities
shows not only how economics ignores the reality of capitalism but also
the intellectual bankruptcy of the "science" and whose interests it,
ultimately, serves.

In spite of this awkward little fact, what of the claims made based on
it? Is this pay **really** the result of any increased productivity on
the part of CEOs? The evidence points the other way. This can be seen
from the performance of the economies and companies in question. In
Britain trend growth was a bit more than 2% in 1980 and is still a bit
more than 2% a quarter of a century later. A study of corporate
performance in Britain and the United States looked at the companies
that make up the FTSE 100 index in Britain and the S&P 500 in the US and
found that executive income is rarely justified by improved performance.
[Julie Froud, Sukhdev Johal, Adam Leaver and Karel Williams,
**Financialisation and Strategy: Narrative and Number** ] Rising stock
prices in the 1990s, for example, were the product of one of the
financial market's irrational bubbles over which the CEO's had no
control or role in creating.

During the same period as soaring CEO pay, workers' real wages remained
flat. Are we to believe that since the 1980s, the marginal contribution
of CEOs has increased massively whereas workers' marginal contributions
remained stagnant? According to economists, in a free market wages
should increase until they reach their marginal productivity. In the US,
however, during the 1960s *"pay and productivity grew in tandem, but
they separated in the 1970s. In the 1990s boom, pay growth lagged behind
productivity by almost 30%."* Looking purely at direct pay, *"overall
productivity rose four times as fast as the average real hourly wage --
and twenty times as fast in manufacturing."* Pay did catch up a bit in
the late 1990s, but after 2000 *"pay returned to its lagging position."*
[Doug Henwood, **After the New Economy**, pp. 45-6] In other words, over
two decades of free market reforms has produced a situation which has
refuted the idea that a workers wage equals their marginal productivity.

The standard response by economists would be to state that the US
economy is not a free market. Yet the 1970s, after all, saw the start of
reforms based on the recommendations of free market capitalist
economists. The 1980s and 1990s saw even more. Regulation was reduced,
if not effectively eliminated, the welfare state rolled back and unions
marginalised. So it staggers belief to state that the US was **more**
free market in the 1950s and 1960s than in the 1980s and 1990s but,
logically, this is what economists suggest. Moreover, this explanation
sits ill at ease with the multitude of economists who justified growing
inequality and skyrocketing CEO pay and company profits during this
period in terms of free market economics. What is it to be? If the US is
not a free market, then the incomes of companies and the wealth are
**not** the result of their marginal contribution but rather are gained
at the expense of the working class. If the US is a free market, then
the rich are justified (in terms of economic theory) in their income but
workers' wages do not equal their marginal productivity. Unsurprisingly,
most economists do not raise the question, never mind answer it.

So what is the reason for this extreme wage difference? Simply put, it's
due to the totalitarian nature of capitalist firms (see [section
B.4](secB4.html)). Those at the bottom of the company have no say in
what happens within it; so as long as the share-owners are happy, wage
differentials will rise and rise (particularly when top management own
large amounts of shares!). It is capitalist property relations that
allow this monopolisation of wealth by the few who own (or boss) but do
not produce. The workers do not get the full value of what they produce,
nor do they have a say in how the surplus value produced by their labour
gets used (e.g. investment decisions). Others have monopolised both the
wealth produced by workers and the decision-making power within the
company (see [section C.2](secC2.html) for more discussion). This is a
private form of taxation without representation, just as the company is
a private form of statism. Unlike the typical economist, most people
would not consider it too strange a coincidence that the people with
power in a company, when working out who contributes most to a product,
decide it's themselves!

Whether workers will tolerate stagnating wages depends, of course, on
the general economic climate. High unemployment and job insecurity help
make workers obedient and grateful for any job and this has been the
case for most of the 1980s and 1990s in both America and the UK. So a
key reason for the exploding pay is to be found in the successful class
struggle the ruling class has been waging since the 1970s. There has
*"been a real shift in focus, so that the beneficiaries of corporate
success (such as it is) are no longer the workers and the general public
as a whole but shareholders. And given that there is evidence that only
households in the top half of the income distribution in the UK and the
US hold shares, this represents a significant redistribution of money
and power."* [Larry Elliott, **Op. Cit.**] That economics ignores the
social context of rising CEO pay says a lot about the limitations of
modern economics and how it can be used to justify the current system.

Then there is the trivial little thing of production. Economics used to
be called "political economy" and was production orientated. This was
replaced by an economics based on marginalism and subjective evaluations
of a given supply of goods is fixed. For classical economics, to focus
on an instant of time was meaningless as time does not stop. To exclude
production meant to exclude time, which as we noted in [section
C.1.2](secC1.html#secc12) this is precisely and knowingly what
marginalist economics did do. This means modern economics simply ignores
production as well as time and given that profit making is a key concern
for any firm in the real world, such a position shows how irrelevant
neoclassical economics really is.

Indeed, the neo-classical theory falls flat on its face. Basing itself,
in effect, on a snapshot of time its principles for the rational firm
are, likewise, based on time standing still. It argues that profit is
maximised where marginal cost equals marginal revenue yet this is only
applicable when you hold time constant. However, a real firm will not
maximise profit with respect to quantity but also in respect to time.
The neoclassical rule about how to maximise profit *"is therefore
correct if the quantity produced never changes"* and *"by ignoring time
in its analysis of the firm, economic theory ignores some of the most
important issues facing a firm."* Neo-classical economics exposes its
essentially static nature again. It *"ignores time, and is therefore
only relevant in a world in which time does no matter."* [Keen, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 80-1]

Then there is the issue of consumption. While capitalist apologists go
on about *"consumer sovereignty"* and the market as a *"consumers
democracy,"* the reality is somewhat different. Firstly, and most
obviously, big business spends a lot of money trying to shape and
influence demand by means of advertising. Not for them the neoclassical
assumption of "given" needs, determined outside the system. So the
reality of capitalism is one where the "sovereign" is manipulated by
others. Secondly, there is the distribution of resources within society.

Market demand is usually discussed in terms of tastes, not in the
distribution of purchasing power required to satisfy those tastes.
Income distribution is taken as given, which is very handy for those
with the most wealth. Needless to say, those who have a lot of money
will be able to maximise their satisfactions far easier than those who
have little. Also, of course, they can out-bid those with less money. If
capitalism is a "consumers" democracy then it is a strange one, based on
*"one dollar, one vote."* It should be obvious whose values are going to
be reflected most strongly in the market. If we start with the orthodox
economics (convenient) assumption of a *"given distribution of income"*
then any attempt to determine the best allocation of resources is flawed
to start with as money replaces utility from the start. To claim after
that the market based distribution is the best one is question begging
in the extreme.

In other words, under capitalism, it is not individual need or "utility"
as such that is maximised, rather it is ***effective*** utility (usually
called "effective demand") -- namely utility that is backed up with
money. This is the reality behind all the appeals to the marvels of the
market. As right-wing guru von Hayek put, the *"[s]pontaneous order
produced by the market does not ensure that what general opinion regards
as more important needs are always met before the less important ones."*
[*"Competition as a discovery process",* **The Essence of Hayek**, p.
258] Which is just a polite way of referring to the process by which
millionaires build a new mansion while thousands are homeless or live in
slums or feed luxury food to their pets while humans go hungry. It is,
in effect, to dismiss the needs of, for example, the 37 million
Americans who lived below the poverty line in 2005 (12.7% of the
population, the highest percentage in the developed world and is based
on the American state's absolute definition of poverty, looking at
relative levels, the figures are worse). Similarly, the 46 million
Americans without health insurance may, of course, think that their need
to live should be considered as *"more important"* than, say, allowing
Paris Hilton to buy a new designer outfit. Or, at the most extreme, when
agribusiness grow cash crops for foreign markets while the landless
starve to death. As E.P. Thompson argues, Hayek's answer:

> *"promote[s] the notion that high prices were a (painful) remedy for
> dearth, in drawing supplies to the afflicted region of scarcity. But
> what draws supply are not high prices but sufficient money in their
> purses to pay high prices. A characteristic phenomenon in times of
> dearth is that it generates unemployment and empty pursues; in
> purchasing necessities at inflated prices people cease to be able to
> buy inessentials [causing unemployment] . . . Hence the number of
> those able to pay the inflated prices declines in the afflicted
> regions, and food may be exported to neighbouring, less afflicted,
> regions where employment is holding up and consumers still have money
> with which to pay. In this sequence, high prices can actually withdraw
> supply from the most afflicted area."* [**Customs in Common**, pp.
> 283-4]

Therefore *"the law of supply and demand"* may not be the "most
efficient" means of distribution in a society based on inequality. This
is clearly reflected in the "rationing" by purse which this system is
based on. While in the economics books, price is the means by which
scare resources are "rationed" in reality this creates many errors. As
Thompson notes, *"[h]owever persuasive the metaphor, there is an elision
of the real Relationships assigned by price, which suggests . . .
ideological sleight-of-mind. Rationing by price does not allocate
resources equally among those in need; it reserves the supply to those
who can pay the price and excludes those who can't . . . The raising of
prices during dearth could 'ration' them [the poor] out of the market
altogether."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 285] Which is precisely what does
happen. As economist (and famine expert) Amartya Sen notes:

> *"Take a theory of entitlements based on a set of rights of
> 'ownership, transfer and rectification.' In this system a set of
> holdings of different people are judged to be just (or unjust) by
> looking at past history, and not by checking the consequences of that
> set of holdings. But what if the consequences are recognisably
> terrible? . . .[R]efer[ing] to some empirical findings in a work on
> famines . . . evidence [is presented] to indicate that in many large
> famines in the recent past, in which millions of people have died,
> there was no over-all decline in food availability at all, and the
> famines occurred precisely because of shifts in entitlement resulting
> from exercises of rights that are perfectly legitimate. . . . [Can]
> famines . . . occur with a system of rights of the kind morally
> defended in various ethical theories, including Nozick's. I believe
> the answer is straightforwardly yes, since for many people the only
> resource that they legitimately possess, viz. their labour-power, may
> well turn out to be unsaleable in the market, giving the person no
> command over food . . . [i]f results such as starvations and famines
> were to occur, would the distribution of holdings still be morally
> acceptable despite their disastrous consequences? There is something
> deeply implausible in the affirmative answer."* [**Resources, Values
> and Development**, pp. 311-2]

Recurring famines were a constant problem during the lassiez-faire
period of the British Empire. While the Irish Potato famine is probably
the best known, the fact is that millions died due to starvation mostly
due to a firm believe in the power of the market. In British India,
according to the most reliable estimates, the deaths from the 1876-1878
famine were in the range of 6-8 million and between 1896 and 1900, were
between 17 to 20 million. According to a British statistician who
analysed Indian food security measures in the two millennia prior to
1800, there was one major famine a century in India. Under British rule
there was one every four years. Over all, the late 1870s and the late
1890s saw somewhere between 30 to 60 million people die in famines in
India, China and Brazil (not including the many more who died
elsewhere). While bad weather started the problem by placing the price
of food above the reach of the poorest, the market and political
decisions based on profound belief in it made the famine worse. Simply
put, had the authorities distributed what food existed, most of the
victims would have survived yet they did not as this would have, they
argued, broke the laws of the market and produced a culture of
dependency. [Mike Davis, **Late Victorian Holocausts** ] This pattern,
incidentally, has been repeated in third world countries to this day
with famine countries exporting food as the there is no "demand" for it
at home.

All of which puts Hayek's glib comments about *"spontaneous order"* into
a more realistic context. As Kropotkin put it:

> *"The very essence of the present economic system is that the worker
> can never enjoy the well-being he [or she] has produced . . .
> Inevitably, industry is directed . . . not towards what is needed to
> satisfy the needs of all, but towards that which, at a given moment,
> brings in the greatest profit for a few. Of necessity, the abundance
> of some will be based on the poverty of others, and the straitened
> circumstances of the greater number will have to be maintained at all
> costs, that there may be hands to sell themselves for a part only of
> what which they are capable of producing; without which private
> accumulation of capital is impossible."* [**Anarchism**, p. 128]

In other words, the market cannot be isolated and abstracted from the
network of political, social and legal relations within which it is
situated. This means that all that "supply and demand" tells us is that
those with money can demand more, and be supplied with more, than those
without. Whether this is the "most efficient" result for society cannot
be determined (unless, of course, you assume that rich people are more
valuable than working class ones **because** they are rich). This has an
obvious effect on production, with "effective demand" twisting economic
activity and so, under capitalism, meeting needs is secondary as the
*"only aim is to increase the profits of the capitalist."* [Kropotkin,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 55]). George Barrett brings home of evil effects of
such a system:

> *"To-day the scramble is to compete for the greatest profits. If there
> is more profit to be made in satisfying my lady's passing whim than
> there is in feeding hungry children, then competition brings us in
> feverish haste to supply the former, whilst cold charity or the poor
> law can supply the latter, or leave it unsupplied, just as it feels
> disposed. That is how it works out."* [**Objections to Anarchism**, p.
> 347]

Therefore, as far as consumption is concerned, anarchists are well aware
of the need to create and distribute necessary goods to those who
require them. This, however, cannot be achieved under capitalism and for
all its talk of "utility," "demand", "consumer sovereignty" and so forth
the real facts are those with most money determine what is an
"efficient" allocation of resources. This is directly, in terms of their
control over the means of life as well as indirectly, by means of
skewing market demand. For if financial profit is the sole consideration
for resource allocation, then the wealthy can outbid the poor and ensure
the highest returns. The less wealthy can do without.

All in all, the world assumed by neo-classical economics is not the one
we actually live in, and so applying that theory is both misleading and
(usually) disastrous (at least to the "have-nots"). While this may seen
surprisingly, it is not once we take into account its role as apologist
and defender of capitalism. Once that is recognised, any apparent
contradiction falls away.

C.1.6 Is it possible to a non-equilibrium based capitalist economics?
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Yes, it is but it would be unlikely to be free-market based as the
reality of capitalism would get the better of its apologetics. This can
be seen from the two current schools of economics which, rightly, reject
the notion of equilibrium -- the post-Keynesian school and the so-called
Austrian school.

The former has few illusions in the nature of capitalism. At its best,
this school combines the valid insights of classical economics, Marx and
Keynes to produce a robust radical (even socialist) critique of both
capitalism and capitalist economics. At its worse, it argues for state
intervention to save capitalism from itself and, politically, aligns
itself with social democratic (*"liberal",* in the USA) movements and
parties. If economics does become a science, then this school of
economics will play a key role in its development. Economists of this
school include Joan Robinson, Nicholas Kaldor, John Kenneth Galbraith,
Paul Davidson and Steven Keen. Due to its non-apologetic nature, we will
not discuss it here.

The Austrian school has a radically different perspective. This school,
so named because its founders were Austrian, is passionately
pro-capitalist and argues against **any** form of state intervention
(bar, of course, the definition and defence of capitalist property
rights and the power that these create). Economists of this school
include Eugen von Bhm-Bawerk, Ludwig von Mises, Murray Rothbard, Israel
Kirzner and Frederick von Hayek (the latter is often attacked by other
Austrian economists as not being sufficiently robust in his opposition
to state intervention). It is very much a minority school.

As it shares many of the same founding fathers as neoclassical economics
and is rooted in marginalism, the Austrian school is close to
neoclassical economics in many ways. The key difference is that it
rejects the notion that the economy is in equilibrium and embraces a
more dynamic model of capitalism. It is rooted in the notion of
entrepreneurial activity, the idea that entrepreneurs act on information
and disequilibrium to make super profits and bring the system closer to
equilibrium. Thus, to use their expression, their focus is on the market
process rather than a non-existent end state. As such, it defends
capitalism in terms of how it reacts of **dis**-equilibrium and presents
a theory of the market process that brings the economy closer to
equilibrium. And fails.

The claim that markets tend continually towards equilibrium, as the
consequence of entrepreneurial actions, is hard to justify in terms of
its own assumptions. While the adjustments of a firm may bring the
specific market it operates in more towards equilibrium, their
ramifications may take other markets away from it and so any action will
have stabilising and destabilising aspects to it. It strains belief to
assume that entrepreneurial activity will only push an economy more
towards equilibrium as any change in the supply and demand for any
specific good leads to changes in the markets for other goods (including
money). That these adjustments will all (mostly) tend towards
equilibrium is little more than wishful thinking.

While being more realistic than mainstream neo-classical theory, this
method abandons the possibility of demonstrating that the market outcome
is in any sense a realisation of the individual preferences of whose
interaction it is an expression. It has no way of establishing the
supposedly stabilising character of entrepreneurial activity or its
alleged socially beneficial character as the dynamic process could lead
to a divergence rather than a convergence of behaviour. A dynamic system
need not be self-correcting, particularly in the labour market, nor show
any sign of self-equilibrium (i.e. it will be subject to the business
cycle).

Given that the Austrian theory is, in part, based on Say's Law the
critique we presented in the [last section](secC1.html#secc14) also
applies here. However, there is another reason to think the Austrian
self-adjusting perspective on capitalism is flawed and this is rooted in
their own analysis. Ironically enough, economists of this school often
maintain that while equilibrium does not exist their analysis is rooted
on two key markets being in such a state: the labour market and the
market for credit. The reason for these strange exceptions to their
general assumption is, fundamentally, political. The former is required
to deflect claims that "pure" capitalism would result in the
exploitation of the working class, the latter is required to show that
such a system would be stable.

Looking at the labour market, the Austrians argue that free market
capitalism would experience full employment. That this condition is one
of equilibrium does not seem to cause them much concern. Thus we find
von Hayek, for example, arguing that the *"cause of unemployment . . .
is a deviation of prices and wages from their equilibrium position which
would establish itself with a free market and stable money. But we can
never know at what system of relative prices and wages such an
equilibrium would establish itself."* Therefore, *"the deviation of
existing prices from that equilibrium position . . . is the cause of the
impossibility of selling part of the labour supply."* [**New Studies**,
p. 201] Therefore, we see the usual embrace of equilibrium theory to
defend capitalism against the evils it creates even by those who claim
to know better.

Of course, the need to argue that there would be full employment under
"pure" capitalism is required to maintain the fiction that everyone will
be better off under it. It is hard to say that working class people will
benefit if they are subject to high levels of unemployment and the
resulting fear and insecurity that produces. As would be expected, the
Austrian school shares the same perspective on unemployment as the
neoclassical school, arguing that it is *"voluntary"* and the result of
the price of labour being too high (who knew that depressions were so
beneficial to workers, what with some having more leisure to enjoy and
the others having higher than normal wages?). The reality of capitalism
is very different than this abstract model.

Anarchists have long realised that the capitalist market is based upon
inequalities and changes in power. Proudhon argued that *"[t]he
manufacturer says to the labourer, 'You are as free to go elsewhere with
your services as I am to receive them. I offer you so much.' The
merchant says to the customer, 'Take it or leave it; you are master of
your money, as I am of my goods. I want so much.' Who will yield? The
weaker."* He, like all anarchists, saw that domination, oppression and
exploitation flow from inequalities of market/economic power and that
the *"power of invasion lies in superior strength."* [**What is
Property?**, p. 216 and p. 215] This is particularly the case in the
labour market, as we argued in [section B.4.3](secB4.html#secb43).

As such, it is unlikely that "pure" capitalism would experience full
employment for under such conditions the employers loose the upper hand.
To permanently experience a condition which, as we indicate in [section
C.7](secC7.html), causes "actually existing" capitalism so many problems
seems more like wishful thinking than a serious analysis. If
unemployment is included in the Austrian model (as it should) then the
bargaining position of labour is obviously weakened and, as a
consequence, capital will take advantage and gather profits at the
expense of labour. Conversely, if labour is empowered by full employment
then they can use their position to erode the profits and managerial
powers of their bosses. Logically, therefore, we would expect less than
full unemployment and job insecurity to be the normal state of the
economy with short periods of full unemployment before a slump. Given
this, we would expect "pure" capitalism to be unstable, just as the
approximations to it in history have always been. Austrian economics
gives no reason to believe that would change in the slightest. Indeed,
given their obvious hatred of trade unions and the welfare state, the
bargaining power of labour would be weakened further during most of the
business cycle and, contra Hayek, unemployment would remain and its
level would fluctuate significantly throughout the business cycle.

Which brings us to the next atypical market in Austrian theory, namely
the credit market. According to the Austrian school, "pure" capitalism
would not suffer from a business cycle (or, at worse, a very mild one).
This is due to the lack of equilibrium in the credit market due to state
intervention (or, more correctly, state non-intervention). Austrian
economist W. Duncan Reekie provides a summary:

> *"The business cycle is generated by monetary expansion and
> contraction . . . When new money is printed it appears as if the
> supply of savings has increased. Interest rates fall and businessmen
> are misled into borrowing additional founds to finance extra
> investment activity . . . This would be of no consequence if it had
> been the outcome of [genuine saving] . . . - but the change was
> government induced. The new money reaches factor owners in the form of
> wages, rent and interest . . . the factor owners will then spend the
> higher money incomes in their existing consumption:investment
> proportions . . . Capital goods industries will find their expansion
> has been in error and malinvestments have been incurred."* [**Markets,
> Entrepreneurs and Liberty**, pp. 68-9]

This analysis is based on their notion that the interest rate reflects
the "time preference" of individuals between present and future goods
(see [section C.2.6](secC2.html#secc26) for more details). The argument
is that banks or governments manipulate the money supply or interest
rates, making the actual interest rate different from the "real"
interest rate which equates savings and loans. Of course, that analysis
is dependent on the interest rate equating savings and loans which is,
of course, an equilibrium position. If we assume that the market for
credit shows the same disequilibrium tendencies as other markets, then
the possibility for malinvestment is extremely likely as banks and other
businesses extend credit based on inaccurate assumptions about present
conditions and uncertain future developments in order to secure greater
profits. Unsurprisingly, the Austrians (like most economists) expect the
working class to bear the price for any recession in terms of real wage
cuts in spite of their theory indicating that its roots lie in
capitalists and bankers seeking more profits and, consequently, the
former demanding and the latter supplying more credit than the "natural"
interest rate would supply.

Ironically, therefore, the Austrian business cycle is rooted in the
concept of **dis**-equilibrium in the credit market, the condition it
argues is the standard situation in all other markets. In effect, they
think that the money supply and interest rates are determined
exogenously (i.e. outside the economy) by the state. However, this is
unlikely as the evidence points the other way, i.e. to the endogenous
nature of the money supply itself. This account of money (proposed
strongly by, among others, the post-Keynesian school) argues that the
money supply is a function of the demand for credit, which itself is a
function of the level of economic activity. In other words, the banking
system creates as much money as people need and any attempt to control
that creation will cause economic problems and, perhaps, crisis. Money,
in other words, emerges from **within** the system and so the Austrian
attempt to *"blame the state"* is simply wrong. As we discuss in
[section C.8](secC8.html), attempts by the state to control the money
during the Monetarist disasters of the early 1980s failed and it is
unlikely that this would change in a *"pure"* capitalism marked by a
totally privatised banking system.

It should also be noted that in the 1930s, the Austrian theory of the
business cycle lost the theoretical battle with the Keynesian one (not
to be confused with the neoclassical-Keynesian synthesis of the post-war
years). This was for three reasons. Firstly, it was irrelevant (its
conclusion was do nothing). Secondly, it was arrogant (it essentially
argued that the slump would not have happened if people had listened to
them and the pain of depression was fully deserved for not doing so).
Thirdly, and most importantly, the leading Austrian theorist on the
business cycle was completely refuted by Piero Sraffa and Nicholas
Kaldor (Hayek's own follower who turned Keynesian) both of whom exposed
the internal contradictions of his analysis.

The empirical record backs our critique of the Austrian claims on the
stability of capitalism and unemployment. Throughout the nineteenth
century there were a continual economic booms and slumps. This was the
case in the USA, often pointed to as an approximately lassiez-faire
economy, where the last third of the 19th century (often considered as a
heyday of private enterprise) was a period of profound instability and
anxiety. Between 1867 and 1900 there were 8 complete business cycles.
Over these 396 months, the economy expanded during 199 months and
contracted during 197. Hardly a sign of great stability (since the end
of world war II, only about a fifth of the time has spent in periods of
recession or depression, by way of comparison). Overall, the economy
went into a slump, panic or crisis in 1807, 1817, 1828, 1834, 1837,
1854, 1857, 1873, 1882, and 1893 (in addition, 1903 and 1907 were also
crisis years). Full employment, needless to say, was not the normal
situation (during the 1890s, for example, the unemployment rate exceeded
10% for 6 consecutive years, reaching a peak of 18.4% in 1894, and was
under 4% for just one, 1892). So much for temporary and mild slumps,
prices adjusting fast and markets clearing quickly in pre-Keynesian
economies!

Luckily, though, the Austrian school's methodology allows it to ignore
such irritating constrictions as facts, statistics, data, history or
experimental confirmation. While neoclassical economics at least
**pretends** to be scientific, the Austrian school displays its
deductive (i.e. pre-scientific) methodology as a badge of pride along
side its fanatical love of free market capitalism. For the Austrians, in
the words of von Mises, economic theory *"is not derived from
experience; it is prior to experience"* and *"no kind of experience can
ever force us to discard or modify **a priori** theorems; they are
logically prior to it and cannot be either proved by corroborative
experience or disproved by experience to the contrary."* And if this
does not do justice to a full exposition of the phantasmagoria of von
Mises' **a priorism**, the reader may take some joy (or horror) from the
following statement:

> *"If a contradiction appears between a theory and experience, **we
> must always assume** that a condition pre-supposed by the theory was
> not present, or else there is some error in our observation. The
> disagreement between the theory and the facts of experience frequently
> forces us to think through the problems of the theory again. **But so
> long as a rethinking of the theory uncovers no errors in our thinking,
> we are not entitled to doubt its truth**"* [emphasis added, quoted by
> Homa Katouzian, **Ideology and Method in Economics**, pp. 39-40]

In other words, if reality is in conflict with your ideas, do not adjust
your views because reality must be at fault! The scientific method would
be to revise the theory in light of the facts. It is not scientific to
reject the facts in light of the theory! Without experience, any theory
is just a flight of fantasy. For the higher a deductive edifice is
built, the more likely it is that errors will creep in and these can
only be corrected by checking the analysis against reality. Starting
assumptions and trains of logic may contain inaccuracies so small as to
be undetectable, yet will yield entirely false conclusions. Similarly,
trains of logic may miss things which are only brought to light by
actual experiences or be correct, but incomplete or concentrate on or
stress inappropriate factors. To ignore actual experience is to loose
that input when evaluating a theory.

Ignoring the obvious problems of the empirical record, as any consistent
Austrian would, the question does arise why does the Austrian school
make exceptions to its disequilibrium analysis for these two markets.
Perhaps this is a case of political expediency, allowing the ideological
supporters of free market capitalism to attack the notion of equilibrium
when it clearly clashes with reality but being able to return to it when
attacking, say, trade unions, welfare programmes and other schemes which
aim to aid working class people against the ravages of the capitalist
market? Given the self-appointed role of Austrian economics as the
defender of "pure" (and, illogically, not so pure) capitalism that
conclusion is not hard to deny.

Rejecting equilibrium is not as straightforward as the Austrians hope,
both in terms of logic and in justifying capitalism. Equilibrium plays a
role in neo-classical economics for a reason. A disequilibrium trade
means that people on the winning side of the bargain will gain real
income at the expense of the losers. In other words, Austrian economics
is rooted (in most markets, at least) in the idea that trading benefits
one side more than the other which flies in the face of the repeated
dogma that trade benefits both parties. Moreover, rejecting the idea of
equilibrium means rejecting any attempt to claim that workers' wages
equal their just contribution to production and so to society. If
equilibrium does not exist or is never actually reached then the various
economic laws which "prove" that workers are not exploited under
capitalism do not apply. This also applies to accepting that any real
market is unlike the ideal market of perfect competition. In other
words, by recognising and taking into account reality capitalist
economics cannot show that capitalism is stable, non-exploitative or
that it meets the needs of all.

Given that they reject the notion of equilibrium as well as the concept
of empirical testing of their theories and the economy, their defence of
capitalism rests on two things: "freedom" and anything else would be
worse. Neither are particularly convincing.

Taking the first option, this superficially appears appealing,
particularly to anarchists. However this stress on "freedom" -- the
freedom of individuals to make their own decisions -- flounders on the
rocks of capitalist reality. Who can deny that individuals, when free to
choose, will pick the option they consider best for themselves? However,
what this praise for individual freedom ignores is that capitalism often
reduces choice to picking the lesser of two (or more) evils due to the
inequalities it creates (hence our reference to the **quality** of the
decisions available to us). The worker who agrees to work in a sweatshop
does "maximise" her "utility" by so doing -- after all, this option is
better than starving to death -- but only an ideologue blinded by
capitalist economics will think that she is free or that her decision is
not made under (economic) compulsion.

The Austrian school is so in love with markets they even see them where
they do not exist, namely inside capitalist firms. There, hierarchy
reigns and so for all their talk of "liberty" the Austrian school at
best ignores, at worse exalts, factory fascism (see [section
F.2.1](secF2.html#secf21)) For them, management is there to manage and
workers are there to obey. Ironically, the Austrian (like the
neo-liberal) ethic of "freedom" is based on an utterly credulous faith
in authority in the workplace. Thus we have the defenders of "freedom"
defending the hierarchical and autocratic capitalist managerial
structure, i.e. "free" workers subject to a relationship distinctly
**lacking** freedom. If your personal life were as closely monitored and
regulated as your work life, you would rightly consider it oppression.

In other words, this idealisation of freedom through the market
completely ignores the fact that this freedom can be, to a large number
of people, very limited in scope. Moreover, the freedom associated with
capitalism, as far as the labour market goes, becomes little more than
the freedom to pick your master. All in all, this defence of capitalism
ignores the existence of economic inequality (and so power) which
infringes the freedom and opportunities of others. Social inequalities
can ensure that people end up *"wanting what they get"* rather than
*"getting what they want"* simply because they have to adjust their
expectations and behaviour to fit into the patterns determined by
concentrations of economic power. This is particularly the case within
the labour market, where sellers of labour power are usually at a
disadvantage when compared to buyers due to the existence of
unemployment as we have discussed.

As such, their claims to be defenders of "liberty" ring hollow in
anarchist ears. This can be seen from the 1920s. For all their talk of
"freedom", when push came to shove, they end up defending authoritarian
regimes in order to save capitalism when the working classes rebel
against the "natural" order. Thus we find von Mises, for example,
arguing in the 1920s that it *"cannot be denied that Fascism and similar
movements aiming at the establishment of dictatorships are full of the
best intentions and that their intervention has, for the moment, saved
European civilisation. The merit that Fascism has thereby won for itself
will live eternally in history."* [**Liberalism**, p. 51] Faced with the
Nazis in the 1930s, von Mises changed his tune somewhat as, being
Jewish, he faced the same state repression he was happy to see inflicted
upon rebellious workers the previous decade. Unsurprisingly, he started
to stress that Nazi was short for "National Socialism" and so the
horrors of fascism could be blamed on "socialism" rather than the
capitalists who funded the fascist parties and made extensive profits
under them once the labour, anarchist and socialist movements had been
crushed.

Similarly, when right-wing governments influenced by the Austrian school
were elected in various countries in the 1980s, those countries saw an
increase in state authoritarianism and centralisation. In the UK, for
example, Thatcher's government strengthened the state and used it to
break the labour movement (in order to ensure management authority over
their workers). In other words, instead of regulating capital and the
people, the state just regulates the people. The general public will
have the freedom of doing what the market dictates and if they object to
the market's "invisible hand", then the very visible fist of the state
(or private defence companies) will ensure they do. We can be sure if a
large anarchist movement developed the Austrian economists will, like
von Mises in the 1920s, back whatever state violence was required to
defend "civilisation" against it. All in the name of "freedom," of
course.

Then there is the idea that anything else that "pure" capitalism would
be worse. Given their ideological embrace of the free market, the
Austrians attack those economists (like Keynes) who tried to save
capitalism from itself. For the Austrian school, there is only
capitalism or "socialism" (i.e. state intervention) and they cannot be
combined. Any attempt to do so would, as Hayek put it in his book **The
Road to Serfdom**, inevitably lead to totalitarianism. Hence the
Austrians are at the forefront in attacking the welfare state as not
only counterproductive but inherently leading to fascism or, even worse,
some form of state socialism. Needless to say, the state's role in
creating capitalism in the first place is skilfully ignored in favour of
endless praise for the "natural" system of capitalism. Nor do they
realise that the victory of state intervention they so bemoan is, in
part, necessary to keep capitalism going and, in part, a consequence of
attempts to approximate their utopia (see [section D.1](secD1.html) for
a discussion).

Not that Hayek's thesis has any empirical grounding. No state has ever
become fascist due to intervening in the economy (unless a right-wing
coup happens, as in Chile, but that was not his argument). Rather,
dictatorial states have implemented planning rather than democratic
states becoming dictatorial after intervening in the economy. Moreover,
looking at the Western welfare states, the key compliant by the
capitalist class in the 1960s and 1970s was not a lack of general
freedom but rather too much. Workers and other previously oppressed but
obedient sections of society were standing up for themselves and
fighting the traditional hierarchies within society. This hardly fits in
with serfdom, although the industrial relations which emerged in
Pinochet's Chile, Thatcher's Britain and Reagan's America does. The call
was for the state to defend the *"management's right to manage"* against
rebellious wage slaves by breaking their spirit and organisation while,
at the same time, intervening to bolster capitalist authority in the
workplace. That this required an increase in state power and
centralisation would only come as a surprise to those who confuse the
rhetoric of capitalism with its reality.

Similarly, it goes without saying Hayek's thesis was extremely
selectively applied. It is strange to see, for example, Conservative
politicians clutching Hayek's **Road to Serfdom** with one hand and
using it to defend cutting the welfare state while, with the other,
implementing policies which give billions to the Military Industrial
Complex. Apparently "planning" is only dangerous to liberty when it is
in the interests of the many. Luckily, defence spending (for example)
has no such problems. As Chomsky stresses, *"the 'free market' ideology
is very **useful** -- it's a weapon against the general population . . .
because it's an argument against social spending, and it's a weapon
against poor people abroad . . . But nobody [in the ruling class] really
pays attention to this stuff when it comes to actual planning -- and no
one ever has."* [**Understanding Power**, p. 256] That is why anarchists
stress the importance of reforms from **below** rather than from above
-- as long as we have a state, any reforms should be directed first and
foremost to the (much more generous) welfare state for the rich rather
than the general population (the experience of the 1980s onwards shows
what happens when reforms are left to the capitalist class).

This is not to say that Hayek's attack upon those who refer to
totalitarian serfdom as a "new freedom" was not fully justified. Nor is
his critique of central planning and state "socialism" without merit.
Far from it. Anarchists would agree that any valid economic system must
be based on freedom and decentralisation in order to be dynamic and meet
needs, they simply apply such a critique to capitalism **as well as**
state socialism. The ironic thing about Hayek's argument is that he did
not see how his theory of tacit knowledge, used to such good effect
against state socialist ideas of central planning, were just as
applicable to critiquing the highly centralised and top-down capitalist
company and economy. Nor, ironically enough, that it was just as
applicable to the price mechanism he defended so vigorously (as we note
in [section I.1.2](secI2.html#seci12), the price system hides as much,
if not more, necessary information than it provides). As such, his
defence of capitalism can be turned against it and the centralised,
autocratic structures it is based on.

To conclude, while its open and extreme support for free market
capitalism and its inequalities is, to say the least, refreshing, it is
not remotely convincing or scientific. In fact, it amounts to little
more than a vigorous defence of business power hidden behind a thin
rhetoric of "free markets." As it preaches the infallibility of
capitalism, this requires a nearly unyielding defence of corporations,
economic and social power and workplace hierarchy. It must dismiss the
obvious fact that allowing big business to flourish into oligopoly and
monopoly (as it does, see [section C.4](secC4.html)) reduces the
possibility of competition solving the problem of unethical business
practices and worker exploitation, as they claim. This is unsurprising,
as the Austrian school (like economics in general) identifies "freedom"
with the "freedom" of private enterprise, i.e. the lack of
accountability of the economically privileged and powerful. This simply
becomes a defence of the economically powerful to do what they want
(within the laws specified by their peers in government).

Ironically, the Austrian defence of capitalism is dependent on the
belief that it will remain close to equilibrium. However, as seems
likely, capitalism is endogenously unstable, then any real "pure"
capitalism will be distant from equilibrium and, as a result, marked by
unemployment and, of course, booms and slumps. So it is possible to have
a capitalist economics based on non-equilibrium, but it is unlikely to
convince anyone that does not already believe that capitalism is the
best system ever unless they are unconcerned about unemployment (and so
worker exploitation) and instability. As Steve Keen notes, it is *"an
alternative way to ideologically support a capitalist economy . . . If
neoclassical economics becomes untenable for any reason, the Austrians
are well placed to provide an alternative religion for believers in the
primacy of the market over all other forms of social organisation."*
[Keen, **Debunking Economics**, p. 304]

Those who seek freedom for all and want to base themselves on more than
faith in an economic system marked by hierarchy, inequality and
oppression would be better seeking a more realistic and less apologetic
economic theory.
