C.12 Doesn't Hong Kong show the potentials of "free market" capitalism?
=======================================================================

Given the general lack of laissez-faire capitalism in the world,
examples to show its benefits are few and far between. Rather than admit
that the ideal is simply impossible, conservative and
right-"libertarian" ideologues scour the world and history for examples.
Rarely do they let facts get in the way of their searching -- until the
example expresses some negative features such as economic crisis
(repression of working class people or rising inequality and poverty are
of little consequence). Once that happens, then all the statist features
of those economies previously ignored or downplayed will be stressed in
order to protect the ideal from reality.

One such example is Hong Kong, which is often pointed to by
right-wingers as an example of the power of capitalism and how a "pure"
capitalism will benefit all. It has regularly been ranked as first in
the *"Index of Economic Freedom"* produced by the Heritage Foundation, a
US-based conservative think tank ("economic freedom" reflecting what you
expect a right-winger would consider important). Milton Friedman played
a leading role in this idealisation of the former UK colony. In his
words:

> "Take the fifty-year experiment in economic policy provided by Hong
> Kong between the end of World War II and . . . when Hong Kong reverted
> to China.
>
> "In this experiment, Hong Kong represents the experimental treatment .
> . . I take Britain as one control because Britain, a benevolent
> dictator, imposed different policies on Hong Kong from the ones it
> pursued at home . . .
>
> "Nonetheless, there are some statistics, and in 1960, the earliest
> date for which I have been able to get them, the average per capita
> income in Hong Kong was 28 percent of that in Great Britain; by 1996,
> it had risen to 137 percent of that in Britain. In short, from 1960 to
> 1996, Hong Kong's per capita income rose from about one-quarter of
> Britain's to more than a third larger than Britain's . . . I believe
> that the only plausible explanation for the different rates of growth
> is socialism in Britain, free enterprise and free markets in Hong
> Kong. Has anybody got a better explanation? I'd be grateful for any
> suggestions." [**The Hong Kong Experiment**]

It should be stressed that by "socialism" Friedman meant state spending,
particularly that associated with welfare (*"Direct government spending
is less than 15 percent of national income in Hong Kong, more than 40
percent in the United States."* [**Op. Cit.**]). What to make of his
claims?

It is undeniable that the figures for Hong Kong's economy are
impressive. Per-capita GDP by end 1996 should reach US\$ 25,300, one of
the highest in Asia and higher than many western nations. Enviable tax
rates - 16.5% corporate profits tax, 15% salaries tax. In the first 5
years of the 1990's Hong Kong's economy grew at a tremendous rate --
nominal per capita income and GDP levels (where inflation is not
factored in) almost doubled. Even accounting for inflation, growth was
brisk. The average annual growth rate in real terms of total GDP in the
10 years to 1995 was six per cent, growing by 4.6 per cent in 1995.
However, looking more closely, we find a somewhat different picture than
that painted by those claim Hong Kong as an example of the wonders of
free market capitalism. Once these basic (and well known) facts are
known, it is hard to take Friedman's claims seriously. Of course, there
are aspects of laissez-faire to the system (it does not subsidise sunset
industries, for example) however, there is much more to Hong Kong that
these features. Ultimately, laissez-faire capitalism is more than just
low taxes.

The most obvious starting place is the fact that the government owns all
the land. To state the obvious, land nationalisation is hardly
capitalistic. It is one of the reasons why its direct taxation levels
are so low. As one resident points out:

> "The main explanation for low tax rates . . . is not low social
> spending. One important factor is that Hong Kong does not have to
> support a defence industry . . . The most crucial explanation . . .
> lies in the fact that less than half of the government's revenues
> comes from direct taxation.
> "The Hong Kong government actually derives much of its revenue from
> land transactions. The territory's land is technically owned by the
> government, and the government fills its coffers by selling fifty-year
> leases to developers (the fact that there are no absolute private
> property rights to land will come as another surprise t boosters of
> 'Hong Kong-style' libertarianism) . . . The government has an interest
> in maintaining high property values . . . if it is to maintain its
> policy of low taxation. It does this by carefully controlling the
> amount of land that is released for sale . . . It is, of course, those
> buying new homes and renting from the private sector who pay the price
> for this policy. Many Hong Kongers live in third world conditions, and
> the need to pay astronomical residential property prices is widely
> viewed as an indirect form of taxation." [Daniel A. Bell, *"Hong
> Kong's Transition to Capitalism"*, pp. 15-23, **Dissent**, Winter
> 1998, pp. 15-6]

The ownership of land and the state's role as landlord partly explains
the low apparent ratio of state spending to GDP. If the cost of the
subsidised housing land were accounted for at market prices in the
government budget, the ratio would be significantly higher. As noted,
Hong Kong had no need to pay for defence as this cost was borne by the
UK taxpayer. Include these government-provided services at their market
prices and the famously low share of government spending in GDP climbs
sharply.

Luckily for many inhabitants of Hong Kong, the state provides a range of
social welfare services in housing, education, health care and social
security. The government has a very basic, but comprehensive social
welfare system. This started in the 1950s, when the government launched
one of the largest public housing schemes in history to house the influx
of about 2 million people fleeing Communist China. Hong Kong's social
welfare system really started in 1973, when the newly appointed governor
*"announced that public housing, education, medical, and social welfare
services would be treated as the four pillars of a fair and caring
society."* He launched a public housing program and by 1998, 52 percent
of the population *"live in subsidised housing, most of whom rent flats
from the Housing Authority with rents set at one-fifth the market level
(the rest have bought subsidised flats under various home-ownership
schemes, with prices discounted 50 percent from those in the private
sector)."* Beyond public housing, Hong Kong *"also has most of the
standard features of welfare states in Western Europe. There is an
excellent public health care system: private hospitals are actually
going out of business because clean and efficient public hospitals are
well subsidised (the government pays 97 percent of the costs)."*
Fortunately for the state, the territory initially had a relatively
youthful population compared with western countries which meant it had
less need for spending on pensions and help for the aged (this advantage
is declining as the population ages). In addition, the *"large majority
of primary schools and secondary schools are either free of heavily
subsidised, and the territory's tertiary institutions all receive most
of their funds from the public coffers."* [Bell, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 16-7
and p. 17] We can be sure that when conservatives and
right-"libertarians" use Hong Kong as a model, they are **not**
referring to these aspects of the regime.

Given this, Hong Kong has *"deviated from the myth of a laissez-faire
economy with the government limiting itself to the role of the 'night
watchman'"* as it *"is a welfare state."* In 1995-6, it spent 47 percent
of its public expenditure on social services (*"only slightly less than
the United Kingdom"*). Between 1992 and 1998, welfare spending increased
at a real rate of at least 10 percent annually. [Bell, **Op. Cit.**, p.
16] *"Without doubt,"* two experts note, *"the development of public
housing in Hong Kong has contributed greatly to the social well-being of
the Territory."* Overall, social welfare *"is the third largest [state]
expenditure . . . after education and health."* [Simon X. B. Zhao and l.
Zhand, *"Economic Growth and Income Inequality in Hong Kong: Trends and
Explanations,"* pp. 74-103, **China: An International Journal**, Vol. 3,
No. 1, p. 95 and p. 97] Hong Kong spent 11.6% of its GDP on welfare
spending in 2004, for example.

Moreover, this state intervention is not limited to just social welfare
provision. Hong Kong has an affordable public transport system in which
the government has substantial equity in most transport systems and
grants franchises and monopolised routes. So as well as being the
monopoly owner of land and the largest landlord, the state imposes rent
controls, operates three railways and regulates transport services and
public utilities as monopoly franchises. It subsidises education, health
care, welfare and charity. It has also took over the ownership and
management of several banks in the 1980s to prevent a general bank run.
Overall, since the 1960s *"the Hong Kong government's involvement in
everyday life has increases steadily and now reaches into many vital
areas of socio-economic development."* [Ming K Chan, *"The Legacy of the
British Administration of Hong Kong: A View from Hong Kong,"* pp.
567-582, **The China Quarterly**, no. 151, p. 575 and p. 574] It also
intervened massively in the stock market during the 1997 Asian crisis.
Strangely, Friedman failed to note any of these developments nor point
to the lack of competition in many areas of the domestic economy and the
high returns given to competition-free utility companies.

The state did not agree to these welfare measures by choice, as they
were originally forced upon it by fears of social unrest, first by waves
of migrants fleeing from China and then by the need to portray itself as
something more than an uncaring colonial regime. However, the other form
of intervention it pursued **was** by choice, namely the collusion
between the state and business elites. As one expert notes, the
*"executive-led 'administrative non-party' state was heavily influenced
by the business community"* with *"the composition of various government
advisory boards, committees and the three councils"* reflecting this as
*"business interests had an overwhelming voice in the consultation
machinery (about 70% of the total membership)."* This is accurately
described as a *"bureaucratic-cum-corporatist state"* with *"the
interests of government and the private sector dominating those of the
community."* Overall, *"the government and private sector share common
interests and have close links."* [Mae Kam Ng, *"Political Economy and
Urban Planning,"* **Progress in Planning**, P. Diamond and B. H. Massan
(eds.), vol. 51, Part 1, p. 11 and p. 84] Sizeable fortunes will be made
when there are interlocking arrangements between the local oligarchies
and the state.

Another commentator notes that the myth of Hong Kong's laissez-faire
regime *"has been disproved in academic debates more than a decade ago"*
and points to *"the hypocrisy of laissez-faire colonialism"* which is
marked by *"a government which is actively involved, fully engaged and
often interventionist, whether by design or necessity."* He notes that
*"the most damaging legacy [of colonial rule] was the blatantly
pro-business bias in the government's decision-making."* There has been
*"collusion between the colonial officialdom and the British economic
elites."* Indeed, *"the colonial regime has been at fault for its
subservience to business interests as manifested in its unwillingness
until very recently, not because of laissez-faire but from its
pro-business bias, to legislate against cartels and monopolies and to
regulate economic activities in the interests of labour, consumers and
the environment . . . In other words, free trade and free enterprise
with an open market . . . did not always mean fair trade and equal
opportunity: the regime intervened to favour British and big business
interests at the expense of both fair play and of a level playing field
for all economic players regardless of class or race."* [Ming K Chan,
*"The Legacy of the British Administration of Hong Kong: A View from
Hong Kong,"* pp. 567-582, **The China Quarterly**, no. 151, p. 577, p.
576, p. 575 and pp. 575-6] Bell notes that a British corporation *"held
the local telephone monopoly until 1995"* while another *"holds all the
landing rights at Hong Kong airport."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 21]

Unsurprisingly, as it owns all the land, the government has *"a strong
position in commanding resources to direct spatial development in the
territory."* There is a *"three-tiered system of land-use plans."* The
top-level, for example, *"maps out the overall land development strategy
to meet the long-term socio-economic needs of Hong Kong"* and it is
*"prepared and reviewed by the administration and there is no public
input to it."* This planning system is, as noted, heavily influenced by
the business sector and its *"committees operate largely behind closed
doors and policy formulation could be likened to a black-box
operation."* *"Traditionally,"* Ng notes, *"the closed door and Hong
Kong centred urban planning system had served to maintain economic
dynamism in the colony. With democratisation introduced in the 1980s,
the planning system is forced to be more open and to serve not just
economic interests."* [Mae Kam Ng, **Op. Cit.**, p. 11, p. 39, p. 37 and
p. 13] As Chan stresses, *"the colonial government has continuously
played a direct and crucial role as a very significant economic
participant. Besides its control of valuable resources, the regime's
command of the relevant legal, political and social institutions and
processes also indirectly shapes economic behaviour and societal
development."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 574]

Overall, as Bell notes, *"one cannot help but notice the large gap
between this reality and the myth of an open and competitive market
where only talent and luck determine the economic winners."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 16] As an expert in the Asian Tiger economies summarises:

> *"to conclude . . . that Hong Kong is close to a free market economy
> is misleading . . . Not only is the economy managed from outside the
> formal institutions of government by the informal coalition of peak
> private economic organisations, but government itself also has
> available some unusual instruments for influencing industrial
> activity. It owns all the land. . . It controls rents in part of the
> public housing market and supplies subsidised public housing to
> roughly half the population, thereby helping to keep down the cost of
> labour. And its ability to increase or decrease the flow of immigrants
> from China also gives it a way of affecting labour costs."* [Robert
> Wade, **Governing the Market**, p. 332]

This means that the Hong Kong system of "laissez-faire" is marked by the
state having close ties with the major banks and trading companies,
which, in turn, are closely linked to the life-time expatriates who
largely run the government. This provides a *"point of concentration"*
to conduct negotiations in line with an implicit development strategy.
Therefore it is pretty clear that Hong Kong does not really show the
benefits of "free market" capitalism. Wade indicates that we can
consider Hong Kong as a *"special case or as a less successful variant
of the authoritarian-capitalist state."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 333]

There are other explanations for Hong Kong's high growth rates than
simply "capitalism." Firstly, Hong Kong is a city state and cities have
a higher economic growth rate than regions (which are held back by large
rural areas). This is because the agricultural sector rarely achieves
high economic growth rates and so in its absence a high growth rate is
easier to achieve. Secondly, there is Hong Kong's location and its
corresponding role as an entrepôt economy. Wade notes that *"its
economic growth is a function of its service role in a wider regional
economy, as entrepôt trader, regional headquarters for multinational
companies, and refuge for nervous money."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 331] Being
between China and the rest of the world means its traders could act as a
middleman, earning income from the mark-up they could impose on good
going through the territory. This is why Hong Kong is often referred to
as an entrepôt economy, a place that imports, stores, and re-exports
goods. In other words, Hong Kong made a lot of its money because many
Chinese exports and imports went through it and its traders marked-up
the prices. It should be obvious if most of Western Europe's goods went
through, say, Liverpool, that city would have a very good economic
performance regardless of other factors. This option is hardly available
to most cities, never mind countries.

Then there is the issue of state ownership of land. As Mae Kam Ng
reports, monopoly ownership of all land by the state sets the context
for super-profits by government and finance capital generally. [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 13] Unsurprisingly, most government land *"is sold to just
three real-estate developers"* who *"sit on huge tracts of land,
drop-feeding apartments onto the market so as to maintain high property
prices."* Between 1992 and 1996, for example, prices increased fourfold
and profits doubled. The heads of two of the property firms were on the
list of the world's ten richest men in 1998. *"Meanwhile, potential new
entrants to the market are restricted by the huge cost of paying
land-conversion premiums that are the bedrock of government revenues."*
This is a *"cosy arrangement between the government and major
developers."* [Daniel A. Bell, **Op. Cit.**, p. 16]

The role as headquarters for companies and as a financial centre also
plays a part. It means an essential part of its success is that it gets
surplus value produced elsewhere in the world. Handling other people's
money is a sure-fire way of getting rich and this will have a nice
impact on per-capita income figures (as will selling goods produced in
sweat-shops in dictatorships like China). There has been a gradual shift
in economic direction to a more service-oriented economy which has
stamped Hong Kong as one of the world's foremost financial centres. This
highly developed sector is served by some 565 banks and deposit-taking
companies from over 40 countries, including 85 of the world's top 100 in
terms of assets. In addition, it is the 8th largest stock market in the
world (in terms of capitalisation) and the 2nd largest in Asia. By 1995,
Hong Kong was the world's 10th largest exporter of services with the
industry embracing everything from accounting and legal services,
insurance and maritime to telecommunications and media. The contribution
of the services sectors as a whole to GDP increased from 60 per cent in
1970 to 83 per cent in 1994.

Meanwhile, manufacturing industry has moved to low wage countries such
as southern China (by the end of the 1970's, Hong Kong's manufacturing
base was less competitive, facing increasing costs in land and labour --
in other words, workers were starting to benefit from economic growth
and so capital moved elsewhere). The economic reforms introduced by Deng
Xiaoping in southern China in 1978 where important, as this allowed
capital access to labour living under a dictatorship (just as American
capitalists invested heavily in Nazi Germany -- labour rights were null,
profits were high). It is estimated about 42,000 enterprises in the
province have Hong Kong participation and 4,000,000 workers (nine times
larger than the territory's own manufacturing workforce) are now
directly or indirectly employed by Hong Kong companies. In the late
1980's Hong Kong trading and manufacturing companies began to expand
further a field than just southern China. By the mid 1990's they were
operating across Asia, in Eastern Europe and Central America. This
shift, incidentally, has resulted in deindustrialisation and a
*"decrease in real income among manual workers"* as they moved to the
lower end service sector. [Simon X. B. Zhao and l. Zhand, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 88]

Then there is the criteria Friedman uses, namely per-capita GDP. As we
have repeated stressed, averages hide a lot of important and relevant
information when evaluating a society. So it must be stressed that
Friedman's criteria of per capita income is an average and, as such,
hides the effect of inequality. This means that a society with huge
numbers of poor people and a handful of ultra-rich individuals may have
a higher average income than a more equal society. This is the case of,
say, America compared to Sweden. Unsurprisingly, Hong Kong is a very
unequal society and this inequality is growing (so his claim that Hong
Kong is capitalist refutes his 1962 assertion that the more capitalist
economies are more equal). *"Behind the impressive GDP figures,"*
indicates Chan, *"is a widening income gap between the super-rich and
the grassroots, with 650,000 people reportedly living below the poverty
line."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 576] As Bell points out, 13% lived below the
poverty line in 1999, compared to 8% in 1971. This is partly explained
by *"the rising proportion of elderly people and single-parent
families."* However, economic integration with China has played a role
as Hong Kong's manufacturing sector *"has been almost entirely
transferred to the southern province of Guangdong (where labour is
cheaper and workers' rights are practically non-existent), with the
consequence that Hong Kong's industrial workers now find it much harder
to find decent jobs in Hong Kong. Most end up working in low-paying
service jobs without much hope of upward mobility."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
21-2]

As other experts note, while Hong Kong may have a GDP-per-capita of a
developed nation, its distribution of household income was similar to
that of Guatemala. Looking at the 1960s onwards, income distribution
only improved between 1966 and 1971, after this period the share of the
bottom 30% of the population went down continuously while the top 20%
saw an increase in their share of total income. In fact, from the 1980s,
*"the top 20% of households managed to account for over 50 per cent of
the total income."* In fact, the bottom 60% of the population saw a
decline in their share of income between 1971 and 1996. Overall,
*"high-income households increased their wealth progressively faster
than low-income households."* This polarisation, they argue, will
continue as the economy de-industrialises: *"in the absence of proper
social policies, it will generate a small, extremely wealthy class of
the 'new rich' and simultaneously a large population of the 'working
poor.'"* [Simon X. B. Zhao and L. Zhand, **Op. Cit.**, p. 85, p. 80, p.
82, p. 84 and p. 102]

Given that everywhere cannot be such a service provider, it does not
provide much of an indication of how "free market" capitalism would work
in, say, the United States. And as there is in fact extensive (if
informal) economic management and that the state owns all the land and
subsidies rent and health care, how can it be even considered an example
of "free market" capitalism in action? Unless, of course, you consider
that "economic freedom" best flourishes under a dictatorship which owns
all the land, which has close links to business interests, provides a
comprehensive, if basic, welfare state and is dependent on another
country to provide its defence needs and the head of its executive.
While most American's would be envious of Hong Kong's welfare state, it
is doubtful that many would consider its other features as desirable.
How many would be happy with being under a *"benevolent dictator"*
(perhaps being turned into a colony of Britain again?) whose appointed
government works closely with the local business elite? Having a
political regime in which the wealthy can influence the government
without the need for elections may be considered too a high price to pay
just to get subsidised housing, health care and education. Given a
choice between freedom and a high rate of growth, how many would pick
the latter over the former?

It is no coincidence that like most examples of the wonders of the free
market, Hong Kong was not a democracy. It was a relatively liberal
colonial dictatorship run. But political liberty does not rate highly
with many supporters of laissez-faire capitalism (such as
right-"libertarians", for example). However, the two are linked. Which
explains why we have spent so much time debunking the "free market"
capitalism claims over Hong Kong. It is more than simply a concern over
basic facts and correcting inaccurate assertions. Rather it is a concern
over the meaning of freedom and the dubious assumption that freedom can
be compartmentalised. While Hong Kong may be a more appealing example
that Pinochet's Chile, it still rests on the assumption that the masses
should be excluded from having a say over their communities (in their
own interests, of course, and **never,** of course, in the interests of
those who do the excluding) and that freedom is simply the ability to
change bosses (or become one yourself). Ultimately, there is a big
difference between "free" and "business-friendly." Hong Kong is the
latter simply because it is not the former. Its success is testament
that dictatorships can be more reliable defenders of class privilege
than democracies.

This can be seen from the attitude of Hong Kong's business elite to the
democratic reforms introduced in the 1990s and integration with China.
Significantly, *"the nominally socialist Chinese government consistently
opposed the introduction of further social welfare programs in Hong
Kong."* This is because *"it has chosen to enter into a strategic
alliance with Hong Kong's business class"* (*"To earn support of
corporate bosses, the Chinese government organised timely interventions
on behalf of Hong Kong companies"*). Unsurprisingly, the first
Beijing-appointed executive was made up of successful business men and
one of its first acts was to suspend pro-labour laws passed by the
out-going legislature. [Bell, **Op. Cit.**, p. 17, p. 18 and pp. 19-20]
The Chinese government opposed attempts to extend democracy, imposing a
complex electoral system which, in the words of the **Asian Wall Street
Journal**, was a *"means of reducing public participation in the
political process while stacking the next legislature with people who
depend on favours from the regime in Hong Kong or Beijing and answer to
narrow special interests, particularly the business elite."* [quoted by
Bell, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 18-9]

This reflects the fact that business tycoons are worried that democracy
would led to increased welfare spending with one, for example,
predicting that the *"under-educated, and those who did not pay tax
would elect candidates who stood for more social spending, which would
turn Hong Kong into a 'welfare state' . . . If we had a 100-per-cent
directly elected LegCo, only social welfare-oriented candidates will be
elected. Hong Kong is a business city and we [sic!] do not want to end
up being a social welfare state."* [*"Tycoon warns on protests,"* **The
Standard**, 29 April 2004] Such a government can ignore public opinion
and the electorate more than in an independent democracy and, of course,
can be more influenced by business (as the history of Hong Kong
testifies).

Overall, it is fair to say that Friedman only saw what he wanted to see
and contrasted his idealised vision with Britain and explained the
divergent economic performances of both countries to a conflict between
"socialism" and "capitalism." How he failed to notice that the reality
of Hong Kong was one marked by collusion between big business and the
state and that in key areas the regime was much more "socialist" than
its British counterpart is difficult to understand given his willingness
to use it as an example. It seems intellectually dishonest to fail to
mention that the state owned all the land and was the biggest landlord
with at least 50% of the population living in subsidised housing. Then
there are the facts of almost free medical treatment at government
clinics and hospitals and an education system almost entirely funded by
the government. These are all massive interventions in the marketplace,
interventions Friedman spent many decades fighting in the USA. He did,
however, contribute to the myth that the British were benign
imperialists and the "free market" they introduced into Hong Kong was in
the interests of all rather than for those who exercised the
dictatorship.
