D.9 Why does political power become concentrated under capitalism?
==================================================================

Under capitalism, political power tends to become concentrated in the
executive branch of government, along with a corresponding decline in
the effectiveness of parliamentary institutions. As Kropotkin discussed
in his account of *"Representative Government,"* parliaments grew out of
the struggle of capitalists against the power of centralised monarchies
during the early modern period. This meant that the function of
parliaments was to check and control the exercise of executive power
when it was controlled by another class (namely the aristocracy and
landlords). The role of Parliaments flourished and reached the peak of
their prestige in the struggle against the monarchy and immediately
afterwards.

With the end of absolute monarchy, legislatures become battlegrounds of
contending parties, divided by divergent class and group interests. This
reduces their capacity for positive action, particularly when struggle
outside parliament is pressurising representatives to take some interest
in public concerns. The ruling class also needs a strong centralised
state that can protect its interests internally and externally and which
can ignore both popular demands and the vested interests of specific
sections of the dominant economic and social elites in order to pursue
policies required to keep the system as a whole going. This means that
there will be a tendency for Parliaments to give up its prerogatives,
building up a centralised and uncontrolled authority in the form of an
empowered executive against which, ironically, it had fought against at
its birth.

This process can be seen clearly in the history of the United States.
Since World War II, power has become centralised in the hands of the
president to such an extent that some scholars now refer to an
*"imperial presidency,"* following Arthur Schlesinger's 1973 book of
that title. In the UK, Prime Minister Tony Blair has been repeatedly
criticised for his *"presidential"* form of government, while Parliament
has been repeatedly side-tracked. This builds on tendencies which flow
back to, at least, the Thatcher government which started the neo-liberal
transformation of the UK with its associated rise in inequality, social
polarisation and increases in state centralisation and authority.

Contemporary US presidents' appropriation of congressional authority,
especially in matters relating to national security, has paralleled the
rise of the United States as the world's strongest and most
imperialistic military power. In the increasingly dangerous and
interdependent world of the 20th century, the perceived need for a
leader who can act quickly and decisively, without possibly disastrous
obstruction by Congress, has provided an impetus for ever greater
concentration of power in the White House. This concentration has taken
place in both foreign and domestic policy, but it has been catalysed
above all by a series of foreign policy decisions in which modern US
presidents have seized the most vital of all government powers, the
power to make war. For example, President Truman decided to commit
troops in Korea without prior congressional approval while the
Eisenhower Administration established a system of pacts and treaties
with nations all over the globe, making it difficult for Congress to
limit the President's deployment of troops according to the requirements
of treaty obligations and national security, both of which were left to
presidential judgement. The CIA, a secretive agency accountable to
Congress only after the fact, was made the primary instrument of US
intervention in the internal affairs of other nations for national
security reasons. This process of executive control over war reached a
peak post-911, with Bush's nonsense of a *"pre-emptive"* war and public
acknowledgement of a long standing US policy that the Commander-in-Chief
was authorised to take "defensive" war measures without congressional
approval or UN authorisation.

And as they have continued to commit troops to war without congressional
authorisation or genuine public debate, the President's unilateral
policy-making has spilled over into domestic affairs as well. Most
obviously, thanks to Bush I and Clinton, important economic treaties
(like GATT and NAFTA) can be rammed through Congress as *"fast-track"*
legislation, which limits the time allowed for debate and forbids
amendments. Thanks to Jimmy Carter, who reformed the Senior Executive
Service to give the White House more control over career bureaucrats,
and Ronald Reagan, who politicised the upper levels of the executive
branch to an unprecedented degree, presidents can now pack government
with their spoilsmen and reward partisan bureaucrats (the lack of
response by FEMA during the Katrina hurricane is an example of this).
Thanks to the first Bush, presidents now have a powerful new technique
to enhance presidential prerogatives and erode the intent of Congress
even further -- namely, signing laws while announcing that they will not
obey them. Fifth, thanks also to Bush, yet another new instrument of
arbitrary presidential power has been created: the "tsar," a
presidential appointee with vague, sweeping charges that overlap with or
supersede the powers of department heads. [Michael Lind, *"The Case for
Congressional Power: the Out-of-Control Presidency,"* **The New
Republic**, Aug. 14, 1995]

Thus we find administrations bypassing or weakening official government
agencies or institutions to implement policies that are not officially
permitted. In the US, the Reagan Administration's Iran-Contra affair is
an example. During that episode the National Security Council, an arm of
the executive branch, secretly funded the Contras, a mercenary
counter-revolutionary force in Central America, in direct violation of
the Boland Amendment which Congress had passed for the specific purpose
of prohibiting such funding. Then there is the weakening of government
agencies to the point where they can no longer effectively carry out
their mandate. Reagan's tenure in the White House again provides a
number of examples. The Environmental Protection Agency, for instance,
was for all practical purposes neutralised when employees dedicated to
genuine environmental protection were removed and replaced with people
loyal to corporate polluters. Such detours around the law are deliberate
policy tools that allow presidents to exercise much more actual power
than they appear to have on paper. Finally, the President's authority to
determine foreign and domestic policy through National Security
Directives that are kept secret from Congress and the American people.
Such NSDs cover a virtually unlimited field of actions, shaping policy
that may be radically different from what is stated publicly by the
White House and involving such matters as interference with First
Amendment rights, initiation of activities that could lead to war,
escalation of military conflicts, and even the commitment of billions of
dollars in loan guarantees -- all without congressional approval or even
knowledge.

President Clinton's use of an Executive Order to bail out Mexico from
its debt crisis after Congress failed to appropriate the money falls
right into the authoritarian tradition of running the country by fiat, a
process which accelerated with his successor George Bush (in keeping
with the general tendencies of Republican administrations in
particular). The second Bush took this disdain for democracy and the law
even further. His administration has tried to roll back numerous basic
liberties and rights as well. He has sought to strip people accused of
crimes of rights that date as far back as the Magna Carta in
Anglo-American jurisprudence: elimination of presumption of innocence,
keeping suspects in indefinite imprisonment, ending trial by impartial
jury, restricting access to lawyers and knowledge of evidence and
charges against the accused. He has regularly stated when signing
legislation that he will assert the right to ignore those parts of laws
with which he disagrees. His administration has adopted policies which
have ignored the Geneva Convention (labelled as *"quaint"*) and publicly
tolerated torture of suspects and prisoners of war. That this underlying
authoritarianism of politicians is often belied by their words should go
without saying (an obvious fact, somehow missed by the mainstream media,
which made satire redundant in the case the second Bush).

Not that this centralisation of powers has bothered the representatives
whom are being disempowered by it. Quite the reverse. This is
unsurprising, for under a leader which *"guarantees 'order' -- that is
to say internal exploitation and external expansion -- than the
parliament submits to all his caprices and arms him with ever new powers
. . . That is understandable: all government has tendency to become
personal since that is its origin and its essence . . . it will always
search for the man on whom it can unload the cares of government and to
whom in turn it will submit. As long as we confide to a small group all
the economic, political, military, financial and industrial prerogatives
with which we arm them today, this small group will necessarily be
inclined . . . to submit to a single chief."* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 128] As such, there are institutional forces at work within the
government organisational structure which encourage these tendencies and
as long as they find favour with business interests they will not be
challenged.

This is a key factor, of course. If increased authoritarianism and
concentration of decision making were actually harming the interests of
the economically dominant elite then more concern would be expressed
about them in what passes for public discourse. However, the reduction
of democratic processes fits in well with the neo-liberal agenda (and,
indeed, this agenda dependent on it). As Chomsky notes, *"democracy
reduces to empty form"* when the votes of the general public votes no
impact or role in determining economic and social development. In other
words, *"neoliberal reforms are antithetical to promotion of democracy.
They are not designed to shrink the state, as often asserted, but to
strengthen state institutions to serve even more than before the needs
of the substantial people."* This has seen *"extensive gerrymandering to
prevent competition for seats in the House, the most democratic of
government institutions and therefore the most worrisome,"* while
congress has been *"geared to implementing the pro-business policies"*
and the White House has been reconstructed into top-down systems, in a
similar way to that of a corporation (*"In structure, the political
counterpart to a corporation is a totalitarian state."*) [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 218, p. 237 and p. 238]

The aim is to exclude the general politic from civil society, creating
Locke's system of rule by property owners only. As one expert (and
critic) on Locke argues in his scheme, the *"labouring class, being
without estate, are subject to, but not full members of civil society"*
and the *"right to rule (more accurately, the right to control any
government) is given to men of estate only."* The working class will be
in but not part of civil society in the same way that they are in but
not part of a company. The labouring class may do the actual work in a
capitalist firm, but they *"cannot take part in the operation of the
company at the same level as the owners."* Thus the ideal (classical)
"liberal" state is a *"joint-stock company of owners whose majority
decision binds not only themselves but also their employees."* [C. B.
MacPherson, **The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism**, p.
248, p. 249 and p. 251] The aim of significant sections of the right and
the ruling class is to achieve this goal within the context of a
nominally democratic state which, on paper, allows significant civil
liberties but which, in practice, operates like a corporation. Liberty
for the many will be reduced to market forms, the ability to buy and
sell, within the rules designed by and for the property owners.
Centralised state power within an overall authoritarian social culture
is the best way to achieve this aim.

It should be stressed that the rise of inequality and centralised state
power has came about by design, not by accident. Both trends delight the
rich and the right, whose aim has always been to exclude the general
population from the public sphere, eliminate taxation on wealth and
income derived from owning it and roll back the limited reforms the
general population have won over the years. In his book
**Post-Conservative America** Kevin Phillips, one of the most
knowledgeable and serious conservative ideologues, discusses the
possibility of fundamental alterations that he regards as desirable in
the US government. His proposals leave no doubt about the direction in
which the Right wishes to proceed. *"Governmental power is too diffused
to make difficult and necessary economic and technical decisions,"*
Phillips maintains. *"[A]ccordingly, the nature of that power must be
re-thought. Power at the federal level must be augmented, and lodged for
the most part in the executive branch."* [p. 218] He assures us that all
the changes he envisions can be accomplished without altering the
Constitution.

As one moderate British Conservative MP has documented, the
"free-market" Conservative Thatcher government of the 1980s increased
centralisation of power and led a sustained *"assault on local
government."* One key reason was *"dislike of opposition"* which applied
to *"intermediate institutions"* between the individual and the state.
These *"were despised and disliked because they got in the way of
'free-market forces' . . . and were liable to disagree with Thatcherite
policies."* Indeed, they simply abolished elected local governments
(like the Greater London Council) which were opposed to the policies of
the central government. They controlled the rest by removing their power
to raise their own funds, which destroyed their local autonomy. The net
effect of neo-liberal reforms was that Britain became *"ever more
centralised"* and local government was *"fragmenting and weakening."*
[**Dancing with Dogma**, p. 261, p. 262 and p. 269]

This reversal of what, traditionally, conservatives and even liberals
had argued had its roots in the "free market" capitalist ideology. For
*"[n]othing is to stand in the way of the free market, and no such
fripperies as democratic votes are to be allowed to upset it. The
unadulterated free market is unalterable, and those who dislike it or
suffer from it must learn to put up with it. In Rousseau's language,
they must be forced to be free."* as such there was *"no paradox"* to
the *"Thatcherite devotion to both the free market and a strong state"*
as the *"establishment of individualism and a free-market state is an
unbending if not dictatorial venture which demands the prevention of
collective action and the submission of dissenting institutions and
individuals."* Thus rhetoric about "liberty" and rolling back the state
can easily be *"combined in practice with centralisation and the
expansion of the state's frontiers."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 273-4 and p.
273] A similar process occurred under Reagan in America.

As Chomsky stresses, the *"antidemocratic thrust has precedents, of
course, but is reaching new heights"* under the current set of
*"reactionary statists"* who *"are dedicated warriors. With consistency
and passion that approach caricature, their policies serve the serve the
substantial people -- in fact, an unusually narrow sector of them -- and
disregard or harm the underlying population and future generations. They
are also seeking to use their current opportunities to institutionalise
these arrangements, so that it will be no small task to reconstruct a
more humane and democratic society."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 238 and p. 236]
As we noted in [section D.1](secD1.html), the likes of Reagan, Thatcher
and Bush do not appear by accident. They and the policies they implement
reflect the interests of significant sectors of the ruling elite and
their desires. These will not disappear if different, more progressive
sounding, politicians are elected. Nor will the nature of the state
machine and its bureaucracy, nor will the workings and needs of the
capitalist economy.

This helps explains why the distinctions between the two major parties
in the US have been, to a large extent, virtually obliterated. Each is
controlled by the corporate elite, albeit by different factions within
it. Despite many tactical and verbal disagreements, virtually all
members of this elite share a basic set of principles, attitudes,
ideals, and values. Whether Democrat or Republican, most of them have
graduated from the same Ivy League schools, belong to the same exclusive
social clubs, serve on the same interlocking boards of directors of the
same major corporations, and send their children to the same private
boarding schools (see G. William Domhoff, **Who Rules America Now?** and
C. Wright Mills, **The Power Elite**). Perhaps most importantly, they
share the same psychology, which means that they have the same
priorities and interests: namely, those of corporate America. That the
Democrats are somewhat more dependent and responsive to progressive
working class people while the Republicans are beholden to the rich and
sections of the religious right come election time should not make us
confuse rhetoric with the reality of policies pursued and underlying
common assumptions and interests.

This means that in the USA there is really only one party -- the
Business Party -- which wears two different masks to hide its real face
from the public. Similar remarks apply to the liberal democratic regimes
in the rest of the advanced capitalist states. In the UK, Blair's "New
Labour" has taken over the mantle of Thatcherism and have implemented
policies based on its assumptions. Unsurprisingly, it received the
backing of numerous right-wing newspapers as well as funding from
wealthy individuals. In other words, the UK system has mutated into a
more US style one of two Business parties one of which gets more trade
union support than the other (needless to say, it is unlikely that
Labour will be changing its name to "Capital" unless forced to by the
trading standards office nor does it look likely that the trade union
bureaucracy will reconsider their funding in spite of the fact New
Labour simply ignored them when not actually attacking them!). The
absence of a true opposition party, which itself is a main
characteristic of authoritarian regimes, is thus an accomplished fact
already, and has been so for many years.

Besides the reasons noted above, another cause of increasing political
centralisation under capitalism is that industrialisation forces masses
of people into alienated wage slavery, breaking their bonds to other
people, to the land, and to tradition, which in turn encourages strong
central governments to assume the role of surrogate parent and to
provide direction for their citizens in political, intellectual, moral,
and even spiritual matters. (see Hannah Arendt, **The Origins of
Totalitarianism**). And as Marilyn French emphasises in **Beyond
Power**, the growing concentration of political power in the capitalist
state can also be attributed to the form of the corporation, which is a
microcosm of the authoritarian state, since it is based on centralised
authority, bureaucratic hierarchy, antidemocratic controls, and lack of
individual initiative and autonomy. Thus the millions of people who work
for large corporations tend automatically to develop the psychological
traits needed to survive and "succeed" under authoritarian rule:
notably, obedience, conformity, efficiency, subservience, and fear of
responsibility. The political system naturally tends to reflect the
psychological conditions created at the workplace, where most people
spend about half their time.

Reviewing such trends, Marxist Ralph Miliband concludes that *"it points
in the direction of a regime in which democratic forms have ceased to
provide effective constraints upon state power."* The *"distribution of
power"* will become *"more unequal"* and so *"[h]owever strident the
rhetoric of democracy and popular sovereignty may be, and despite the
'populist' overtones which politics must now incorporate, the trend is
toward the ever-greater appropriation of power at the top."* [**Divided
Societies**, p. 166 and p. 204] As such, this reduction in genuine
liberty, democracy and growth in executive power does not flow simply
from the intentions of a few bad apples. Rather, they reflect economic
developments, the needs of the system as a whole plus the pressures
associated with the way specific institutions are structured and operate
as well as the need to exclude, control and marginalise the general
population. Thus while we can struggle and resist specific
manifestations of this process, we need to fight and eliminate their
root causes within capitalism and statism themselves if we want to turn
them back and, eventually, end them.

This increase in centralised and authoritarian rule may not result in
obvious elimination of such basic rights as freedom of speech. However,
this is due to the success of the project to reduce genuine freedom and
democracy rather than its failure. If the general population are
successfully marginalised and excluded from the public sphere (i.e.
turned into Locke's system of being within but not part of a society)
then a legal framework which recognises civil liberties would still be
maintained. That most basic liberties would remain relatively intact and
that most radicals will remain unmolested would be a testimony to the
lack of power possessed by the public at large in the existing system.
That is, countercultural movements need not be a concern to the
government until they become broader-based and capable of challenging
the existing socio-economic order -- only then is it "necessary" for the
repressive, authoritarian forces to work on undermining the movement. So
long as there is no effective organising and no threat to the interests
of the ruling elite, people are permitted to say whatever they want.
This creates the illusion that the system is open to all ideas, when, in
fact, it is not. But, as the decimation of the Wobblies and anarchist
movement after the First World War first illustrated, the government
will seek to eradicate any movement that poses a significant threat.

D.9.1 What is the relationship between wealth polarisation and authoritarian government?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have previously noted the recent increase in the rate of wealth
polarisation, with its erosion of working-class living standards (see
[section B.7](secB7.html)). This process has been referred to by Noam
Chomsky as "Third-Worldisation." It is appearing in a particularly acute
form in the US -- the "richest" industrialised nation which also has the
highest level of poverty, since it is the most polarised -- but the
process can be seen in other "advanced" industrial nations as well,
particularly in the UK. As neo-liberalism has spread, so has inequality
soared.

Third World governments are typically authoritarian, since harsh
measures are required to suppress rebellions among their impoverished
and discontented masses. Hence "Third-Worldisation" implies not only
economic polarisation but also increasingly authoritarian governments.
As Philip Slater puts it, a large, educated, and alert "middle class"
(i.e. average income earners) has always been the backbone of democracy,
and anything that concentrates wealth tends to weaken democratic
institutions. [**A Dream Deferred**, p. 68] This analysis is echoed by
left-liberal economist James K. Galbraith:

> *"As polarisation of wages, incomes and wealth develops, the common
> interests and common social programs of society fall into decline. We
> have seen this too, in this country over thirty years, beginning with
> the erosion of public services and public investments, particularly in
> the cities, with the assault on the poor and on immigrants and the
> disabled that led to the welfare bill of 1996, and continuing now
> manufactured crises of Medicare and the social security system. The
> haves are on the march. With growing inequality, so grows their power.
> And so also diminish the voices of solidarity and mutual
> reinforcement, the voices of civil society, the voices of a democratic
> and egalitarian middle class."* [**Created Unequal: The Crisis in
> American Pay**, p. 265]

If this is true, then along with increasing wealth polarisation in the
US we should expect to see signs of growing authoritarianism. This
hypothesis is confirmed by numerous facts, including the following:
continuing growth of an *"imperial presidency"* (concentration of
political power); extralegal operations by the executive branch (e.g.
the Iran-Contra scandal, the Grenada and Panama invasions); skyrocketing
incarceration rates; more official secrecy and censorship; the rise of
the Far Right; more police and prisons; FBI requests for massive
wiretapping capability; and so on. Public support for draconian measures
to deal with crime reflect the increasingly authoritarian mood of
citizens beginning to panic in the face of an ongoing social breakdown,
which has been brought about, quite simply, by ruling-class greed that
has gotten out of hand -- a fact that is carefully obscured by the
media. The 911 attacks have been used to bolster these authoritarian
trends, as would be expected.

One might think that representative democracy and constitutionally
guaranteed freedoms would make an authoritarian government impossible in
the United States and other liberal democratic nations with similar
constitutional "protections" for civil rights. In reality, however, the
declaration of a "national emergency" would allow the central government
to ignore constitutional guarantees with impunity and set up what Hannah
Arendt calls *"invisible government"* -- mechanisms allowing an
administration to circumvent constitutional structures while leaving
them nominally in place. The erosion of civil liberties and increase in
state powers post-911 in both the US and UK should show that such
concerns are extremely valid.

In response to social breakdown or "terrorism," voters may turn to
martial-style leaders (aided by the media). Once elected, and with the
support of willing legislatures and courts, administrations could easily
create much more extensive mechanisms of authoritarian government than
already exist, giving the executive branch virtually dictatorial powers.
Such administrations could escalate foreign militarism, further expand
the funding and scope of the police, national guard units, secret police
and foreign intelligence agencies, and authorise more widespread
surveillance of citizens as well as the infiltration of dissident
political groups (all of which happened in post-911 America). There
would be a corresponding rise of government secrecy (as *"popular
understanding of the workings of government is not conducive to
instilling proper reverence for powerful leaders and their nobility."*
[Chomsky, **Failed States**, p.238]). These developments would not occur
all at once, but so gradually, imperceptibly, and logically -- given the
need to maintain "law and order" -- that most people would not even be
aware that an authoritarian take-over was underway. Indeed, there is
substantial evidence that this is already underway in the US (see
**Friendly Fascism** by Bertram Gross for details).

We will examine some of the symptoms of growing authoritarianism listed
above, again referring primarily to the example of the United States.
The general trend has been a hollowing out of even the limited
democratic structures associated with representative states in favour of
a purely formal appearance of elections which are used to justify
ignoring the popular will, authoritarianism and "top-down" rule by the
executive. While these have always been a feature of the state (and must
be, if it is to do its function as we discussed in [section
B.2](secB2.html)) the tendencies are increasing and should be of concern
for all those who seek to protect, never mind, expand what human rights
and civil liberties we have. While anarchists have no illusions about
the nature of even so-called democratic states, we are not indifferent
to the form of state we have to endure and how it changes. As Malatesta
put it:

> *"there is no doubt that the worst of democracies is always
> preferable, if only from an educational point of view, than the best
> of dictatorships. Of course democracy, so-called government of the
> people, is a lie; but the lie always slightly binds the liar and
> limits the extent of his arbitrary power . . . Democracy is a lie, it
> is oppression and is in reality, oligarchy; that is, government by the
> few to the advantage of a privileged class. But we can still fight it
> in the name of freedom and equality, unlike those who have replaced it
> or want to replace it with something worse."* [**The Anarchist
> Revolution**, p. 77]

We must stress that as long as governments exist, then this struggle
against authoritarianism will continue. As Kropotkin argued, these
tendencies *"do not depend on individuals; they are inherent in the
institution."* We must always remember that *"[o]f its own accord,
representative government does not offer real liberties, and it can
accommodate itself remarkably well to despotism. Freedoms have to be
seized from it, as much as they do from absolute kings; and once they
have been gained they must be defended against parliament as much as
they were against a king."* [**Words of a Rebel**, p. 137 and p. 123]

So we cannot assume that legal rights against and restrictions on state
or economic power are enough in themselves. Liberty needs to be
continually defended by the mass of the population who cannot leave it
to others to act for them. *"If we want . . . to leave the gates wide
open to reaction,"* Kropotkin put it, *"we have only to confide our
affairs to a representative government."* Only *"extra-parliamentary
agitation"* will stop the state *"imping[ing] continually on the
country's political rights"* or *"suppress[ing] them with a strike of
the pen."* The state must always *"find itself faced by a mass of people
ready to rebel."* [**Op. Cit.** p. 129 and p. 124]

D.9.2 Why is government surveillance of citizens on the increase?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Authoritarian governments are characterised by fully developed secret
police forces, extensive government surveillance of civilians, a high
level of official secrecy and censorship, and an elaborate system of
state coercion to intimidate and silence dissenters. All of these
phenomena have existed in the US since suppression of the anarchist
inspired No-Conscription League and the IWW for its unionising and
anti-war activity. The post-World War I Red Scare and Palmer raids
continued this process of wartime jailings and intimidation, combined
with the deportation of aliens (the arrest, trial and subsequent
deportation of Alexander Berkman and Emma Goldman is but one example of
this war on radicals). [Howard Zinn, **A People's History of America**,
pp. 363-7]

However, since World War II these systems have taken more extreme forms,
especially during the 1980s and 2000s. Indeed, one of the most
disturbing revelations to emerge from the Iran-Contra affair was the
Reagan administration's contingency plan for imposing martial law.
Alfonso Chardy, a reporter for the Miami Herald, revealed in July 1987
that Lt. Col. Oliver North, while serving on the National Security
Council's staff, had worked with the Federal Emergency Management Agency
on a plan to suspend the Bill of Rights by imposing martial law in the
event of *"national opposition to a US military invasion abroad."*
[Richard O. Curry (ed.), **Freedom at Risk: Secrecy, Censorship, and
Repression in the 1980s**] However, this rise in authoritarian-style
government policies is not limited to just possibilities and so in this
section we will examine the operations of the secret police in the USA
since the 1950s. First, however, we must stress that these tendencies
are hardly US specific. For example, the secret services in the UK have
regularly spied on left-wing groups as well as being heavily involved in
undermining the 1984-5 Miners strike. [S. Milne, **The Enemy Within**]

The creation of an elaborate US "national security" apparatus has come
about gradually since 1945 through congressional enactments, numerous
executive orders and national security directives, and a series of
Supreme Court decisions that have eroded First Amendment rights. The
policies of the Reagan administration, however, reflected radical
departures from the past, as revealed not only by their comprehensive
scope but by their institutionalisation of secrecy, censorship, and
repression in ways that will be difficult, if not impossible, to
eradicate. As Richard Curry points out, the Reagan administration's
success stems *"from major structural and technological changes that
have occurred in American society during the twentieth century --
especially the emergence of the modern bureaucratic State and the
invention of sophisticated electronic devices that make surveillance
possible in new and insidious ways."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 4]

The FBI has used *"countersubversive"* surveillance techniques and kept
lists of people and groups judged to be potential national security
threats since the days of the Red Scare in the 1920s. Such activities
were expanded in the late 1930s when Franklin Roosevelt instructed the
FBI to gather information about Fascist and Communist activities in the
US and to conduct investigations into possible espionage and sabotage
(although for most of the 1920s and 1930s, fascists and fascist
sympathisers were, at best, ignored and, at worse, publicly praised
while anti-fascists like anarchist Carol Tresca were spied on and
harassed by the authorities. [Nunzio Pernicone, **Carlo Tresca**]). FBI
chief J. Edgar Hoover interpreted these directives as authorising
open-ended inquiries into a very broad category of potential
"subversives"; and by repeatedly misinforming a succession of careless
or indifferent presidents and attorneys general about the precise scope
of Roosevelt's directives, Hoover managed for more than 30 years to
elicit tacit executive approval for continuous FBI investigations into
an ever-expanding class of political dissidents. [Geoffrey R. Stone,
*"The Reagan Administration, the First Amendment, and FBI Domestic
Security Investigations,"* Curry (ed.), **Op. Cit.**]

The advent of the Cold War, ongoing conflicts with the Soviet Union, and
fears of the "international Communist conspiracy" provided justification
not only for covert CIA operations and American military intervention in
countries all over the globe, but also contributed to the FBI's
rationale for expanding its domestic surveillance activities. Thus in
1957, without authorisation from Congress or any president, Hoover
launched a highly secret operation called COINTELPRO:

> *"From 1957 to 1974, the bureau opened investigative files on more
> than half a million 'subversive' Americans. In the course of these
> investigations, the bureau, in the name of 'national security,'
> engaged in widespread wire-tapping, bugging, mail-openings, and
> break-ins. Even more insidious was the bureau's extensive use of
> informers and undercover operative to infiltrate and report on the
> activities and membership of 'subversive' political associations
> ranging from the Socialist Workers Party to the NAACP to the Medical
> Committee for Human Rights to a Milwaukee Boy Scout troop."* [Stone,
> **Op. Cit.**, p. 274]

But COINTELPRO involved much more than just investigation and
surveillance. As Chomsky notes, it was *"one of its major programs of
repression"* and was used to discredit, weaken, and ultimately destroy
the New Left and Black radical movements of the sixties and early
seventies, i.e. to silence the major sources of political dissent and
opposition. It's aim was to *"disrupt"* a wide range of popular
movements *"by instigating violence in the ghetto, direct participation
in police assassination of a Black Panther organiser, burglaries and
harassment of the Socialist Workers Party over many years, and other
methods of defamation and disruption."* [**Necessary Illusions**, p.
189]

The FBI fomented violence through the use of agents provocateurs and
destroyed the credibility of movement leaders by framing them, bringing
false charges against them, distributing offensive materials published
in their name, spreading false rumours, sabotaging equipment, stealing
money, and other dirty tricks. By such means the Bureau exacerbated
internal frictions within movements, turning members against each other
as well as other groups. For example, during the civil rights movement,
while the government was making concessions and verbally supporting the
movement, the FBI was harassing and breaking up black groups. Between
1956 and 1971, the FBI took 295 actions against black groups as part of
COLINTELPRO. [Zinn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 455]

Government documents show the FBI and police involved in creating
acrimonious disputes which ultimately led to the break-up of such groups
as Students for a Democratic Society, the Black Panther Party, and the
Liberation News Service. The Bureau also played a part in the failure of
such groups to form alliances across racial, class, and regional lines.
The FBI is implicated in the assassination of Malcolm X, who was killed
in a "factional dispute" that the Bureau bragged of having "developed"
in the Nation of Islam. Martin Luther King, Jr., was the target of an
elaborate FBI plot to drive him to suicide before he was conveniently
killed by a lone sniper. Other radicals were portrayed as "Communists",
criminals, adulterers, or government agents, while still others were
murdered in phoney "shoot-outs" where the only shooting was done by the
police.

These activities finally came to public attention because of the
Watergate investigations, congressional hearings, and information
obtained under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). In response to the
revelations of FBI abuse, Attorney General Edward Levi in 1976 set forth
a set of public guidelines governing the initiation and scope of the
bureau's domestic security investigations, severely restricting its
ability to investigate political dissidents.

The Levi guidelines, however, proved to be only a temporary reversal of
the trend. Although throughout his presidency Ronald Reagan professed to
be against the increase of state power in regard to domestic policy, he
in fact expanded the power of the national bureaucracy for "national
security" purposes in systematic and unprecedented ways. One of the most
significant of these was his immediate elimination of the safeguards
against FBI abuse that the Levi guidelines had been designed to prevent.
This was accomplished through two interrelated executive branch
initiatives: Executive Order 12333, issued in 1981, and Attorney General
William French Smith's guidelines, which replaced Levi's in 1983. The
Smith guidelines permitted the FBI to launch domestic security
investigations if the facts *"reasonably indicated"* that groups or
individuals were involved in criminal activity. More importantly,
however, the new guidelines also authorised the FBI to *"anticipate or
prevent crime."* As a result, the FBI could now investigate groups or
individuals whose statements *"advocated"* criminal activity or
indicated an **apparent intent** to engage in crime, particularly crimes
of violence.

As Curry notes, the language of the Smith guidelines provided FBI
officials with sufficient interpretative latitude to investigate
virtually any group or individual it chose to target, including
political activists who opposed the administration's foreign policy. Not
surprisingly, under the new guidelines the Bureau immediately began
investigating a wide variety of political dissidents, quickly making up
for the time it had lost since 1976. Congressional sources show that in
1985 alone the FBI conducted 96 investigations of groups and individuals
opposed to the Reagan Administration's Central American policies,
including religious organisations who expressed solidarity with Central
American refugees.

Since the 1980s, the state has used the threat of "terrorism" (both
domestic and international) to bolster its means of repression. The aim
has been to allow the President, on his own initiative and by his own
definition, to declare any person or organisation "terrorist" and so
eliminate any rights they may, in theory, have. The 911 attacks were
used to pass in effect a "wish-list" (in the form of the PATRIOT act) of
measures long sought by both the secret state and the right but which
they had difficulty in passing previously due to public scrutiny.
Post-911, as after the Oklahoma bombing, much opposition was muted while
those that did raise their voices were dismissed as, at best, naive or,
at worse, pro-terrorist.

Post-911, presidential rulings are considered as conclusive while the
Attorney General was handed new enforcement powers, e.g. suspects would
be considered guilty unless proven innocent, and the source or nature of
the evidence brought against suspects would not have to be revealed if
the Justice Department claimed a *"national security"* interest in
suppressing such facts, as of course it would. Security agencies were
given massive new powers to gather information on and act against
suspected "terrorists" (i.e., any enemy of the state, dissident or
critic of capitalism). As intended, the ability to abuse these powers is
staggering. They greatly increased the size and funding of the FBI and
gave it the power to engage in "anti-terrorist" activities all over the
country, without judicial oversight. Unsurprisingly, during the run-up
to the Iraq invasion of 2003, the anti-war movement was targeted with
these new powers of surveillance. That the secret state, for example,
seriously argued that potential "terrorists" could exist within Quaker
peace groups says it all. Unsurprisingly, given the history of the
secret state the new measures were turned against the Left, as
COINTELPRO and similar laws were in the past.

If, as the Bush Administration continually asserted, the terrorists hate
the west for our freedoms (rather than their self-proclaimed hatred of
US foreign policy) then that government is the greatest appeaser the
world has ever seen (not to mention the greatest recruiting agent they
ever had). It has done more to undermine freedom and increase state
power (along with the threat of terrorism) that the terrorists ever
dreamed. However, it would be a mistake to draw the conclusion that it
is simply incompetence, arrogance and ignorance which was at work
(tempting as that may be). Rather, there are institutional factors at
work as well (a fact that becomes obvious when looking at the history of
the secret state and its activities). The fact that such draconian
measures were even considered says volumes about the direction in which
the US -- and by implication the other "advanced" capitalist states --
are headed.

D.9.3 What causes justifications for racism to appear?
------------------------------------------------------

The tendency toward social breakdown which is inherent in the growth of
wealth polarisation, as discussed above, is also producing a growth in
racism in the countries affected. As we have seen, social breakdown
leads to the increasingly authoritarian government prompted by the need
of the ruling class to contain protest and civil unrest among those at
the bottom of the wealth pyramid. In the US those in the lowest economic
strata belong mostly to racial minorities, while in several European
countries there are growing populations of impoverished minorities from
the Third World, often from former colonies. The desire of the more
affluent strata to justify their superior economic positions is, as one
would expect, causing racially based theories of privilege to become
more popular.

That racist feelings are gaining strength in America is evidenced by the
increasing political influence of the right, whose thinly disguised
racism reflects the darkening vision of a growing segment of the
conservative community. Further evidence can be seen in the growth of
ultraconservative extremist groups preaching avowedly racist
philosophies, such as the Ku Klux Klan, the Aryan Nations, the White
Aryan Resistance, and others (see James Ridgeway's **Blood in the Face:
The Ku Klux Klan, Aryan Nations, Nazi Skinheads, and the Rise of a New
White Culture**). Much the same can be said of Europe, with the growth
of parties like the BNP in Britain, the FN in France and similar
organisations elsewhere.

Most conservative politicians have taken pains to distance themselves
officially from the extreme right. Yet they are dependent on getting
votes of those influenced by the right-wing media personalities and the
extreme right. This means that this racism cannot help seep into their
election campaigns and, unsurprisingly, mainstream conservative
politicians have used, and continue to use, code words and innuendo
("welfare queens," "quotas," etc.) to convey a thinly veiled racist
message. This allows mainstream right-wingers to exploit the budding
racism of lower- and middle-class white youths, who must compete for
increasingly scarce jobs with desperate minorities who are willing to
work at very low wages. As Lorenzo Lom'boa Ervin notes:

> "Basing themselves on alienated white social forces, the Nazis and
> Klan are trying to build a mass movement which can hire itself out to
> the Capitalists at the proper moment and assume state power . . .
> Fascism is the ultimate authoritarian society when in power, even
> though it has changed its face to a mixture of crude racism and
> smoother racism in the modern democratic state.
> "So in addition to the Nazis and the Klan, there are other Right-Wing
> forces that have been on the rise . . . They include
> ultra-conservative rightist politicians and Christian fundamentalist
> preachers, along with the extreme right section of the Capitalist
> ruling class itself, small business owners, talk show hosts . . .
> along with the professors, economists, philosophers and others in
> academia who are providing the ideological weapons for the Capitalist
> offensive against the workers and oppresses people. So not all racists
> wear sheets. These are the 'respectable' racists, the New Right
> conservatives . . . The Capitalist class has already shown their
> willingness to use this conservative movement as a smoke screen for an
> attack on the Labor movement, Black struggle, and the entire working
> class." [**Anarchism and the Black Revolution**, p. 18]

The expanding popularity of such racist groups in the US is matched by a
similar phenomenon in Europe, where xenophobia and a weak economy have
propelled extreme right-wing politicians into the limelight on promises
to deport foreigners. This poisons the whole mainstream political
spectrum, with centre and centre-left politicians pandering to racism
and introducing aspects of the right's agenda under the rhetoric of
"addressing concerns" and raising the prospect that by not doing what
the right wants, the right will expand in influence. How legitimising
the right by implementing its ideas is meant to undercut their support
is never explained, but the "greater evil" argument does have its
utility for every opportunistic politician (particularly one under
pressure from the right-wing media whipping up scare stories about
immigration and such like to advance the interests of their wealthy
backers).

What easier way is there to divert people's anger than onto scapegoats?
Anger about bad housing, no housing, boring work, no work, bad wages and
conditions, job insecurity, no future, and so on. Instead of attacking
the real causes of these (and other) problems, people are encouraged to
direct their anger against people who face the same problems just
because they have a different skin colour or come from a different part
of the world! Little wonder politicians and their rich backers like to
play the racist card -- it diverts attention away from them and the
system they run (i.e. the **real** causes of our problems).

Racism, in other words, tries to turn **class** issues into "race"
issues. Little wonder that sections of the ruling elite will turn to it,
as and when required. Their class interests (and, often, their personal
bigotry) requires them to do so -- a divided working class will never
challenge their position in society. This means that justifications for
racism appear for two reasons. Firstly, to try and justify the existing
inequalities within society (for example, the infamous -- and highly
inaccurate -- *"Bell Curve"* and related works). Secondly, to divide the
working class and divert anger about living conditions and social
problems away from the ruling elite and their system onto scapegoats in
our own class. After all, *"for the past fifty years American business
has been organising a major class war, and they needed troops -- there
**are** votes after all, and you can't just come before the electorate
and say, 'Vote for me, I'm trying to screw you.' So what they've had to
do is appeal to the population on some other grounds. Well, there aren't
a lot of other grounds, and everybody picks the same ones . . . --
jingoism, racism, fear, religious fundamentalism: These are ways of
appealing to people if you're trying to organise a mass base of support
for policies that are really intended to crush them."* [Chomsky,
**Understanding Power**, pp. 294-5]

Part of the right-wing resurgence in the US and elsewhere has been the
institutionalisation of the Reagan-Bush brand of conservatism, whose
hallmark was the reinstatement, to some degree, of laissez-faire
economic policies (and, to an even larger degree, of laissez-faire
rhetoric). A "free market," Reagan's economic "experts" argued,
necessarily produced inequality; but by allowing unhindered market
forces to select the economically fittest and to weed out the unfit, the
economy would become healthy again. The wealth of those who survived and
prospered in the harsh new climate would ultimately benefit the less
fortunate, through a "trickle-down" effect which was supposed to create
millions of new high-paying jobs.

All this would be accomplished by deregulating business, reducing taxes
on the wealthy, and dismantling or drastically cutting back federal
programmes designed to promote social equality, fairness, and
compassion. The aptly named Laffer Curve (although invented without the
burden of any empirical research or evidence) alleged to illustrate how
cutting taxes actually **raises** government revenue. When this program
of pro-business policies was applied the results were, unsurprisingly,
the opposite of that proclaimed, with wealth flooding upwards and the
creation of low-paying, dead-end jobs (the biggest "Laffers" in this
scenario were the ruling class, who saw unprecedented gains in wealth at
the expense of the rest of us).

The Reaganites' doctrine of inequality gave the official seal of
approval to ideas of racial superiority that right-wing extremists had
used for years to rationalise the exploitation of minorities. If, on
average, blacks and Hispanics earn only about half as much as whites; if
more than a third of all blacks and a quarter of all Hispanics lived
below the poverty line; if the economic gap between whites and
non-whites was growing -- well, that just proved that there was a racial
component in the Social-Darwinian selection process, showing that
minorities "deserved" their poverty and lower social status because they
were "less fit." By focusing on individuals, laissez-faire economics
hides the social roots of inequality and the effect that economic
institutions and social attitudes have on inequality. In the words of
left-liberal economist James K. Galbraith:

> "What the economists did, in effect, was to reason backward, from the
> troublesome effect to a cause that would rationalise and justify it .
> . . [I]t is the work of the efficient market [they argued], and the
> fundamental legitimacy of the outcome is not supposed to be
> questioned.
> "The **apologia** is a dreadful thing. It has distorted our
> understanding, twisted our perspective, and crabbed our politics. On
> the right, as one might expect, the winners on the expanded scale of
> wealth and incomes are given a reason for self-satisfaction and an
> excuse for gloating. Their gains are due to personal merit, the
> application of high intelligence, and the smiles of fortune. Those on
> the loosing side are guilty of sloth, self-indulgence, and whining.
> Perhaps they have bad culture. Or perhaps they have bad genes. While
> no serious economist would make that last leap into racist fantasy,
> the underlying structure of the economists' argument has undoubtedly
> helped to legitimise, before a larger public, those who promote such
> ideas." [**Op. Cit.**, p. 264]

The logical corollary of this social Darwinism is that whites who are
"less fit" (i.e., poor) also deserve their poverty. But philosophies of
racial hatred are not necessarily consistent. Thus the ranks of white
supremacist organisations have been swollen in recent years by
undereducated and underemployed white youths frustrated by a declining
industrial labour market and a noticeably eroding social status.
[Ridgeway, **Op. Cit.**, p.186] Rather than drawing the logical
Social-Darwinian conclusion -- that they, too, are "inferior" -- they
have instead blamed blacks, Hispanics, Asians, and Jews for "unfairly"
taking their jobs. Thus the neo-Nazi skinheads, for example, have been
mostly recruited from disgruntled working-class whites below the age of
30. This has provided leaders of right-wing extremist groups with a
growing base of potential storm troopers.

Therefore, laissez-faire ideology helps create a social environment in
which racist tendencies can increase. Firstly, it does so by increasing
poverty, job insecurity, inequality and so on which right-wing groups
can use to gather support by creating scapegoats in our own class to
blame (for example, by blaming poverty on blacks "taking our jobs"
rather than capitalists moving their capital to other, more profitable,
countries or them cutting wages and conditions for **all** workers --
and as we point out in [section B.1.4](secB1.html#secb14), racism, by
dividing the working class, makes poverty and inequality **worse** and
so is self-defeating). Secondly, it abets racists by legitimising the
notions that inequalities in pay and wealth are due to racial
differences rather than a hierarchical system which harms **all**
working class people (and uses racism to divide, and so weaken, the
oppressed). By pointing to individuals rather than to institutions,
organisations, customs, history and above all power -- the relative
power between workers and capitalists, citizens and the state, the
market power of big business, etc. -- laissez-faire ideology points
analysis into a dead-end as well as apologetics for the wealthy,
apologetics which can be, and are, utilised by racists to justify their
evil politics.
