D.11 Can politics and economics be separated from each other?
=============================================================

A key aspect of anarchism is the idea that the political and economic
aspects of society cannot be separated. [Section D](secDcon.html) has
been an attempt to show how these two aspects of society interact and
influence each other. This means that economic liberty cannot be
separated from political liberty and vice versa. If working class people
are subject to authoritarian political organisations then their economic
liberty will likewise be restricted and, conversely, if their economic
freedoms are limited then so, too, will their political freedoms. As
Proudhon put it, *"industrial liberty is inseparable from political
liberty."* [quoted by Alan Ritter, **The Political Thought of
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 188]

Some disagree, arguing that economic liberty is of primary importance.
When Milton Friedman died in 2006, for example, many of his supporters
parroted his defence of working with the Pinochet regime and noted that
Chile had (eventually) become a democracy. For Friedman, this justified
his praise for the "economic liberty" the regime had introduced and
rationalised the advice he gave it. For him, Chile provided his earlier
assertion that *"economic freedom is an indispensable means toward the
achievement of political freedom."* For while Friedman stated that there
was *"an intimate connection between economics and politics,"* he meant
simply that capitalism was required to produce democracy (to use his
words, *"capitalism is a necessary condition for political freedom"*).
[**Capitalism and Freedom**, p. 8 and p. 10]

So it should first be stressed that by "economic liberty" Friedman meant
capitalism and by "political liberty" he meant representative government
and a democratic state. Anarchists would disagree that either of those
institutions have much to do with genuine liberty. However, we will
ignore this for the moment and take his general point. Sadly, such a
position makes little sense. In fact, Friedman's separation of
"economic" and "political" liberties is simply wrong as well as having
authoritarian implications and lacking empirical basis.

The easiest way of showing that statism and capitalism cannot be
separated is to look at a country where "economic liberty" (i.e. free
market capitalism) existed but "political liberty" (i.e. a democratic
government with basic human rights) did not. The most obvious example is
Pinochet's Chile, an experiment which Friedman praised as an "economic
miracle" shortly before it collapsed. In [section C.11](secC11.html) we
discussed the Chilean "economic miracle" at face value, refusing to
discuss the issue of whether describing the regime as one of "economic
liberty" could be justified. Rather, we exposed the results of applying
what leading ideologues of capitalism have called "free market" policies
on the country. As would be expected, the results were hardly an
"economic miracle" if you were working class. Which shows how little our
lives are valued by the elite and their "experts."

As to be expected with Friedman, the actual experience of implementing
his economic dogmas in Chile refuted them. Much the same can be said of
his distinction of "economic" and "political" liberty. Friedman
discussed the Chilean regime in 1991, arguing that *"Pinochet and the
military in Chile were led to adopt free market principles after they
took over only because they did not have any other choice."* [**Economic
Freedom, Human Freedom, Political Freedom**] This is an interesting
definition of *"free market principles."* It seems to be compatible with
a regime in which the secret police can seize uppity workers, torture
them and dump their bodies in a ditch as a warning to others.

For Friedman, the economic and political regimes could be separated. As
he put it, *"I have nothing good to say about the political regime that
Pinochet imposed. It was a terrible political regime. The real miracle
of Chile is not how well it has done economically; the real miracle of
Chile is that a military junta was willing to go against its principles
and support a free market regime designed by principled believers in a
free market."* [**Op. Cit.**] How, exactly, could the political regime
**not** impact on the economic one? How is a "free market" possible if
people who make up the labour market are repressed and in fear of their
lives? True, the Chilean workers could, as workers in Tsarist Russia,
*"change their jobs without getting permission from political
authorities"* (as Friedman put it [**Capitalism and Freedom**, p. 10]),
however this is only a small part of what anarchists consider to be
genuine economic liberty.

To see why, it is useful to show a snapshot of what life was like under
Friedman's "economic liberty" for working class people. Once this is
done, it is easy to see how incredulous Friedman was being. Peter Winn
gives a good description of what Chile's "economic liberty" was based
on:

> *"In the wake of the coup, most of the 'revolutionary' leaders of the
> textile workers disappeared, some to unmarked graves, jails, or
> concentration camps, others to exile or the underground resistance.
> Moreover, when the textile factories resumed production, it was under
> military administration and with soldiers patrolling the plants.
> Authoritarian management and industrial discipline were reimposed at
> the point of a bayonet, and few workers dared to protest. Some feared
> for their lives or liberty; many more feared for their jobs. Military
> intelligence officers interrogated the workers one by one, pressing
> them to inform on each other and then firing those considered to be
> leftist activists. The dismissals often continued after the mills were
> returned to their former owners, at first for political reasons or for
> personal revenge, but, with the recession of 1975, for economic
> motives as well. The unions, decimated by their leadership losses,
> intimidated by the repression, and proscribed by military decree from
> collective bargaining, strikes, or other militant actions, were
> incapable of defending their members' jobs, wages, or working
> conditions. With wages frozen and prices rising rapidly, living
> standards fell precipitously, even for those fortunate enough to keep
> their jobs."* [*"No Miracle for Us"*, Peter Winn (ed.), **Victims of
> the Chilean Miracle: Workers and Neoliberalism in the Pinochet Era,
> 1973-2002**, p. 131]

In the copper mines, *"[h]undreds of leftist activists were fired, and
many were arrested and tortured . . . the military exercised a firm
control over union leaders and activity within the unions remained
dormant until the 1980s."* The *"decade following the military coup was
defined by intense repression and a generalised climate of terror and
fear."* Workers recalled that people who spoke at union meetings were
detained and until 1980 police permission was required to hold a
meeting, which was held under police supervision. At work, *"supervisors
and foremen ruled with an authoritarian discipline"* while miners
*"reported that spies denounced workers who talked politics or spoke at
union meetings to the company administration and police."* [Thomas
Miller Klubock, *"Class, Community, and Neoliberalism in Chile"*, Winn
(ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 214 p. 216 and p. 217]

Over all, Workers *"bore the brunt of the repression during the military
take-over and throughout the Pinochet regime. The armed forces viewed
workers -- and the level of organisation they had achieved under
previous governments -- as the greatest threat to traditional power
structure in Chile . . . Armed troops went after workers in general and
union members and leaders in particular with a virulence that
contradicted their claim to be stamping out 'class hatred.'"* As for the
relationship between "economic" and "political" liberty, the latter was
dependent on the end of the former: *"Fear of repression was clearly
essential to the implementation of free-market labour policies, but far
more pervasive was the fear of unemployment"* generated by the so-called
"economic miracle." [John Lear and Joseph Collins, *"Working in Chile's
Free Market"*, pp. 10-29, **Latin American Perspectives**, vol. 22, No.
1, pp. 12-3 and p. 14]

Thus the ready police repression made strikes and other forms of protest
both impractical and dangerous. When working class people did take to
the streets after the economic crash of 1982, they were subject to
intense state repression as Pinochet *"cracked down, sending in army
troops to curb the demonstrators."* According to a report by the Roman
Catholic Church 113 protesters had been killed during social protest,
with several thousand detained for political activity and protests
between May 1983 and mid-1984. Thousands of strikers were also fired and
union leaders jailed. [Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. 70] In fact, the
*"brutal government repression put even the militant copper miners on
the defensive."* [Winn, *"The Pinochet Era"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**,
p. 43] Workers were aware that the regime *"was likely to use the full
rigour of the law against workers who acted in defence of their
interests. Moreover, even though the arbitrary actions of the secret
police diminished in the last years of the dictatorship, they did not
disappear, nor did their internalised legacy. Fear of becoming a target
of repression still exercised a chilling effect on both workers and
their leaders."* [Winn, *"No Miracle for Us"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**,
p. 133]

All of which puts into stark light Friedman's 1982 comment that *"Chile
is an even more amazing political miracle. A military regime has
supported reforms that sharply reduce the role of the state and replace
control from the top with control from the bottom."* [quoted by Rayack,
**Not so Free to Choose**, p. 37] Clearly Friedman had no idea what he
was talking about. While the *"role of the state"* **was** reduced in
terms of welfare for the masses, it was obviously massively
**increased** in terms of warfare against them (we will address the
*"control from the bottom"* nonsense shortly).

For anarchists, it is simply common-sense that "economic liberty" cannot
exist within an authoritarian state for the mass of the population. In
reality, the economic and political regime cannot be so easily
compartmentalised. As Malatesta noted, *"every economic question of some
importance automatically becomes a political question . . . Workers'
organisations must therefore, of necessity, adopt a line of action in
face of present as well as possible future government action."*
[**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, pp. 130-1] Such common-sense
is sadly lacking with Friedman who seriously seems to believe that
"economic liberty" could exist without the freedom of workers to take
collective action if they so desired. In other words, the "economic
miracle" Friedman praises was built on the corpses, fears and backs of
working class people. Unlike Friedman, Chile's workers and bosses know
that *"employers could count on the backing of the military in any
conflict with workers."* [Lear and Collins, **Op. Cit.**, p. 13] As can
be seen, Malatesta had a much firmer grasp of the question of liberty
that Friedman, as expected as the latter equals it with capitalism and
its hierarchies while the former spent much of his live in prison and
exile trying to increase the freedom of working class people by fighting
the former and the state which maintains them.

As we argued in [section D.1.4](secD1.html#secd14), laissez-faire
capitalism does not end statism. Rather it focuses it on purely
defending economic power (i.e. "economic liberty" for the capitalist
class). The example of Chile's "economic liberty" proves this beyond
doubt and shows that the separation of economic and political freedom is
impossible and, consequently, both capitalism **and** the state need to
be fought and, ultimately, abolished.

D.11.1 What does Chile tell us about the right and its vision of liberty?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The key to understanding how Friedman managed to ignore the obvious lack
of "economic liberty" for the bulk of the population under Pinochet lies
in remembering that he is a supporter of capitalism. As capitalism is a
hierarchical system in which workers sell their liberty to a boss, it
comes as no real surprise that Friedman's concern for liberty is
selective.

Pinochet did introduce free-market capitalism, but this meant real
liberty only for the rich. For the working class, "economic liberty" did
not exist, as they did not manage their own work nor control their
workplaces and lived under a fascist state. The liberty to take economic
(never mind political) action in the forms of forming unions, going on
strike, organising go-slows and so on was severely curtailed by the very
likely threat of repression. Of course, the supporters of the Chilean
"Miracle" and its "economic liberty" did not bother to question how the
suppression of political liberty effected the economy or how people
acted within it. They maintained that the repression of labour, the
death squads, the fear installed in rebel workers could be ignored when
looking at the economy. But in the real world, people will put up with a
lot more if they face the barrel of a gun than if they do not. So the
claim that "economic liberty" existed in Chile makes sense only if we
take into account that there was only **real** liberty for one class.
The bosses may have been "left alone" but the workers were not, unless
they submitted to authority (capitalist or state). Hardly what most
people would term as "liberty".

Beyond the ideologues of capitalism who term themselves "economists," it
is generally admitted that the "labour market," if it exists, is a
somewhat unique market. As "labour" cannot be separated from its owner,
it means that when you "buy" labour you "buy" the time, and so liberty,
of the individual involved. Rather than be bought on the market all at
once, as with a slave, the wage slave's life is bought piecemeal. This
is the key to understanding Friedman's nonsensical claims for never
forget that by "economic freedom" he means capitalism. To understand the
difference we need only compare two of Friedman's arguments to the
reality of capitalism. Once we do that then his blindness to Chile's
neo-liberal dictatorship's impact on genuine economic liberty becomes
clear.

The most obvious fallacy within his argument is this assertion:

> *"A characteristic feature of a free private market is that all
> parties to a transaction believe that they are going to be better off
> by that transaction. It is not a zero sum game in which some can
> benefit only at the expense of others. It is a situation in which
> everybody thinks he is going to be better off."* [**Economic Freedom,
> Human Freedom, Political Freedom**]

Who can deny that the worker who sells her liberty to the autocrat of a
capitalist firm is *"going to be better off"* than one starving to
death? As we noted in [section B.4.1](secB4.html#secb41), Friedman
avoids the obvious fact that a capitalist economy is dependent on there
being a class of people who have no means of supporting themselves
**except** by selling their labour (i.e. liberty). While full employment
will mitigate this dependency (and, as a result, bring the system to
crisis), it never goes away. And given that Pinochet's *"free market
regime designed by principled believers in a free market"* had
substantial unemployment, it is unsurprising that the capitalist was
*"better off"* than the worker as a result. As the experience of the
*"free private market"* in Chile suggests, workers need to be free to
organise without the fear of death squads otherwise they will be
oppressed and exploited by their bosses. By denying that freedom,
Pinochet's regime could only be considered "free" by the ideologues and
savants of capitalism. The only positive thing that can be said is that
it provided empirical evidence that the ideal neo-classical labour
market would increase inequality and exploitation (see [section
C.11.3](secC11.html#secc113)).

The problem with Friedman's argument is that he fails to recognise the
hierarchical nature of capitalism and the limited liberty it produces.
This can be seen from Friedman's comparison of military dictatorships to
capitalism:

> *"Almost all military juntas are adverse to economic freedom for
> obvious reasons. The military is organised from the top down: the
> general tells the colonel, the colonel tells the captain, the captain
> tells the lieutenant, and so on. A market economy is organised from
> the bottom up: the consumer tells the retailer, the retailer tells the
> wholesaler, the wholesaler tells the producer, and the producer
> delivers. The principles underlying a military organisation are
> precisely the reverse of those underlying a market organisation."*
> [**Op. Cit.**]

Obviously geometry was not Friedman's strong point. A "market economy"
is characterised by **horizontal** links between workplaces and
consumers, not vertical ones. However, the key issue is that the
dominant *"market organisation"* under capitalism ***is*** marked by the
*"principles underlying a military organisation."* To present a more
accurate picture than Friedman, in the *"market organisation"* of a
capitalist firm the boss tells the worker what to do. It is *"organised
from the top down"* just as a military junta is. That Friedman ignores
the organisational structure which 90% of the population have to operate
within for most of their waking hours is significant. It shows how
little he understands of capitalism and "economic freedom."

In Pinochet's Chile, the workplace **did** become more like *"a military
organisation."* Without effective unions and basic human rights, the
bosses acted like the autocrats they are. Discussing the textile
industry, Peter Winn notes that *"most mill owners took full advantage
of the regime's probusiness Labour Code . . . At many mills, sweatshop
conditions prevailed, wages were low, and management was authoritarian,
even tyrannical . . . Workers might resent these conditions, but they
often felt powerless to oppose them. Informers and the threat of
dismissal kept even alienated and discontented workers in line."* [*"No
Miracle for Us"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 132 and pp. 132-3] John
Lear and Joseph Collins generalise the picture, noting that *"[i]n wake
of the coup, factory owners suddenly had absolute control over their
workers and could fire any worker without case. From 1973 through 1978,
practically every labour right for organised and unorganised workers was
suspended. All tools of collective bargaining, including of course the
right to strike, were outlawed."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 13] The Junta
themselves had no illusions about the military-like regime they desired
within the workplace, stating in 1974 its intention of *"imposing
authority and discipline in production and labour relations."* [quoted
by Joseph Collins and John Lear, **Chile's Free-Market Miracle: A Second
Look**, p. 27]

The reality of life under Pinochet for working class people should make
anyone with sense wary of praising the regime in any way, but Friedman
argued that the *"results were spectacular. Inflation came down sharply.
After a transitory period of recession and low output that is
unavoidable in the course of reversing a strong inflation, output
started to expand, and ever since, the Chilean economy has performed
better than any other South American economy."* [**Op. Cit.**] Of
course, by downplaying the deep recession caused by applying his
recommended *"shock-treatment"* policies, Friedman can confuse the high
growth resulting from coming out of the boom combined with ready
repression on labour with sound economic policies. Strangely he failed
to mention the *"spectacular"* recession of 1982 which wiped out the
gains of 1976 to 1981. As indicated in [section C.11](secC11.html),
looking over the whole of the Pinochet period the results were hardly
*"spectacular"* (unless you were rich) and the moderate gains were paid
for by the working class in terms of longer hours, lower pay and
political and economic oppression.

In other words, Friedman and the 'Chicago boys' provided an appearance
of technical respectability to the dreams, greed and power of the
landlords and capitalists who made up the Chilean oligarchy. The
military simply applied the brutal force required to achieve those
goals. As such, there is only an apparent contradiction between
political tyranny and "economic liberty," not a real one. Repression for
the working class and "economic liberty" for the elite are two sides of
the same coin.

This should be common-sense and, as such, it is nonsensical for the
likes of Friedman to support an economic policy while pretending to
reject the system of terror it required to implement. After all,
economic policies do not occur in a social and political vacuum. They
are conditioned by, and at the same time modify, the social and
political situation where they are put into practice. Thus there cannot
be "economic liberty" for workers if they expect a visit from the secret
police if they talk back to their boss. Yet for Friedman and those like
him, there seems to be a lack of awareness of such basic and obvious
facts. There is a necessary connection between economic policy (and its
outcome) and the socio-political setting in which it is implemented.

Friedman exposes the utter hypocrisy of the supporters of capitalism.
His myopia about the reality of the regime was expressed in articles
which amount to little more than apologetics for the dictatorship. For
example, in 1982 he noted in response to the economic problems of the
previous year *"the opposition to the free-market policies that had been
largely silence by success is being given full voice."* [quoted by
Rayack, **Op. Cit.**, p. p. 63] No mention that the real cause of the
*"silence"* of the opposition was not the *"success"* of policies which
had impoverished the working class and enriched the elite but, rather,
the expectation of a visit by the secret police. Given that Pinochet had
sent murder squads to kill prominent dissidents abroad, Friedman's
comments are incredulous -- particularly as Allende's former foreign
minister, Orlando Letelier, was assassinated in Washington in 1976 by a
car bomb.

The state terror, the violation of human rights and drastic control and
suppression of every form of meaningful dissent is discussed (and often
condemned) as something only indirectly linked, or indeed entirely
unrelated, to the economic policies that the military imposed. To
publicly praise and support the economic policies adopted by the
dictatorship while regretting its political regime is simply illogical
hypocrisy. However, it does expose the limited nature of the right's
concept of liberty as well as its priorities and values.

D.11.2 But surely Chile proves that "economic freedom" creates political freedom?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As noted above, Friedman defended his praise for the Pinochet regime by
arguing that its "economic liberty" helped produce the end of the
dictatorship. In the words of Friedman:

> *"The economic development and the recovery produced by economic
> freedom in turn promoted the public's desire for a greater degree of
> political freedom . . . In Chile, the drive for political freedom,
> that was generated by economic freedom and the resulting economic
> success, ultimately resulted in a referendum that introduced political
> democracy. Now, at long last, Chile has all three things: political
> freedom, human freedom and economic freedom. Chile will continue to be
> an interesting experiment to watch to see whether it can keep all
> three or whether, now that it has political freedom, that political
> freedom will tend to be used to destroy or reduce economic freedom."*
> [**Op. Cit.**]

It is hard to find an account so skewed by ideological blindness as
this. The notion that Chile's "free market" capitalism provided the base
for eliminating Pinochet's dictatorship is hard to defend. If it were
true then we would expect Pinochet's rule to be substantially shorter
than other military dictatorships in the region. However, this is
**not** the case. For example, Argentina's Military Junta lasted from
1976 to 1983, 7 years; Peru's 12 years (1968 to 1980); Uruguay's 12
years (1973 to 1985); Bolivia's 18 years (1964 to 1982). Pinochet's
lasted 17 years, exceeded by Brazil's 21 years (1964 to 1985). If
Friedman's argument were valid then Pinochet would have fallen long
before the rest. In fact, Chile was one of the last Latin American
countries to return to democracy.

Nor can it be said that ending of the Pinochet regime was an automatic
outcome of economic forces. Rather, it was a product of struggle by
ordinary people who took to the streets in the early 1980s to protest in
the face of state repression. The regime was subject to popular
pressures from below and these, not capitalism, were the key factor.
After all, it was not "economic liberty" which produced the desire for
"political freedom." Working class people could remember what political
freedom was before it was destroyed in order to create Friedman's
"economic liberty" and tried to recreate it.

In the face of state terror, political activists and trade unionists
fought the regime. The 1988 referendum Friedman alludes to was the
product of this heroic activity, not some abstract economic force. As
Cathy Schneider points out, the 1983-86 *"cycle of protests had set the
stage for a negotiated transition to democracy in 1990."* These
protests, it should be noted, were subject to extreme state repression
(one demonstration saw Pinochet send 18,000 troops onto the streets, who
shot 129 people, 29 fatally, and tortured some of the 1,000 arrested).
[**Shantytown protest in Pinochet's Chile**, p. 194 and p. 165] Peter
Winn, for example, notes *"the resistance of workers to both the
dictatorship and its neoliberal policies, often against great odds and
at great risks."* In fact, *"during the Pinochet era, with its
repression and restrictions on union activism, Chile's workers displayed
great creativity in devising new ways to resist . . . Nor was this
resistance confined to the workplace or workers' issues . . . it was
Chile's workers who first raised the flag of political resistance
against the dictatorship in the 1970s and sustained it during the years
when political parties were banned. And it was the copper miners who
mobilised the social protests and political opposition to the military
regime in the 1980s to demand an end to Pinochet's dictatorship and the
restoration of democracy and civil liberties."* [*"Introduction"*, Winn
(ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 11] This is confirmed by John Lear and Joseph
Collins, who note that *"[d]uring the mid-1980s, unions were fundamental
to organising the national protests that led eventually to the
negotiations of the 1988 plebiscite."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 20]

This, it should be noted, has always been the case. Political freedoms
have **never** been given by the powers that be but rather won by long
struggles by working class people. This has always been the case, as
Kropotkin stressed basic political liberties were *"extorted from
parliament by force, by agitations that threatened to become rebellions.
It was by establishing trade unions and practising strike action despite
the edicts of Parliament and the hangings"* that workers *"won the right
to associate and strike"* in Britain for example. [**Words of a Rebel**,
pp. 123-4] To ignore that often heroic struggle shows an ignorance about
history which only matches an ignorance about liberty. The history of
capitalism is important in this regard. It first developed under
Absolutist states which used its power to bolster the position of their
capitalist class within both national (against the working class) and
international markets (against foreign competitors). As we discuss in
[section F.8](secF8.html), they actively intervened to create the
pre-conditions for generalised wage slavery before becoming a handicap
to the rising bourgeoisie. These regimes were generally replaced by
liberal states with limited voting rights which generally lifted the
burden of state regulation from the capitalist class. The working class
had to fight long and hard to win basic civil liberties and the vote. As
Chomsky notes, such progress *"didn't just happen; it happened through
the struggles of the labour movement, and the Civil Rights Movement, and
the women's movement, and everything else. It's the popular movements
which expanded the domain of freedom of speech [and other liberties]
until it began to be meaningful."* [**Understanding Power**, pp. 268-9]

Once these rights were won, the ruling elite has always turned to
fascism to control them once they started to threaten their power and
wealth. This obviously applies to Chile. Until the coup of 11 September
1973, Chile had been seen increasing participation of the working class
in economic and social decision making. The coup was, simply, a massive
class revenge of the wealthy against a working class which had dared to
imagine that another world was possible. Unsurprisingly, given the key
role of working class people in the struggle for freedom, *"Worker
leaders and activists . . . were central targets of the military
regime's state terror, whose goal was to intimidate them into passivity,
in large part so that neoliberal policies could be imposed."* [Peter
Winn, *"Introduction"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 12] Equally unsurprising, those
who had taken to the streets aimed for political freedom in order to
**end** the "economic liberty" imposed by the regime.

This means that Friedman's maxim that economic liberty is required to
produce political liberty is a deeply flawed position to take. Not only
does it ignore the popular struggles which have always had to be fought
to end minority government, it also allows its advocates to justify and
work with authoritarian regimes. At best, this position ensures that you
will be indifferent to the destruction of political freedom as long as
"economic liberty" (i.e. capitalism) was secured. At worse, it ensures
that you would actively support such a destruction as you can justify it
in terms of a return to "democracy" in the long run. Friedman and the
"Chicago Boys" express both ends of that spectrum. That he can comment
on *"the paradox that economic freedom produces political freedom but
political freedom may destroy economic freedom"* in the context of Chile
is staggering, as it was the destruction of "political freedom" that
allowed "economic freedom" (for the rich) to be imposed. [**Op. Cit.**]
In reality, Chile provides evidence to support the alternative argument
that the introduction of free market capitalism requires the elimination
or, at best, the reduction of "political liberty."

In other words, fascism was an ideal political environment to introduce
"economic liberty" **because** it had destroyed political liberty.
Perhaps we should conclude that the denial of political liberty is both
necessary and sufficient in order to create (and preserve) "free market"
capitalism? After all, the history of capitalism has been marked by the
ruling class overthrowing "political liberty" when their power was
threatened by popular movements. In other words, that Malatesta was
right to argue that the *"capitalists can maintain the struggle in the
economic field so long as workers demand small . . . improvements; but
as soon as they see their profits seriously diminished and the very
existence of their privileges threatened, they appeal to government and
if it is not sufficiently understanding and not strong enough to defend
them . . . they use their own wealth to finance new repressive forces
and to set up a new government which will serve them better."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 131]

Friedman's argument implies that "economic liberty" is more important
than "political liberty," so making people less concerned about
dictatorships as long as they support the interests of the capitalist
class. While the long list of capitalists, conservatives and right-wing
("classical") liberals who supported fascism or fascist-like regimes
shows that giving them an ideological prop to justify it is unnecessary,
it is hardly wise.

Then there is the question of whether Chile does, in fact, have genuine
political liberty (i.e. a democratic government). The answer is, not
quite. Chile's democracy is a "managed" one, constrained both by the
political legacy of Pinochet's constitution and the threat of military
intervention. Significantly, Friedman seems unconcerned about the
quality of the post-Pinochet democracy Chile experiences. Simply put,
the existence of an electoral regime cannot be confused with democracy
or "political liberty."

It is clear that Pinochet went into the 1988 plebiscite expecting to win
(particularly as he tried to rig it like the 1980 one). According to
many reports from members of his cabinet and staff, he was absolutely
furious and wanted to annul the results. The popular backlash this would
have created ensured he abided by the result. Instead, he ensured that
the new governments had to accept his authoritarian constitution and
decree-laws. In other words, knowing he would be replaced he immediately
took steps to limit the subsequent democratically elected governments as
well as remaining as the head of the armed forces (as we discuss below,
this obviously ensures the threat of a coup hung over the new
governments).

This means that post-Pinochet Chile is not your typical "democracy."
Pinochet became an unelected senator for life after his retirement as
armed forces commander in March 1998 and 28% of the Senate is
*"designated,"* including four retired military officers named by the
National Security Council. Pinochet also imposed a *"unique binomial
electoral law, [in] which to elect two deputies or senators from the
same district, a party or electoral alliance needed to double its
opponent's vote -- a difficult feat -- or else the opponent received an
equal number of seats in congress."* This ensured rightist control of
the Senate despite a decade of majority victories by the centre-left in
elections and so *"Pinochet's 'designated senators' and undemocratic
electoral law continued to frustrate the popular will and limit Chile's
restored democracy."* The majority could not *"pass laws without the
consent of its rightist opponents."* Pinochet used *"final months as
president to decree laws that would hamstring his opponents, even if a
majority of the electorate supported them."* In addition, any new
government was *"confronted by a judiciary and government bureaucracy
packed by Pinochet with his own adherents. Moreover, the Right enjoyed a
near monopoly of the press and media that grew as the decade advanced."*
[Winn, *"The Pinochet Era"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 64 and p. 49]

Thus Chile is lumbered with Pinochet's legacy, *"the authoritarian
constitution of 1980, which sought to create a 'protected democracy'
under military tutelage. It was written so as to be difficult to amend
and designed to handcuff a future opposition government and frustrate
popular will."* It *"removed the military from civilian control, while
submitting future elected governments to a military-dominated National
Security Council with a vague but broad purview."* It also *"banned
measures against private property."* With some *"relative minor
modifications of some of its most egregious features during the
transition to democracy"* it remained *"in effect for the rest of the
century"* and in 2004 was *"still Chile's fundamental charter."* [Winn,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 30] This constitution built upon the work of
right-"libertarian" Friedrich von Hayek and, unsurprisingly aimed to
insulate "economic liberty" from popular pressures, i.e. to limit and
reduce democracy to secure the freedom of capitalism (and, of course,
the capitalist class).

In addition, the threat of military intervention is always at the
forefront of political discussions. For example, on 11 September 1990,
Pinochet *"warned that he would lead another coup is conditions
warranted it. In 1993, when investigations into an arms procurement
scandal implicated his son, Pinochet ordered combat-ready troops and
tanks onto the streets for an 'exercise' . . . Throughout the Aylwin
presidency, Pinochet maintained an army 'shadow cabinet' that acted as a
political pressure group."* Unsurprisingly, the first post-Pinochet
government *"often backed down in practice for the sake of social peace
-- or out of fear of endangering the transition to democracy. As a
result, Aylwin was unable to fulfil his promises of constitutional and
institutional reforms that would reverse Pinochet's authoritarian
legacy."* This was because the new government thought that the coup and
dictatorship *"reflected the decision of business elites to call in the
military, because they could not protect their core interests under
Chile's radicalised democracy. The lesson that . . . [they] drew . . .
was that to avoid its repetition in the 1990s it was necessary to
reassure business that its interests would be protected."* [Winn, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 50 and p. 53]

The limited nature of Chile's democracy was seen in 1998, when Pinochet
was arrested in Britain in regard of a warrant issued by a Spanish Judge
for the murders of Spanish citizens during his regime. Commentators,
particularly those on the right, stressed that Pinochet's arrest could
undermine Chile's "fragile democracy" by provoking the military. In
other words, Chile is only a democracy in-so-far as the military let it
be. Of course, few commentators acknowledged the fact that this meant
that Chile was not, in fact, a democracy after all.

All of which explains why subsequent governments have only tinkered with
the free-market policies introduced by Pinochet. They have dared not
reverse them not due to their popular nature but to the obvious fact
that recent Chilean history shows that progressive politicians and their
supporters have something to fear besides losing an election.
Unsurprisingly, workers *"socio-economic aspirations were postponed in
the interest of not jeopardising the transition and their expectations
of labour law reform were sacrificed on the same alter."* [Winn,
*"Introduction"*, Winn (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 10] While 2002 saw the
election of the first socialist president since Allende, it is unlikely
that Chile will experience anything beyond minor reforms -- the legacy
of fear and political restrictions will ensure that the ruling class
will have little to fear from "political liberty" being used by
politicians to curb their power and wealth.

Then there is the social legacy of 17 years of dictatorship. As one
expert on Latin America, Cathy Scheider, noted in 1993, *"the
transformation of the economic and political system"* under Pinochet
*"has had a profound impact on the world view of the typical Chilean,"*
with most having *"little contact with other workers or with their
neighbours, and only limited time with their family. Their exposure to
political or labour organisations is minimal. . . they lack either the
political resources or the disposition to confront the state. The
fragmentation of opposition communities has accomplished what brute
military repression could not. It has transformed Chile, both culturally
and politically, from a country of active participatory grassroots
communities, to a land of disconnected, apolitical individuals. The
cumulative impact of this change is such that we are unlikely to see any
concerted challenge to the current ideology in the near future."*
[quoted by Noam Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p. 184]

In such circumstances, political liberty can be re-introduced, as no one
is in a position to effectively use it. In addition, Chileans live with
the memory that challenging the state in the near past resulted in a
fascist dictatorship murdering thousands of people as well as repeated
and persistent violations of human rights by the junta, not to mention
the existence of "anti-Marxist" death squads -- for example in 1986
*"Amnesty International accused the Chilean government of employing
death squads."* [P. Gunson, A. Thompson, G. Chamberlain, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 86] According to one Human Rights group, the Pinochet regime was
responsible for 11,536 human rights violations between 1984 and 1988
alone. [Calculation of *"Comite Nacional de Defensa do los Derechos del
Pueblo,"* reported in **Fortin**, September 23, 1988]

These facts that would have a strongly deterrent effect on people
contemplating the use of political liberty to actually **change** the
status quo in ways that the military and economic elites did not approve
of. This does not mean, of course, that the Chilean people are not
resisting oppression and exploitation and rebuilding their
organisations, simply that using free speech, striking and other forms
of social action is more difficult. That is protects and increases the
power, wealth and authority of the employer and state over their wage
slaves goes without sating -- it was what was intended. As Kropotkin
pointed out years ago, *"freedom of press . . . and all the rest, are
only respected if the people do not make use of them against the
privileged classes. But the day the people begin to take advantage of
them to undermine those privileges, then the so-called liberties will be
cast overboard."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 42] Chile is a classic example of
this, a bloody example which helps deter genuine democracy in that
country decades later.
