D.3 How does wealth influence the mass media?
=============================================

In a word, massively. This, in turn, influences the way people see the
world and, as a result, the media is a key means by which the general
population come to accept, and support, *"the arrangements of the
social, economic, and political order."* The media, in other words *"are
vigilant guardians protecting privilege from the threat of public
understanding and participation."* This process ensures that state
violence is not necessary to maintain the system as *"more subtle means
are required: the manufacture of consent, [and] deceiving the masses
with 'necessary illusions."* [Noam Chomsky, **Necessary Illusions**, pp.
13-4 and p. 19] The media, in other words, are a key means of ensuring
that the dominant ideas within society are those of the dominant class.

Noam Chomsky has helped develop a detailed and sophisticated analyse of
how the wealthy and powerful use the media to propagandise in their own
interests behind a mask of objective news reporting. Along with Edward
Herman, he has developed the ***"Propaganda Model"*** of the media
works. Herman and Chomsky expound this analysis in their book
**Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media**,
whose main theses we will summarise in this section (unless otherwise
indicated all quotes are from this work). We do not suggest that we can
present anything other than a summary here and, as such, we urge readers
to consult **Manufacturing Consent** itself for a full description and
extensive supporting evidence. We would also recommend Chomsky's
**Necessary Illusions** for a further discussion of this model of the
media.

Chomsky and Herman's "propaganda model" of the media postulates a set of
five *"filters"* that act to screen the news and other material
disseminated by the media. These *"filters"* result in a media that
reflects elite viewpoints and interests and mobilises *"support for the
special interests that dominate the state and private activity."*
[**Manufacturing Consent**, p. xi] These *"filters"* are: (1) the size,
concentrated ownership, owner wealth, and profit orientation of the
dominant mass-media firms; (2) advertising as the primary income source
of the mass media; (3) the reliance of the media on information provided
by government, business, and "experts" funded and approved by these
primary sources and agents of power; (4) *"flak"* (negative responses to
a media report) as a means of disciplining the media; and (5)
*"anticommunism"* as a national religion and control mechanism. It is
these filters which ensure that genuine objectivity is usually lacking
in the media (needless to say, some media, such as Fox news and the
right-wing newspapers like the UK's Sun, Telegraph and Daily Mail, do
not even try to present an objective perspective).

*"The raw material of news must pass through successive filters leaving
only the cleansed residue fit to print,"* Chomsky and Herman maintain.
The filters *"fix the premises of discourse and interpretation, and the
definition of what is newsworthy in the first place, and they explain
the basis and operations of what amount to propaganda campaigns."* [p.
2] We will briefly consider the nature of these five filters below
before refuting two common objections to the model. As with Chomsky and
Herman, examples are mostly from the US media. For more extensive
analysis, we would recommend two organisations which study and critique
the performance of the media from a perspective informed by the
"propaganda model." These are the American **Fairness & Accuracy In
Reporting** (FAIR) and the UK based **MediaLens** (neither, it should be
pointed out, are anarchist organisations).

Before discussing the "propaganda model", we will present a few examples
by FAIR to show how the media reflects the interests of the ruling
class. War usually provides the most obvious evidence for the biases in
the media. For example, Steve Rendall and Tara Broughel analysed the US
news media during the first stage of the 2003 invasion of Iraq and found
that official voices dominated it *"while opponents of the war have been
notably underrepresented,"* Nearly two-thirds of all sources were
pro-war, rising to 71% of US guests. Anti-war voices were a mere 10% of
all sources, but just 6% of non-Iraqi sources and 3% of US sources.
*"Thus viewers were more than six times as likely to see a pro-war
source as one who was anti-war; with U.S. guests alone, the ratio
increases to 25 to 1."* Unsurprisingly, official voices, *"including
current and former government employees, whether civilian or military,
dominated network newscasts"* (63% of overall sources). Some analysts
did criticise certain aspects of the military planning, but such *"the
rare criticisms were clearly motivated by a desire to see U.S. military
efforts succeed."* While dissent was quite visible in America, *"the
networks largely ignored anti-war opinion."* FAIR found that just 3% of
US sources represented or expressed opposition to the war in spite of
the fact more than one in four Americans opposed it. In summary, *"none
of the networks offered anything resembling proportionate coverage of
anti-war voices"*. [*"Amplifying Officials, Squelching Dissent"*,
**Extra!** May/June 2003]

This perspective is common during war time, with the media's rule of
thumb being, essentially, that to support the war is to be objective,
while to be anti-war is to carry a bias. The media repeats the sanitised
language of the state, relying on official sources to inform the public.
Truth-seeking independence was far from the media agenda and so they
made it easier for governments to do what they always do, that is lie.
Rather than challenge the agenda of the state, the media simply foisted
them onto the general population. Genuine criticism only starts to
appear when the costs of a conflict become so high that elements of the
ruling class start to question tactics and strategy. Until that happens,
any criticism is minor (and within a generally pro-war perspective) and
the media acts essentially as the fourth branch of the government rather
than a Fourth Estate. The Iraq war, it should be noted, was an excellent
example of this process at work. Initially, the media simply amplified
elite needs, uncritically reporting the Bush Administration's pathetic
"evidence" of Iraqi WMD (which quickly became exposed as the nonsense it
was). Only when the war became too much of a burden did critical views
start being heard and then only in a context of being supportive of the
goals of the operation.

This analysis applies as much to domestic issues. For example, Janine
Jackson reported how most of the media fell in step with the Bush
Administration's attempts in 2006 to trumpet a "booming" U.S. economy in
the face of public disbelief. As she notes, there were *"obvious reasons
[for] the majority of Americans dissent . . . Most American households
are not, in fact, seeing their economic fortunes improve. GDP is up, but
virtually all the growth has gone into corporate profits and the incomes
of the highest economic brackets. Wages and incomes for average workers,
adjusted for inflation, are down in recent years; the median income for
non-elderly households is down 4.8 percent since 2000 . . .The poverty
rate is rising, as is the number of people in debt."* Yet *"rather than
confront these realities, and explore the implications of the White
House's efforts to deny them, most mainstream media instead assisted the
Bush team's PR by themselves feigning confusion over the gap between the
official view and the public mood."* They did so by presenting *"the
majority of Americans' understanding of their own economic situation . .
. as somehow disconnected from reality, ascribed to 'pessimism,'
ignorance or irrationality . . . But why these ordinary workers,
representing the majority of households, should not be considered the
arbiters of whether or not 'the economy' is good is never explained."*
Barring a few exceptions, the media did not *"reflect the concerns of
average salaried workers at least as much as those of the investor
class."* Needless to say, which capitalist economists were allowed space
to discuss their ideas, progressive economists did not. [*"Good News!
The Rich Get Richer: Lack of applause for falling wages is media
mystery,"* **Extra!**, March/April 2006] Given the nature and role of
the media, this reporting comes as no surprise.

We stress again, before continuing, that this is a **summary** of
Herman's and Chomsky's thesis and we cannot hope to present the wealth
of evidence and argument available in either **Manufacturing Consent**
or **Necessary Illusions**. We recommend either of these books for more
information on and evidence to support the "propaganda model" of the
media. Unless otherwise indicated, all quotes in this section of the FAQ
are from Herman and Chomsky's **Manufacturing Consent**.

D.3.1 How does the structure of the media affect its content?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Even a century ago, the number of media with any substantial outreach
was limited by the large size of the necessary investment, and this
limitation has become increasingly effective over time. As in any well
developed market, this means that there are very effective **natural**
barriers to entry into the media industry. Due to this process of
concentration, the ownership of the major media has become increasingly
concentrated in fewer and fewer hands. As Ben Bagdikian's stresses in
his 1987 book **Media Monopoly**, the 29 largest media systems account
for over half of the output of all newspapers, and most of the sales and
audiences in magazines, broadcasting, books, and movies. The *"top
tier"* of these -- somewhere between 10 and 24 systems -- along with the
government and wire services, *"defines the news agenda and supplies
much of the national and international news to the lower tiers of the
media, and thus for the general public."* [p. 5] Since then, media
concentration has increased, both nationally and on a global level.
Bagdikian's 2004 book, **The New Media Monopoly**, showed that since
1983 the number of corporations controlling most newspapers, magazines,
book publishers, movie studios, and electronic media have shrunk from 50
to five global-dimension firms, operating with many of the
characteristics of a cartel -- Time-Warner, Disney, News Corporation,
Viacom and Germany-based Bertelsmann.

These *"top-tier companies are large, profit-seeking corporations, owned
and controlled by very wealthy people . . . Many of these companies are
fully integrated into the financial market"* which means that *"the
pressures of stockholders, directors and bankers to focus on the bottom
line are powerful."* [p. 5] These pressures have intensified in recent
years as media stocks have become market favourites and as deregulation
has increased profitability and so the threat of take-overs. These
ensure that these *"control groups obviously have a special take on the
status quo by virtue of their wealth and their strategic position in one
of the great institutions of society. And they exercise the power of
this strategic position, if only by establishing the general aims of the
company and choosing its top management."* [p. 8]

The media giants have also diversified into other fields. For example
GE, and Westinghouse, both owners of major television networks, are
huge, diversified multinational companies heavily involved in the
controversial areas of weapons production and nuclear power. GE and
Westinghouse depend on the government to subsidise their nuclear power
and military research and development, and to create a favourable
climate for their overseas sales and investments. Similar dependence on
the government affect other media.

Because they are large corporations with international investment
interests, the major media tend to have a right-wing political bias. In
addition, members of the business class own most of the mass media, the
bulk of which depends for their existence on advertising revenue (which
in turn comes from private business). Business also provides a
substantial share of "experts" for news programmes and generates massive
"flak." Claims that the media are "left-leaning" are sheer
disinformation manufactured by the "flak" organisations described below
(in [section D.3.4](secD3.html#secd34)). Thus Herman and Chomsky:

> *"the dominant media forms are quite large businesses; they are
> controlled by very wealthy people or by managers who are subject to
> sharp constraints by owners and other market-profit-oriented forces;
> and they are closely interlocked, and have important common interests,
> with other major corporations, banks, and government. This is the
> first powerful filter that effects news choices."* [p. 14]

Needless to say, reporters and editors will be selected based upon how
well their work reflects the interests and needs of their employers.
Thus a radical reporter and a more mainstream one both of the same
skills and abilities would have very different careers within the
industry. Unless the radical reporter toned down their copy, they are
unlikely to see it printed unedited or unchanged. Thus the structure
within the media firm will tend to penalise radical viewpoints,
encouraging an acceptance of the status quo in order to further a
career. This selection process ensures that owners do not need to order
editors or reporters what to do -- to be successful they will have to
internalise the values of their employers.

D.3.2 What is the effect of advertising on the mass media?
----------------------------------------------------------

The main business of the media is to sell audiences to advertisers.
Advertisers thus acquire a kind of de facto licensing authority, since
without their support the media would cease to be economically viable.
And it is **affluent** audiences that get advertisers interested. As
Chomsky and Herman put it, the *"idea that the drive for large audiences
makes the mass media 'democratic' thus suffers from the initial weakness
that its political analogue is a voting system weighted by income!"*
[p.16]

As regards TV, in addition to *"discrimination against unfriendly media
institutions, advertisers also choose selectively among programs on the
basis of their own principles. With rare exceptions these are culturally
and politically conservative. Large corporate advertisers on television
will rarely sponsor programs that engage in serious criticisms of
corporate activities."* Accordingly, large corporate advertisers almost
never sponsor programs that contain serious criticisms of corporate
activities, such as negative ecological impacts, the workings of the
military-industrial complex, or corporate support of and benefits from
Third World dictatorships. This means that TV companies *"learn over
time that such programs will not sell and would have to be carried at a
financial sacrifice, and that, in addition, they may offend powerful
advertisers."* More generally, advertisers will want *"to avoid programs
with serious complexities and disturbing controversies that interfere
with the 'buying mood.'"* [p. 17]

Political discrimination is therefore structured into advertising
allocations by wealthy companies with an emphasis on people with money
to buy. In addition, *"many companies will always refuse to do business
with ideological enemies and those whom they perceive as damaging their
interests."* Thus overt discrimination adds to the force of the *"voting
system weighted by income."* This has had the effect of placing working
class and radical papers at a serious disadvantage. Without access to
advertising revenue, even the most popular paper will fold or price
itself out of the market. Chomsky and Herman cite the British pro-labour
and pro-union **Daily Herald** as an example of this process. At its
peak, the **Daily Herald** had almost double the readership of **The
Times**, the **Financial Times** and **The Guardian** combined, yet even
with 8.1% of the national circulation it got 3.5% of net advertising
revenue and so could not survive on the "free market." As Herman and
Chomsky note, a *"mass movement without any major media support, and
subject to a great deal of active press hostility, suffers a serious
disability, and struggles against grave odds."* With the folding of the
**Daily Herald**, the labour movement lost its voice in the mainstream
media. [pp. 17-8 and pp. 15-16]

Thus advertising is an effective filter for news choice (and, indeed,
survival in the market).

D.3.3 Why do the media rely on government and business "experts" for information?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As Herman and Chomsky stress, basic economics explains why the mass
media *"are drawn into a symbiotic relationship with powerful sources of
information"* as well as *"reciprocity of interest."* The media need *"a
steady, reliable flow of raw material of news. They have daily news
demands and imperative news schedules that they must meet."* They cannot
afford to have reporters and cameras at all locations and so economics
*"dictates that they concentrate their resources where significant news
often occurs."* [p. 18] This means that bottom-line considerations
dictate that the media concentrate their resources where news, rumours
and leaks are plentiful, and where regular press conferences are held.
The White House, Pentagon, and the State Department, in Washington,
D.C., are centres of such activity on a national scale, while city hall
and police departments are their local equivalents. In addition, trade
groups, businesses and corporations also provide regular stories that
are deemed as newsworthy and from credible sources.

In other words, government and corporate sources have the great merit of
being recognisable and credible by their status and prestige; moreover,
they have the most money available to produce a flow of news that the
media can use. For example, the Pentagon has a public-information
service employing many thousands of people, spending hundreds of
millions of dollars every year, and far outspending not only the
public-information resources of any dissenting individual or group but
the **aggregate** of such groups. Only the corporate sector has the
resources to produce public information and propaganda on the scale of
the Pentagon and other government bodies. The Chamber of Commerce, a
business collective, had a 1983 budget for research, communications, and
political activities of \$65 million. Besides the US Chamber of
Commerce, there are thousands of state and local chambers of commerce
and trade associations also engaged in public relations and lobbying
activities. As we noted in [section D.2](secD2.html), the corporate
funding of PR is massive. Thus *"business corporations and trade groups
are also regular purveyors of stories deemed newsworthy. These
bureaucracies turn out a large volume of material that meets the demands
of news organisations for reliable, scheduled flows."* [p. 19]

To maintain their pre-eminent position as sources, government and
business-news agencies expend much effort to make things easy for news
organisations. They provide the media organisations with facilities in
which to gather, give journalists advance copies of speeches and
upcoming reports; schedule press conferences at hours convenient for
those needing to meet news deadlines; write press releases in language
that can be used with little editing; and carefully organise press
conferences and photo-opportunity sessions. This means that, in effect,
*"the large bureaucracies of the powerful **subsidise** the mass media,
and gain special access by their contribution to reducing the media's
costs of acquiring the raw materials of, and producing, news."* [p. 22]

This economic dependency also allows corporations and the state to
influence the media. The most obvious way is by using their *"personal
relationships, threats, and rewards to further influence and coerce the
media. The media may feel obligated to carry extremely dubious stories
and mute criticism in order not to offend sources and disturb a close
relationship. It is very difficult to call authorities on whom one
depends for daily news liars, even if they tell whoppers."* Critical
sources may be avoided not only due to the higher costs in finding them
and establishing their credibility, but because the established
*"primary sources may be offended and may even threaten the media with
using them."* [p. 22] As well as refusing to co-operate on shows or
reports which include critics, corporations and governments may threaten
the media with loss of access if they ask too many critical questions or
delve into inappropriate areas.

In addition, *"more important, powerful sources regularly take advantage
of media routines and dependency to 'manage' the media, to manipulate
them into following a special agenda and framework . . . Part of this
management process consists of inundating the media with stories, which
serve sometimes to foist a particular line and frame on the media . . .
and at other times to chase unwanted stories off the front page or out
of the media altogether."* [p. 23]

The dominance of official sources would, of course, be weakened by the
existence of highly respectable unofficial sources that gave dissident
views with great authority. To alleviate this problem, the power elite
uses the strategy of *"co-opting the experts"* -- that is, putting them
on the payroll as consultants, funding their research, and organising
think tanks that will hire them directly and help disseminate the
messages deemed essential to elite interests. "Experts" on TV panel
discussions and news programs are often drawn from such organisations,
whose funding comes primarily from the corporate sector and wealthy
families -- a fact that is, of course, never mentioned on the programs
where they appear. This allows business, for example, to sell its
interests as objective and academic while, in fact, they provide a thin
veneer to mask partisan work which draws the proper conclusions desired
by their pay masters.

This process of creating a mass of experts readily available to the
media *"has been carried out on a deliberate and a massive scale."*
These ensure that *"the corporate viewpoint"* is effectively spread as
the experts work is *"funded and their outputs . . . disseminated to the
media by a sophisticated propaganda effort. The corporate funding and
clear ideological purpose in the overall effort had no discernible
effect on the credibility of the intellectuals so mobilised; on the
contrary, the funding and pushing of their ideas catapulted them into
the press."* [p. 23 and p. 24]

D.3.4 How is "flak" used as a means of disciplining the media?
--------------------------------------------------------------

*"Flak"* is a term used by Herman and Chomsky to refer *"to negative
responses to a media statement or program."* Such responses may be
expressed as phone calls, letters, telegrams, e-mail messages,
petitions, lawsuits, speeches, bills before Congress, or *"other modes
of complaint, threat, or punishment."* Flak may be generated centrally,
by organisations, or it may come from the independent actions of
individuals (sometimes encouraged to act by media hacks such as
right-wing talk show hosts or newspapers). *"If flak is produced on a
large-scale, or by individuals or groups with substantial resources, it
can be both uncomfortable and costly to the media."* [p. 26]

This is for many reasons. Positions need to be defended within and
outwith an organisation, sometimes in front of legislatures and
(perhaps) in the courts. Advertisers are very concerned to avoid
offending constituencies who might produce flak, and their demands for
inoffensive programming exerts pressure on the media to avoid certain
kinds of facts, positions, or programs that are likely to call forth
flak. This can have a strong deterrence factor, with media organisations
avoiding certain subjects and sources simply to avoid having to deal
with the inevitable flak they will receive from the usual sources. The
ability to produce flak *"is related to power,"* as it is expensive to
generate on scale which is actually effective. [p. 26] Unsurprisingly,
this means that the most effective flak comes from business and
government who have the funds to produce it on a large scale.

The government itself is *"a major producer of flak, regularly
assailing, threatening, and 'correcting' the media, trying to contain
any deviations from the established line in foreign or domestic
policy."* However, the right-wing plays a major role in deliberately
creating flak. For example, during the 1970s and 1980s, the corporate
community sponsored the creation of such institutions as the American
Legal Foundation, the Capital Legal Foundation, the Media Institute, the
Center for Media and Public Affairs, and Accuracy in Media (AIM), which
may be regarded as organisations designed for the specific purpose of
producing flak. Freedom House is an older US organisation which had a
broader design but whose flak-producing activities became a model for
the more recent organisations. The Media Institute, for instance, was
set up in 1972 and is funded by wealthy corporate patrons, sponsoring
media monitoring projects, conferences, and studies of the media. The
main focus of its studies and conferences has been the alleged failure
of the media to portray business accurately and to give adequate weight
to the business point of view, but it also sponsors works which "expose"
alleged left-wing bias in the mass media. [p. 28 and pp. 27-8]

And, it should be noted, while the flak machines *"steadily attack the
media, the media treats them well. They receive respectful attention,
and their propagandistic role and links to a large corporate program are
rarely mentioned or analysed."* [p. 28] Indeed, such attacks *"are often
not unwelcome, first because response is simple or superfluous; and
second, because debate over this issue helps entrench the belief that
the media are . . . independent and objective, with high standards of
professional integrity and openness to all reasonable views"* which is
*"quite acceptable to established power and privilege -- even to the
media elites themselves, who are not averse to the charge that they may
have gone to far in pursuing their cantankerous and obstreperous ways in
defiance of orthodoxy and power."* Ultimately, such flak *"can only be
understood as a demand that the media should not even reflect the range
of debate over tactical questions among the dominant elites, but should
serve only those segments that happen to manage the state at a
particular moment, and should do so with proper enthusiasm and optimism
about the causes -- noble by definition -- in which state power is
engaged."* [Chomsky, **Necessary Illusions**, p. 13 and p. 11]

D.3.5 Why is "anticommunism" used as control mechanism?
-------------------------------------------------------

The final filter which Herman and Chomsky discuss is the ideology of
anticommunism. "Communism" is of course regarded as the ultimate evil by
the corporate rich, since the ideas of collective ownership of
productive assets *"threatens the very root of their class position and
superior status."* As the concept is *"fuzzy,"* it can be widely applied
and *"can be used against anybody advocating policies that threaten
property interests."* [p. 29] Hence the attacks on third-world
nationalists as "socialists" and the steady expansion of "communism" to
apply to any form of socialism, social democracy, reformism, trade
unionism or even "liberalism" (i.e. any movement which aims to give
workers more bargaining power or allow ordinary citizens more voice in
public policy decisions).

Hence the ideology of anticommunism has been very useful, because it can
be used to discredit anybody advocating policies regarded as harmful to
corporate interests. It also helps to divide the Left and labour
movements, justifies support for pro-US fascist regimes abroad as
"lesser evils" than communism, and discourages liberals from opposing
such regimes for fear of being branded as heretics from the national
religion. This process has been aided immensely by the obvious fact that
the "communist" regimes (i.e. Stalinist dictatorships) have been so
terrible.

Since the collapse of the USSR and related states in 1989, the utility
of anticommunism has lost some of its power. Of course, there are still
a few official communist enemy states, like North Korea, Cuba, and
China, but these are not quite the threat the USSR was. North Korea and
Cuba are too impoverished to threaten the world's only super-power (that
so many Americans think that Cuba was ever a threat says a lot about the
power of propaganda). China is problematic, as Western corporations now
have access to, and can exploit, its resources, markets and cheap
labour. As such, criticism of China will be mooted, unless it starts to
hinder US corporations or become too much of an economic rival.

So we can still expect, to some degree, abuses or human rights
violations in these countries are systematically played up by the media
while similar abuses in client states are downplayed or ignored. Chomsky
and Herman refer to the victims of abuses in enemy states as **worthy
victims,** while victims who suffer at the hands of US clients or
friends are **unworthy victims.** Stories about worthy victims are often
made the subject of sustained propaganda campaigns, to score political
points against enemies. For example:

> "If the government of corporate community and the media feel that a
> story is useful as well as dramatic, they focus on it intensively and
> use it to enlighten the public. This was true, for example, of the
> shooting down by the Soviets of the Korean airliner KAL 007 in early
> September 1983, which permitted an extended campaign of denigration of
> an official enemy and greatly advanced Reagan administration arms
> plans."
> "In sharp contrast, the shooting down by Israel of a Libyan civilian
> airliner in February 1973 led to no outcry in the West, no
> denunciations for 'cold-blooded murder,' and no boycott. This
> difference in treatment was explained by the **New York Times**
> precisely on the grounds of utility: 'No useful purpose is served by
> an acrimonious debate over the assignment of blame for the downing of
> a Libyan airliner in the Sinai peninsula last week.' There **was** a
> very 'useful purpose' served by focusing on the Soviet act, and a
> massive propaganda campaign ensued." [p. 32]

As noted, since the end of the Cold War, anti-communism has not been
used as extensively as it once was to mobilise support for elite
crusades. Other enemies have to be found and so the "Drug War" or
"anti-terrorism" now often provide the public with "official enemies" to
hate and fear. Thus the Drug War was the excuse for the Bush
administration's invasion of Panama, and "fighting narco-terrorists" has
more recently been the official reason for shipping military hardware
and surveillance equipment to Mexico (where it's actually being used
against the Zapatista rebels in Chiapas, whose uprising is threatening
to destabilise the country and endanger US investments). After 9/11,
terrorism became the key means of forcing support for policies. The
mantra *"you are either with us or with the terrorists"* was used to
bolster support and reduce criticism for both imperial adventures as
well as a whole range of regressive domestic policies.

Whether any of these new enemies will prove to be as useful as
anticommunism remains to be seen. It is likely, particularly given how
"communism" has become so vague as to include liberal and social
democratic ideas, that it will remain the bogey man of choice --
particularly as many within the population both at home and abroad
continue to support left-wing ideas and organisations. Given the track
record of neo-liberalism across the globe, being able to tar its
opponents as "communists" will remain a useful tool.

D.3.6 Isn't the "propaganda model" a conspiracy theory?
-------------------------------------------------------

No, far from it. Chomsky and Herman explicitly address this charge in
**Manufacturing Consent** and explain why it is a false one:

> *"Institutional critiques such as we present in this book are commonly
> dismissed by establishment commentators as 'conspiracy theories,' but
> this is merely an evasion. We do not use any kind of 'conspiracy'
> hypothesis to explain mass-media performance. In fact, our treatment
> is much closer to a 'free market' analysis, with the results largely
> an outcome of the workings of market forces."* [p. xii]

They go on to suggest what some of these "market forces" are. One of the
most important is the weeding-out process that determines who gets the
journalistic jobs in the major media: *"Most biased choices in the media
arise from the preselection of right-thinking people, internalised
preconceptions, and the adaptation of personnel to the constraints of
ownership, organisation, market, and political power."* This is the key,
as the model *"helps us to understand how media personnel adapt, and are
adapted, to systemic demands. Given the imperatives of corporate
organisation and the workings of the various filters, conformity to the
needs and interests of privileged sectors is essential to success."*
This means that those who do not display the requisite values and
perspectives will be regarded as irresponsible and/or ideological and,
consequently, will not succeed (barring a few exceptions). In other
words, those who *"adapt, perhaps quite honestly, will then be able to
assert, accurately, that they perceive no pressures to conform. The
media are indeed free . . . for those who have internalised the required
values and perspectives."* [p. xii and p. 304]

In other words, important media employees learn to internalise the
values of their bosses: *"Censorship is largely self-censorship, by
reporters and commentators who adjust to the realities of source and
media organisational requirements, and by people at higher levels within
media organisations who are chosen to implement, and have usually
internalised, the constraints imposed by proprietary and other market
and governmental centres of power."* But, it may be asked, isn't it
still a conspiracy theory to suggest that media leaders all have similar
values? Not at all. Such leaders *"do similar things because they see
the world through the same lenses, are subject to similar constraints
and incentives, and thus feature stories or maintain silence together in
tacit collective action and leader-follower behaviour."* [p. xii]

The fact that media leaders share the same fundamental values does not
mean, however, that the media are a solid monolith on all issues. The
powerful often disagree on the tactics needed *"to attain generally
shared aims, [and this gets] reflected in media debate. But views that
challenge fundamental premises or suggest that the observed modes of
exercise of state power are based on systemic factors will be excluded
from the mass media even when elite controversy over tactics rages
fiercely."* [p. xii] This means that viewpoints which question the
legitimacy of elite aims or suggest that state power is being exercised
in elite interests rather than the "national" interest will be excluded
from the mass media. As such, we would expect the media to encourage
debate within accepted bounds simply because the ruling class is not
monolithic and while they agree on keeping the system going, they
disagree on the best way to do so.

Therefore the "propaganda model" has as little in common with a
"conspiracy theory" as saying that the management of General Motors acts
to maintain and increase its profits. As Chomsky notes, *"[t]o confront
power is costly and difficult; high standards of evidence and argument
are imposed, and critical analysis is naturally not welcomed by those
who are in a position to react vigorously and to determine the array of
rewards and punishments. Conformity to a 'patriotic agenda,' in
contrast, imposes no such costs."* This means that *"conformity is the
easy way, and the path to privilege and prestige . . . It is a natural
expectation, on uncontroversial assumptions, that the major media and
other ideological institutions will generally reflect the perspectives
and interests of established power."* [**Necessary Illusions**, pp. 8-9
and p. 10]

D.3.7 Isn't the model contradicted by the media reporting government and business failures?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As noted above, the claim that the media are "adversarial" or (more
implausibly) that they have a "left-wing bias" is due to right-wing PR
organisations. This means that some "inconvenient facts" are
occasionally allowed to pass through the filters in order to give the
**appearance** of "objectivity" -- precisely so the media can deny
charges of engaging in propaganda. As Chomsky and Herman put it: *"the
'naturalness' of these processes, with inconvenient facts allowed
sparingly and within the proper framework of assumptions, and
fundamental dissent virtually excluded from the mass media (but
permitted in a marginalised press), makes for a propaganda system that
is far more credible and effective in putting over a patriotic agenda
than one with official censorship."* [p. xiv]

To support their case against the "adversarial" nature of the media,
Herman and Chomsky look into the claims of such right-wing media PR
machines as Freedom House. However, it is soon discovered that *"the
very examples offered in praise of the media for their independence, or
criticism of their excessive zeal, illustrate exactly the opposite."*
Such flak, while being worthless as serious analysis, does help to
reinforce the myth of an "adversarial media" and so is taken seriously
by the media. By saying that both right and left attack them, the media
presents themselves as neutral, balanced and objective -- a position
which is valid only if both criticisms are valid and of equal worth.
This is not the case, as Herman and Chomsky prove, both in terms of
evidence and underlying aims and principles. Ultimately, the attacks by
the right on the media are based on the concern *"to protect state
authority from an intrusive public"* and so *"condemn the media for lack
of sufficient enthusiasm in supporting official crusades."* In other
words, that the *"existing level of subordination to state authority is
often deemed unsatisfactory."* [p. xiv and p. 301] The right-wing notion
that the media are "liberal" or "left-wing" says far more about the
authoritarian vision and aims of the right than the reality of the
media.

Therefore the "adversarial" nature of the media is a myth, but this is
not to imply that the media does not present critical analysis. Herman
and Chomsky in fact argue that the *"mass media are not a solid monolith
on all issues."* and do not deny that it does present facts (which they
do sometimes themselves cite). This *"affords the opportunity for a
classic **non sequitur**, in which the citations of facts from the
mainstream press by a critic of the press is offered as a triumphant
'proof' that the criticism is self-refuting, and that media coverage of
disputed issues is indeed adequate."* But, as they argue, *"[t]hat the
media provide some facts about an issue . . . proves absolutely nothing
about the adequacy or accuracy of that coverage. The mass media do, in
fact, literally suppress a great deal . . . But even more important in
this context is the question given to a fact - its placement, tone, and
repetitions, the framework within which it is presented, and the related
facts that accompany it and give it meaning (or provide understanding) .
. . there is no merit to the pretence that because certain facts may be
found by a diligent and sceptical researcher, the absence of radical
bias and de facto suppression is thereby demonstrated."* [p. xii and pp
xiv-xv]

As they stress, the media in a democratic system is different from one
in a dictatorship and so they *"do not function in the manner of the
propaganda system of a totalitarian state. Rather, they permit --
indeed, encourage -- spirited debate, criticism, and dissent, as long as
these remain faithfully within the system of presuppositions and
principles that constitute an elite consensus, a system so powerful as
to be internalised largely without awareness."* Within this context,
*"facts that tend to undermine the government line, if they are properly
understood, can be found."* Indeed, it is *"possible that the volume of
inconvenient facts can expand, as it did during the Vietnam War, in
response to the growth of a critical constituency (which included elite
elements from 1968). Even in this exceptional case, however, it was very
rare for news and commentary to find their way into the mass media if
they failed to conform to the framework of established dogma
(postulating benevolent U.S aims, the United States responding to
aggression and terror, etc.)"* While during the war and after,
*"apologists for state policy commonly pointed to the inconvenient
facts, the periodic 'pessimism' of media pundits, and the debates over
tactics as showing that the media were 'adversarial' and even 'lost' the
war,"* in fact these *"allegations are ludicrous."* [p. 302 and p. xiv]
A similar process, it should be noted, occurred during the invasion and
occupation of Iraq.

To summarise, as Chomsky notes *"what is essential is the power to set
the agenda."* This means that debate *"cannot be stilled, and indeed, in
a properly functioning system of propaganda, it should not be, because
it has a system-reinforcing character if constrained within proper
bounds. What is essential is to set the bounds firmly. Controversy may
rage as long as it adheres to the presuppositions that define the
consensus of elites, and it should furthermore be encourages within
these bounds, this helping to establish these doctrines as the very
condition of thinkable thought while reinforcing the belief that freedom
reigns."* [**Necessary Illusions**, p. 48]
