Section D - How do statism and capitalism affect society?
=========================================================

This section of the FAQ indicates how both statism and capitalism affect
the society they exist in. It is a continuation of sections B ([Why do
anarchists oppose the current system?](secBcon.html)) and C ([What are
the myths of capitalist economics?](secCcon.html)) and it discusses the
impact of the underlying social and power relationships within the
current system on society.

This section is important because the institutions and social
relationships capitalism and statism spawn do not exist in a social
vacuum, they have deep impacts on our everyday lives. These effects go
beyond us as individuals (for example, the negative effects of hierarchy
on our individuality) and have an effect on how the political
institutions in our society work, how technology develops, how the media
operates and so on. As such, it is worthwhile to point out how (and why)
statism and capitalism affect society as a whole outwith the narrow
bounds of politics and economics.

So here we sketch some of the impact concentrations of political and
economic power have upon society. While many people attack the
\*results\* of these processes (like specific forms of state
intervention, ecological destruction, imperialism, etc.) they usually
ignore their \*causes.\* This means that the struggle against social
evils will be never-ending, like a doctor fighting the symptoms of a
disease without treating the disease itself or the conditions which
create it in the first place. We have indicated the roots of the
problems we face in earlier sections; now we discuss how these impact on
other aspects of our society. This section of the FAQ explores the
interactions of the causes and results and draws out how the
authoritarian and exploitative nature of capitalism and the state
affects the world we live in.

It is important to remember that most supporters of capitalism refuse to
do this. Yes, some of them point out **some** flaws and problems within
society but they never relate them to the system as such. As Noam
Chomsky points out, they *"ignor[e] the catastrophes of capitalism or,
on the rare occasions when some problem is noticed, attribut[e] them to
any cause **other** than the system that consistently brings them
about."* [**Deterring Democracy**, p. 232] Thus we have people, say,
attacking imperialist adventures while, at the same time, supporting the
capitalist system which drives it. Or opposing state intervention in the
name of "freedom" while supporting an economic system which by its
working forces the state to intervene simply to keep it going and
society together. The contradictions multiple, simply because the
symptoms are addressed, never the roots of the problems.

That the system and its effects are interwoven can best be seen from the
fact that while right-wing parties have been elected to office promising
to reduce the role of the state in society, the actual size and activity
of the state has not been reduced, indeed it has usually increased in
scope (both in size and in terms of power and centralisation). This is
unsurprising, as "free market" implies strong (and centralised) state --
the "freedom" of management to manage means that the freedom of workers
to resist authoritarian management structures must be weakened by state
action. Thus, ironically, state intervention within society will
continue to be needed in order to ensure that society survives the
rigours of market forces and that elite power and privilege are
protected from the masses.

The thing to remember is that the political and economic spheres are not
independent. They interact in many ways, with economic forces prompting
political reactions and changes, and vice versa. Overall, as Kropotkin
stressed, there are *"intimate links . . . between the political regime
and the economic regime."* [**Words of a Rebel**, p. 118] These means
that it is impossible to talk of, say, capitalism as if it could exist
without shaping and being shaped by the state and society. Equally, to
think that the state could intervene as it pleased in the economy fails
to take into account the influence economic institutions and forces have
on it. This has always been the case, as the state *"is a hybridisation
of political and social institutions, of coercive with distributive
functions, of highly punitive with regulatory procedures, and finally of
class with administrative needs -- this melding process has produced
very real ideological and practical paradoxes that persist as major
issues today."* [Bookchin, **The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 196] These
paradoxes can only be solved, anarchists argue, by abolishing the state
and the social hierarchies it either creates (the state bureaucracy) or
defends (the economically dominant class). Until then, reforms of the
system will be incomplete, be subject to reversals and have unintended
consequences.

These links and interaction between statism and capitalism are to be
expected due to their similar nature. As anarchists have long argued, at
root they are based on the same hierarchical principle. Proudhon, for
example, regarded *"the capitalist principle"* and *"the governmental
principle"* as *"one and the same principle . . . abolition of the
exploitation of man by man and the abolition of the government of man by
man, are one and the same formula."* [quoted by Wayne Thorpe, **"The
Workers Themselves"**, p. 279] This means that anarchists reject the
notion that political reforms are enough in themselves and instead
stress that they must be linked to (or, at least, take into account)
economic change. This means, for example, while we oppose specific
imperialist wars and occupation, we recognise that they will reoccur
until such time as the economic forces which generate them are
abolished. Similarly, we do not automatically think all attempts to
reduce state intervention should be supported simply because they appear
to reduce the state. Instead, we consider who is introducing the
reforms, why they are doing so and what the results will be. If the
"reforms" are simply a case of politicians redirecting state
intervention away from the welfare state to bolster capitalist power and
profits, we would not support the change. Anarchist opposition to
neo-liberalism flows from our awareness of the existence of economic and
social power and inequality and its impact on society and the political
structure.

In some ways, this section discusses class struggle **from above**, i.e.
the attacks on the working class conducted by the ruling class by means
of its state. While it appears that every generation has someone
insisting that the "class war" is dead and/or obsolete (Tony Blair did
just that in the late 1990s), what they mean is that class struggle
**from below** is dead (or, at least, they wish it so). What is ignored
is that the class struggle from above continues even if class struggle
from the below appears to have disappeared (until it reappears in yet
another form). This should be unsurprising as any ruling class will be
seeking to extend its profits, powers and privileges, a task aided
immensely by the reduced pressure from below associated with periods of
apparent social calm (Blair's activities in office being a striking
confirmation of this). Ultimately, while you may seek to ignore
capitalism and the state, neither will ignore you. That this produces
resistance should be obvious, as is the fact that demise of struggle
from below have always been proven wrong.

By necessity, this section will not (indeed, cannot) cover all aspects
of how statism and capitalism interact to shape both the society we live
in and ourselves as individuals. We will simply sketch the forces at
work in certain important aspects of the current system and how
anarchists view them. Thus our discussion of imperialism, for example,
will not get into the details of specific wars and interventions but
rather give a broad picture of why they happen and why they have changed
over the years. However, we hope to present enough detail for further
investigation as well as an understanding of how anarchists analyse the
current system based on our anti-authoritarian principles and how the
political and economic aspects of capitalism interact.
