D.10 How does capitalism affect technology?
===========================================

Technology has an obvious effect on individual freedom, in some ways
increasing it, in others restricting it. However, since capitalism is a
social system based on inequalities of power, it is a truism that
technology will reflect those inequalities as it does not develop in a
social vacuum. As Bookchin puts it:

> *"Along side its positive aspects, technological advance has a
> distinctly negative, socially regressive side. If it is true that
> technological progress enlarges the historical potentiality for
> freedom, it is also true that the bourgeois control of technology
> reinforces the established organisation of society and everyday life.
> Technology and the resources of abundance furnish capitalism with the
> means for assimilating large sections of society to the established
> system of hierarchy and authority . . . By their centralistic and
> bureaucratic tendencies, the resource of abundance reinforce the
> monopolistic, centralistic and bureaucratic tendencies in the
> political apparatus . . . [Technology can be used] for perpetuating
> hierarchy, exploitation and unfreedom."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**,
> p. 3]

No technology evolves and spreads unless there are people who benefit
from it and have sufficient means to disseminate it. In a capitalist
society, technologies useful to the rich and powerful are generally the
ones that spread. This can be seen from capitalist industry, where
technology has been implemented specifically to deskill the worker, so
replacing the skilled, valued craftsperson with the easily trained and
replaced "mass worker." By making trying to make any individual worker
dispensable, the capitalist hopes to deprive workers of a means of
controlling the relation between their effort on the job and the pay
they receive. In Proudhon's words, the *"machine, or the workshop, after
having degraded the labourer by giving him a master, completes his
degeneracy by reducing him from the rank of artisan to that of common
workman."* [**System of Economical Contradictions**, p. 202]

So, unsurprisingly, technology within a hierarchical society will tend
to re-enforce hierarchy and domination. Managers/capitalists will select
technology that will protect and extend their power (and profits), not
weaken it. Thus, while it is often claimed that technology is "neutral"
this is not (and can never be) the case. Simply put, "progress" within a
hierarchical system will reflect the power structures of that system.

As sociologist George Reitzer notes, technological innovation under a
hierarchical system soon results in *"increased control and the
replacement of human with non-human technology. In fact, the replacement
of human with non-human technology is very often motivated by a desire
for greater control, which of course is motivated by the need for
profit-maximisation. The great sources of uncertainty and
unpredictability in any rationalising system are people . . .
McDonaldisation involves the search for the means to exert increasing
control over both employees and customers."* [**The McDonaldisation of
Society**, p. 100] For Reitzer, capitalism is marked by the
*"irrationality of rationality,"* in which this process of control
results in a system based on crushing the individuality and humanity of
those who live within it.

In this process of controlling employees for the purpose of maximising
profit, deskilling comes about because skilled labour is more expensive
than unskilled or semi-skilled and skilled workers have more power over
their working conditions and work due to the difficulty in replacing
them. Unskilled labour makes it easier to "rationalise" the production
process with methods like Taylorism, a system of strict production
schedules and activities based on the amount of time (as determined by
management) that workers "need" to perform various operations in the
workplace, thus requiring simple, easily analysed and timed movements.
As companies are in competition, each has to copy the most "efficient"
(i.e. profit maximising) production techniques introduced by the others
in order to remain profitable, no matter how dehumanising this may be
for workers. Thus the evil effects of the division of labour and
deskilling becoming widespread. Instead of managing their own work,
workers are turned into human machines in a labour process they do not
control, instead being controlled by those who own the machines they use
(see also Harry Braverman, **Labour and Monopoly Capital: The
Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century**).

As Max Stirner noted (echoing Adam Smith), this process of deskilling
and controlling work means that *"[w]hen everyone is to cultivate
himself into man, condemning a man to **machine-like labour** amounts to
the same thing as slavery. . . . Every labour is to have the intent that
the man be satisfied. Therefore he must become a **master** in it too,
be able to perform it as a totality. He who in a pin-factory only puts
on heads, only draws the wire, works, as it were mechanically, like a
machine; he remains half-trained, does not become a master: his labour
cannot **satisfy** him, it can only **fatigue** him. His labour is
nothing by itself, has no object **in itself,** is nothing complete in
itself; he labours only into another's hands, and is **used**
(exploited) by this other."* [**The Ego and Its Own**, p. 121] Kropotkin
makes a similar argument against the division of labour (*"machine-like
labour"*) in **The Conquest of Bread** (see chapter XV -- *"The Division
of Labour"*) as did Proudhon (see chapters III and IV of **System of
Economical Contradictions**).

Modern industry is set up to ensure that workers do not become "masters"
of their work but instead follow the orders of management. The evolution
of technology lies in the relations of power within a society. This is
because *"the viability of a design is not simply a technical or even
economic evaluation but rather a political one. A technology is deemed
viable if it conforms to the existing relations of power."* [David
Noble, **Progress without People**, p. 63]

This process of controlling, restricting, and de-individualising labour
is a key feature of capitalism. Work that is skilled and controlled by
workers is empowering to them in two ways. Firstly it gives them pride
in their work and themselves. Secondly, it makes it harder to replace
them or suck profits out of them. Therefore, in order to remove the
"subjective" factor (i.e. individuality and worker control) from the
work process, capital needs methods of controlling the workforce to
prevent workers from asserting their individuality, thus preventing them
from arranging their own lives and work and resisting the authority of
the bosses. This need to control workers can be seen from the type of
machinery introduced during the Industrial Revolution. According to
Andrew Ure (author of **Philosophy of Manufactures**), a consultant for
the factory owners at the time:

> *"In the factories for spinning coarse yarn . . . the mule-spinners
> [skilled workers] have abused their powers beyond endurance,
> domineering in the most arrogant manner . . . over their masters. High
> wages, instead of leading to thankfulness of temper and improvement of
> mind, have, in too many cases, cherished pride and supplied funds for
> supporting refractory spirits in strikes . . . During a disastrous
> turmoil of [this] kind . . . several of the capitalists . . . had
> recourse to the celebrated machinists . . . of Manchester . . . [to
> construct] a self-acting mule . . . This invention confirms the great
> doctrine already propounded, that when capital enlists science in her
> service, the refractory hand of labour will always be taught
> docility."* [quoted by Noble, **Op. Cit.**, p. 125]

Proudhon quotes an English Manufacturer who argues the same point:

> *"The insubordination of our workmen has given us the idea of
> dispensing with them. We have made and stimulated every imaginable
> effort to replace the service of men by tools more docile, and we have
> achieved our object. Machinery has delivered capital from the
> oppression of labour."* [**System of Economical Contradictions**, p.
> 189]

It is important to stress that technological innovation was not driven
by reasons of economic efficiency as such but rather to break the power
of workers at the point of production. Once that was done, initially
uneconomic investments could become economically viable. As David Noble
summarises, during the Industrial Revolution *"Capital invested in
machines that would reinforce the system of domination [in the
workplace], and this decision to invest, which might in the long run
render the chosen technique economical, was not itself an economical
decision but a political one, with cultural sanction."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 6]

Needless to say, this use of technology within the class war continued.
A similar process was at work in the US, where the rise in trade
unionism resulted in *"industrial managers bec[oming] even more
insistent that skill and initiative not be left on the shop floor, and
that, by the same token, shop floor workers not have control over the
reproduction of relevant skills through craft-regulated apprenticeship
training. Fearful that skilled shop-floor workers would use their scare
resources to reduce their effort and increase their pay, management
deemed that knowledge of the shop-floor process must reside with the
managerial structure."* [William Lazonick, **Organisation and Technology
in Capitalist Development**, p. 273]

American managers happily embraced Taylorism (aka "scientific
management"), according to which the task of the manager was to gather
into his possession all available knowledge about the work he oversaw
and reorganise it. Taylor himself considered the task for workers was
*"to do what they are told to do promptly and without asking questions
or making suggestions."* [quoted by David Noble, **American By Design**,
p. 268] Taylor also relied exclusively upon incentive-pay schemes which
mechanically linked pay to productivity and had no appreciation of the
subtleties of psychology or sociology (which would have told him that
enjoyment of work and creativity is more important for people than just
higher pay). Unsurprisingly, workers responded to his schemes by
insubordination, sabotage and strikes and it was *"discovered . . . that
the 'time and motion' experts frequently knew very little about the
proper work activities under their supervision, that often they simply
guessed at the optimum rates for given operations . . . it meant that
the arbitrary authority of management has simply been reintroduced in a
less apparent form."* [David Noble, **Op. Cit.**, p. 272] Although, now,
the power of management could hide begin the "objectivity" of "science."

Katherine Stone also argues that the *"transfer of skill [from the
worker to management] was not a response to the necessities of
production, but was, rather, a strategy to rob workers of their power"*
by *"tak[ing] knowledge and authority from the skilled workers and
creating a management cadre able to direct production."* Stone
highlights that this deskilling process was combined by a *"divide and
rule"* policy by management based on wage incentives and new promotion
policies. This created a reward system in which workers who played by
the rules would receive concrete gains in terms of income and status.
Over time, such a structure would become to be seen as *"the natural way
to organise work and one which offered them personal advancement"* even
though, *"when the system was set up, it was neither obvious nor
rational. The job ladders were created just when the skill requirements
for jobs in the industry were diminishing as a result of the new
technology, and jobs were becoming more and more equal as to the
learning time and responsibility involved."* The modern structure of the
capitalist workplace was created to break workers resistance to
capitalist authority and was deliberately *"aimed at altering workers'
ways of thinking and feeling -- which they did by making workers'
individual 'objective' self-interests congruent with that of the
employers and in conflict with workers' collective self-interest."* It
was a means of *"labour discipline"* and of *"motivating workers to work
for the employers' gain and preventing workers from uniting to take back
control of production."* Stone notes that the *"development of the new
labour system in the steel industry was repeated throughout the economy
in different industries. As in the steel industry, the core of these new
labour systems were the creation of artificial job hierarchies and the
transfer of skills from workers to the managers."* [*"The Origins of Job
Structure in the Steel Industry,"* pp. 123-157, Root & Branch (ed.),
**Root and Branch: The Rise of the Workers' Movements**, p. 155, p. 153,
p. 152 and pp. 153-4]

This process of deskilling workers was complemented by other factors --
state protected markets (in the form of tariffs and government orders --
the *"lead in technological innovation came in armaments where assured
government orders justified high fixed-cost investments"*); the use of
*"both political and economic power [by American Capitalists] to
eradicate and diffuse workers' attempts to assert shop-floor control"*;
and *"repression, instigated and financed both privately and publicly,
to eliminate radical elements [and often not-so-radical elements as
well, we must note] in the American labour movement."* [William
Lazonick, **Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**, p. 218 and p.
303] Thus state action played a key role in destroying craft control
within industry, along with the large financial resources of capitalists
compared to workers. Bringing this sorry story up to date, we find
*"many, if not most, American managers are reluctant to develop skills
[and initiative] on the shop floor for the fear of losing control of the
flow of work."* [William Lazonick, **Organisation and Technology in
Capitalist Development**, pp. 279-280] Nor should we forget that many
technologies are the product of state aid. For example, in the case of
automation *"the state, especially the military, has played a central
role. Not only has it subsidised extravagant developments that the
market could not or refused to bear but it absorbed excessive costs and
thereby kept afloat those competitors who would otherwise have sunk."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 83]

Given that there is a division of knowledge in society (and, obviously,
in the workplace as well) this means that capitalism has selected to
introduce a management and technology mix which leads to inefficiency
and waste of valuable knowledge, experience and skills. Thus the
capitalist workplace is both produced by and is a weapon in the class
struggle and reflects the shifting power relations between workers and
employers. The creation of artificial job hierarchies, the transfer of
skills away from workers to managers and technological development are
all products of class struggle. Thus technological progress and
workplace organisation within capitalism have little to do with
"efficiency" and far more to do with profits and power. *"Capitalism
does not utilise a socially nature technology for capitalist ends,"*
Cornelius Castoriadis correctly argued. It has *"created a capitalist
technology, which is by no means neutral. The real intention of
capitalist technology is not to develop production for production's
sake: It is to subordinate and dominate the producers"* and *"to
eliminate the human element in productive labour."* This means that
capitalist technologies will evolve, that there is *"a process of
'natural selection,' affecting technical inventions as they are applied
to industry. Some are preferred to others"* and will be *"the ones that
fit in with capitalism's basic need to deal with labour power as a
measurable, supervisable, and interchangeable commodity."* Thus
technology will be selected *"within the framework of its own class
rationality."* [**Social and Political Writings**, vol. 2, p. 104]

This means that while self-management has consistently proven to be more
efficient (and empowering) than hierarchical management structures,
capitalism actively selects **against** it. This is because capitalism
is motivated purely by increasing the power and profits for the bosses,
and both are best done by disempowering workers and empowering bosses
(i.e. the maximisation of power) -- even though this concentration of
power harms efficiency by distorting and restricting information flow
and the gathering and use of widely distributed knowledge within the
firm (as in any command economy) as well as having a serious impact on
the wider economy and social efficiency. Thus the last refuge of the
capitalist or technophile (namely that the productivity gains of
technology outweigh the human costs or the means used to achieve them)
is doubly flawed. Firstly, disempowering technology may maximise
profits, but it need not increase efficient utilisation of resources or
workers' time, skills or potential. Secondly, *"when investment does in
fact generate innovation, does such innovation yield greater
productivity? . . . After conducting a poll of industry executives on
trends in automation, **Business Week** concluded in 1982 that 'there is
a heavy backing for capital investment in a variety of labour-saving
technologies that are designed to fatten profits without necessary
adding to productive output.'"* David Noble concludes that *"whenever
managers are able to use automation to 'fatten profits' and enhance
their authority (by eliminating jobs and extorting concessions and
obedience from the workers who remain) without at the same time
increasing social product, they appear more than ready to do."* [David
Noble, **Progress Without People**, pp. 86-87 and p. 89] As we argue in
greater detail later, in [section J.5.12](secJ5.html#secj512),
efficiency and profit maximisation are two different things, with such
deskilling and management control actually **reducing** efficiency --
compared to workers' control -- but as it allows managers to maximise
profits the capitalist market selects it.

Of course the claim is that higher wages follow increased investment and
technological innovation ("in the long run" -- although usually "the
long run" has to be helped to arrive by workers' struggle and protest!).
Passing aside the question of whether slightly increased consumption
really makes up for dehumanising and uncreative work, we must note that
it is usually the capitalist who **really** benefits from technological
change in money terms. For example, between 1920 and 1927 (a period when
unemployment caused by technology became commonplace) the automobile
industry (which was at the forefront of technological change) saw wages
rise by 23.7%. Thus, claim supporters of capitalism, technology is in
all our interests. However, capital surpluses rose by 192.9% during the
same period -- 8 times faster! Little wonder wages rose! Similarly, over
the last 20 years the USA and many other countries have seen companies
"down-sizing" and "right-sizing" their workforce and introducing new
technologies. The result? Simply put, the 1970s saw the start of
*"no-wage growth expansions."* Before the early 1970s, *"real wage
growth tracked the growth of productivity and production in the economy
overall. After . . ., they ceased to do so. . . Real wage growth fell
sharply below measured productivity growth."* [James K. Galbraith,
**Created Unequal**, p. 79] So while real wages have stagnated, profits
have been increasing as productivity rises and the rich have been
getting richer -- technology yet again showing whose side it is on.

Overall, as David Noble notes (with regards to manufacturing in the
early 1990s):

> *"U.S. Manufacturing industry over the last thirty years . . . [has
> seen] the value of capital stock (machinery) relative to labour
> double, reflecting the trend towards mechanisation and automation. As
> a consequence . . . the absolute output person hour increased 115%,
> more than double. But during this same period, real earnings for
> hourly workers . . . rose only 84%, less than double. Thus, after
> three decades of automation-based progress, workers are now earning
> less relative to their output than before. That is, they are producing
> more for less; working more for their boss and less for themselves."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 92-3]

Noble continues:

> *"For if the impact of automation on workers has not been ambiguous,
> neither has the impact on management and those it serves -- labour's
> loss has been their gain. During the same first thirty years of our
> age of automation, corporate after tax profits have increased 450%,
> more than five times the increase in real earnings for workers."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p. 95]

But why? Because labour has the ability to produce a flexible amount of
output (use value) for a given wage. Unlike coal or steel, a worker can
be made to work more intensely during a given working period and so
technology can be utilised to maximise that effort as well as increasing
the pool of potential replacements for an employee by deskilling their
work (so reducing workers' power to get higher wages for their work).
Thus technology is a key way of increasing the power of the boss, which
in turn can increase output per worker while ensuring that the workers'
receive relatively less of that output back in terms of wages --
*"Machines,"* argued Proudhon, *"promised us an increase of wealth they
have kept their word, but at the same time endowing us with an increase
of poverty. They promised us liberty . . . [but] have brought us
slavery."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 199]

But do not get us wrong, technological progress does not imply that we
are victims. Far from it, much innovation is the direct result of our
resistance to hierarchy and its tools. For example, capitalists turned
to Taylorism and "scientific management" in response to the power of
skilled craft workers to control their work and working environment (the
famous 1892 Homestead strike, for example, was a direct product of the
desire of the company to end the skilled workers' control and power on
the shop-floor). Such management schemes never last in the long run nor
totally work in the short run either -- which explains why hierarchical
management continues, as does technological deskilling. Workers always
find ways of using new technology to increase their power within the
workplace, undermining management decisions to their own advantage). As
left-wing economist William Lazonick puts it:

> *"Because it is the workers, not managers, who are actually doing the
> work, access to information on the effort-saving potential of a
> machine will be asymmetric, giving workers a distinct advantage in
> determining the pace of work. In addition, workers through their
> unions will attempt to exert industry-wide control over the relation
> between effort and pay on newly diffused technology. The resultant
> relation between effort and earnings will depend on the exercise of
> social power, not on abstract 'laws' of proportional change."*
> [**Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**, pp. 66-7]

This means that the *"economic effectiveness of the factory as a mode of
work organisation did not occur within a social vacuum but depend[s] on
the historical evolution of conditions that determined the relative
power of capitalists and workers to structure the relation between
effort and pay."* As such, it is important not to overemphasise the
*"independent influence of technology as opposed to the relations of
production in the determination of work organisation. Because machinery
does change the skill content of work, it can potentially serve as an
instrument of social power. How and to what extent it does so, however,
depends not only on the nature of the technology but also on the nature
of the social environment into which it is introduced."* Thus the
introduction of machinery into the capitalist labour process *"is only a
necessary, not sufficient, condition for the displacement of worker
control over the relation between effort and pay."* [Lazonick, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 52 and p. 63] Needless to say, capitalists have always
appealed to the state to help create a suitable social environment.

This analysis applies to both the formal and informal organisation of
workers in workplace. Just as the informal structures and practices of
working people evolve over time in response to new technology and
practices, so does union organisation. In response to Taylorism, factory
and other workers created a whole new structure of working class power
-- a new kind of unionism based on the industrial level. For example,
the IWW was formed specifically to create industrial unions arguing that
*"[l]abourers are no longer classified by difference in trade skill, but
the employer assigns them according to the machine which they are
attached. These divisions, far from representing differences in skill or
interests among the labourers, are imposed by the employers that workers
may be pitted against one another and spurred to greater exertion in the
shop, and that all resistance to capitalist tyranny may be weakened by
artificial distinctions."* [quoted by Stone, **Op. Cit.**, p. 157]

For this reason, anarchists and syndicalists argued for, and built,
industrial unions -- one union per workplace and industry -- in order to
combat these divisions and effectively resist capitalist tyranny. This
can be seen in many different countries. In Spain, the C.N.T. (an
anarcho-syndicalist union) adopted the **sindicato unico** (one union)
in 1918 which united all workers of the same workplace in the same union
(by uniting skilled and unskilled in a single organisation, the union
increased their fighting power). In the UK, the shop stewards movement
arose during the first world war based on workplace organisation (a
movement inspired by the pre-war syndicalist revolt and which included
many syndicalist activists). This movement was partly in response to the
reformist TUC unions working with the state during the war to suppress
class struggle. In Germany, the 1919 near revolution saw the creation of
revolutionary workplace unions and councils (and a large increase in the
size of the anarcho-syndicalist union FAU which was organised by
industry).

This process was not limited to just libertarian unions. In the USA, the
1930s saw a massive and militant union organising drive by the C.I.O.
based on industrial unionism and collective bargaining (inspired, in
part, by the example of the I.W.W. and its broad organisation of
unskilled workers). More recently, workers in the 1960s and 70s
responded to the increasing reformism and bureaucratic nature of such
unions as the CIO and TUC by organising themselves directly on the shop
floor to control their work and working conditions. This informal
movement expressed itself in wildcat strikes against both unions and
management, sabotage and unofficial workers' control of production (see
John Zerzan's essay *"Organised Labour and the Revolt Against Work"* in
**Elements of Refusal**). In the UK, the shop stewards' movement revived
itself, organising much of the unofficial strikes and protests which
occurred in the 1960s and 70s. A similar tendency was seen in many
countries during this period.

So in response to a new developments in technology and workplace
organisation, workers' developed new forms of resistance which in turn
provokes a response by management. Thus technology and its (ab)uses are
very much a product of the class struggle, of the struggle for freedom
in the workplace. With a given technology, workers and radicals soon
learn to resist it and, sometimes, use it in ways never dreamed of to
resist their bosses and the state (which necessitates a transformation
of within technology again to try and give the bosses an upper hand!).
The use of the Internet, for example, to organise, spread and
co-ordinate information, resistance and struggles is a classic example
of this process (see Jason Wehling, *"'Netwars' and Activists Power on
the Internet"*, **Scottish Anarchist** no. 2 for details). There is
always a "guerrilla war" associated with technology, with workers and
radicals developing their own tactics to gain counter control for
themselves. Thus much technological change reflects **our** power and
activity to change our own lives and working conditions. We must never
forget that.

While some may dismiss our analysis as "Luddite," to do so is make
"technology" an idol to be worshipped rather than something to be
critically analysed. Indeed, it would be temping to argue that
worshippers of technological progress are, in effect, urging us **not**
to think and to sacrifice ourselves to a new abstraction like the state
or capital. Moreover, such attacks misrepresent the ideas of the
Luddites themselves -- they never actually opposed **all** technology or
machinery. Rather, they opposed *"all Machinery hurtful to Commonality"*
(as a March 1812 letter to a hated Manufacturer put it). Rather than
worship technological progress (or view it uncritically), the Luddites
subjected technology to critical analysis and evaluation. They opposed
those forms of machinery that harmed themselves or society. Unlike those
who smear others as "Luddites," the labourers who broke machines were
not intimidated by the modern notion of progress. As John Clark notes,
they *"chose to smash the dehumanising machinery being imposed on them,
rather than submit to domination and degradation in the name of
technical progress."* [**The Anarchist Moment**, p. 102] Their sense of
right and wrong was not clouded by the notion that technology was
somehow inevitable, neutral or to be worshipped without question.

The Luddites did not think that **human** values (or their own
interests) were irrelevant in evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of a
given technology and its effects on workers and society as a whole. Nor
did they consider their skills and livelihood as less important than the
profits and power of the capitalists. In other words, they would have
agreed with Proudhon's later comment that machinery *"plays the leading
role in industry, man is secondary"* **and** they acted to change this
relationship. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 204] The Luddites were an example of
working people deciding what their interests were and acting to defend
them by their own direct action -- in this case opposing technology
which benefited the ruling class by giving them an edge in the class
struggle. Anarchists follow this critical approach to technology,
recognising that it is not neutral nor above criticism. That this is
simply sensible can be seen from the world around us, where capitalism
has, to quote Rocker, made work *"soulless and has lost for the
individual the quality of creative joy. By becoming a dreary
end-in-itself it has degraded man into an eternal galley slave and
robbed him of that which is most precious, the inner joy of accomplished
work, the creative urge of the personality. The individual feels himself
to be only an insignificant element of a gigantic mechanism in whose
dull monotone every personal note dies out."* He has *"became the slave
of the tool he created."* There has been a *"growth of technology at the
expense of human personality."* [**Nationalism and Culture**, p. 253 and
p. 254]

For capital, the source of problems in industry is people. Unlike
machines, people can think, feel, dream, hope and act. The "evolution"
of technology must, therefore, reflect the class struggle within society
and the struggle for liberty against the forces of authority.
Technology, far from being neutral, reflects the interests of those with
power. Technology will only be truly our friend once we control it
ourselves and **modify** to reflect **human** values (this may mean that
some forms of technology will have to be written off and replaces by new
forms in a free society). Until that happens, most technological
processes -- regardless of the other advantages they may have -- will be
used to exploit and control people. Thus Proudhon's comments that *"in
the present condition of society, the workshop with its hierarchical
organisation, and machinery"* could only serve *"exclusively the
interests of the least numerous, the least industrious, and the
wealthiest class"* rather than *"be employed for the benefit of all."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 205]

While resisting technological "progress" which is considered harmful to
people or the planet (by means up to and including machine breaking) is
essential in the here and now, the issue of technology can only be truly
solved when those who use a given technology control its development,
introduction and use. (*"The worker will only respect machinery **on the
day** when it becomes his friend, shortening his work, rather than as
**today**, his enemy, taking away jobs, killing workers,"* in the words
of French syndicalist Emile Pouget [quoted by David Noble, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 15]). Little wonder, therefore, that anarchists consider workers'
self-management as a key means of solving the problems created by
technology. Proudhon, for example, argued that the solution to the
problems created by the division of labour and technology could only be
solved by *"association"*, and *"by a broad education, by the obligation
of apprenticeship, and by the co-operation of all who take part in the
collective work."* This would ensure that *"the division of labour can
no longer be a cause of degradation for the workman [or workwoman]."*
[**The General Idea of the Revolution**, p. 223]

While as far as technology goes, it may not be enough to get rid of the
boss this is a necessary first step. Unless this is done, it will be
impossible to transform existing technologies or create new ones which
enhance freedom rather than controlling and shaping the worker (or user
in general) and enhancing the power and profits of the capitalist. This
means that in an anarchist society, technology would have to be
transformed and/or developed which empowered those who used it, so
reducing any oppressive aspects of it. In the words of Cornelius
Castoriadis, the *"conscious transformation of technology will therefore
be a central task of a society of free workers."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 104]
As German anarchist Gustav Landauer stressed, most are *"completely
unaware of how fundamentally the technology of the socialists differs
from capitalist technology . . . Technology will, in a cultured people,
have to be directed to the psychology of free people who want to use
it."* This will happen when *"the workers themselves determine under
what conditions they want to work,"* step out of *"capitalism mentally
and physically"*, and *"cease playing a role in it and begin to be men
[and women]."* [*"For Socialism,"* pp. 184-6, **Anarchism**, Robert
Graham (ed.), p. 285 and p. 286]

Thus most anarchists would agree with Bookchin's comment that technology
*"is necessarily liberatory or consistently beneficial to man's
development"* but we *"do not believe that man is destined to be
enslaved by technology and technological modes of thought."* A free
society *"will not want to negate technology precisely because it is
liberated and can strike a balance"* and create a *"technology for
life,"* a liberatory technology based on human and ecological needs.
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 43 and p. 80] See [section I.4.9](secI4.html#seci49)
for more discussion on technology within an anarchist society.
