D.5 What causes imperialism?
============================

In a word: power. Imperialism is the process by which one country
dominates another directly, by political means, or indirectly, by
economic means, in order to steal its wealth (either natural or
produced). This, by necessity, means the exploitation of working people
in the dominated nation. Moreover, it can also aid the exploitation of
working people in the imperialist nation itself. As such, imperialism
cannot be considered in isolation from the dominant economic and social
system. Fundamentally the cause is the same inequality of power, which
is used in the service of exploitation.

While the rhetoric used for imperial adventures may be about
self-defence, defending/exporting "democracy" and/or "humanitarian"
interests, the reality is much more basic and grim. As Chomsky stresses,
*"deeds consistently accord with interests, and conflict with words --
discoveries that must not, however, weaken our faith in the sincerity of
the declarations of our leaders."* This is unsurprising as states are
always *"pursuing the strategic and economic interests of dominant
sectors to the accompaniment of rhetorical flourishes about its
exceptional dedication to the highest values"* and so *"the evidence for
. . . the proclaimed messianic missions reduces to routine
pronouncements"* (faithfully repeated by the media) while
*"counter-evidence is mountainous."* [**Failed States**, p. 171 and pp.
203-4]

We must stress that we are concentrating on the roots of imperialism
here. We do not, and cannot, provide a detailed history of the horrors
associated with it. For US imperialism, the works of Noam Chomsky are
recommended. His books **Turning the Tide** and **The Culture of
Terrorism** expose the evils of US intervention in Central America, for
example, while **Deterring Democracy**, **Rogue States: The Rule of
Force in World Affairs** and **Failed States: The Abuse of Power and the
Assault on Democracy** present a wider perspective. **Killing Hope: US
Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II** and **Rogue State: A
Guide to the World's Only Superpower** by William Blum are also worth
reading. For post-1945 British imperialism, Mark Curtis's **Web of
Deceit: Britain's Real Role in the World** and **Unpeople: Britain's
Secret Human Rights Abuses** are recommended.

As we will discuss in the following sections, imperialism has changed
over time, particularly during the last two hundred years (where its
forms and methods have evolved with the changing needs of capitalism).
But even in the pre-capitalist days of empire building, imperialism was
driven by economic forces and needs. In order to make one's state
secure, in order to increase the wealth available to the state, its
ruling bureaucracy and its associated ruling class, it had to be based
on a strong economy and have a sufficient resource base for the state
and ruling elite to exploit (both in terms of human and natural
resources). By increasing the area controlled by the state, one
increased the wealth available.

States by their nature, like capital, are expansionist bodies, with
those who run them always wanting to increase the range of their power
and influence (this can be seen from the massive number of wars that
have occurred in Europe over the last 500 years). This process was began
as nation-states were created by Kings declaring lands to be their
private property, regardless of the wishes of those who actually lived
there. Moreover, this conflict did not end when monarchies were replaced
by more democratic forms of government. As Bakunin argued:

> *"we find wars of extermination, wars among races and nations; wars of
> conquest, wars to maintain equilibrium, political and religious wars,
> wars waged in the name of 'great ideas' . . . , patriotic wars for
> greater national unity . . . And what do we find beneath all that,
> beneath all the hypocritical phrases used in order to give these wars
> the appearance of humanity and right? Always the same economic
> phenomenon: **the tendency on the part of some to live and prosper at
> the expense of others.** All the rest is mere humbug. The ignorant and
> naive, and the fools are entrapped by it, but the strong men who
> direct the destinies of the State know only too well that underlying
> all those wars there is only one motive: pillage, the seizing of
> someone else's wealth and the enslavement of someone else's labour."*
> [**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 170]

However, while the economic motive for expansion is generally the same,
the economic system which a nation is based on has a definite impact on
what drives that motive as well as the specific nature of that
imperialism. Thus the empire building of ancient Rome or Feudal England
has a different economic base (and so driving need) than, say, the
imperialism of nineteenth century Germany and Britain or twentieth and
twenty-first century United States. Here we will focus mainly on modern
capitalist imperialism as it is the most relevant one in the modern
world.

Capitalism, by its very nature, is growth-based and so is characterised
by the accumulation and concentration of capital. Companies **must**
expand in order to survive competition in the marketplace. This,
inevitably, sees a rise in international activity and organisation as a
result of competition over markets and resources within a given country.
By expanding into new markets in new countries, a company can gain an
advantage over its competitors as well as overcome limited markets and
resources in the home nation. In Bakunin's words:

> *"just as capitalist production and banking speculation, which in the
> long run swallows up that production, must, under the threat of
> bankruptcy, ceaselessly expand at the expense of the small financial
> and productive enterprises which they absorb, must become universal,
> monopolistic enterprises extending all over the world -- so this
> modern and necessarily military State is driven on by an irrepressible
> urge to become a universal State. . . . Hegemony is only a modest
> manifestation possible under the circumstances, of this unrealisable
> urge inherent in every State. And the first condition of this hegemony
> is the relative impotence and subjection of all the neighbouring
> States."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 210]

Therefore, economically and politically, the imperialistic activities of
**both** capitalist and state-capitalist (i.e. the Soviet Union and
other "socialist" nations) comes as no surprise. Capitalism is
inevitably imperialistic and so *"[w]ar, capitalism and imperialism form
a veritable trinity,"* to quote Dutch pacifist-syndicalist Bart de Ligt
[**The Conquest of Violence**, p. 64] The growth of big business is such
that it can no longer function purely within the national market and so
they have to expand internationally to gain advantage in and survive.
This, in turn, requires the home state of the corporations also to have
global reach in order to defend them and to promote their interests.
Hence the economic basis for modern imperialism, with *"the capitalistic
interests of the various countries fight[ing] for the foreign markets
and compete with each other there"* and when they *"get into trouble
about concessions and sources of profit,"* they *"call upon their
respective governments to defend their interests . . . to protect the
privileges and dividends of some . . . capitalist in a foreign
country."* [Alexander Berkman, **What is Anarchism?**, p. 31] Thus a
capitalist class needs the power of nation states not only to create
internal markets and infrastructure but also to secure and protect
international markets and opportunities in a world of rivals and
**their** states.

As power depends on profits within capitalism, this means that modern
imperialism is caused more by economic factors than purely political
considerations (although, obviously, this factor does play a role).
Imperialism serves capital by increasing the pool of profits available
for the imperialistic country in the world market as well as reducing
the number of potential competitors. As Kropotkin stressed, *"capital
knows no fatherland; and if high profits can be derived from the work of
Indian coolies whose wages are only one-half of those of English workmen
[or women], or even less, capital will migrate to India, as it has gone
to Russian, although its migration may mean starvation for Lancashire."*
[**Fields, Factories and Workshops**, p. 57]

Therefore, capital will travel to where it can maximise its profits --
regardless of the human or environmental costs at home or abroad. This
is the economic base for modern imperialism, to ensure that any trade
conducted benefits the stronger party more than the weaker one. Whether
this trade is between nations or between classes is irrelevant, the aim
of imperialism is to give business an advantage on the market. By
travelling to where labour is cheap and the labour movement weak
(usually thanks to dictatorial regimes), environmental laws few or
non-existent, and little stands in the way of corporate power, capital
can maximise its profits. Moreover, the export of capital allows a
reduction in the competitive pressures faced by companies in the home
markets (at least for short periods).

This has two effects. Firstly, the industrially developed nation (or,
more correctly corporation based in that nation) can exploit less
developed nations. In this way, the dominant power can maximise for
itself the benefits created by international trade. If, as some claim,
trade always benefits each party, then imperialism allows the benefits
of international trade to accrue more to one side than the other.
Secondly, it gives big business more weapons to use to weaken the
position of labour in the imperialist nation. This, again, allows the
benefits of trade (this time the trade of workers liberty for wages) to
accrue to more to business rather than to labour.

How this is done and in what manner varies and changes, but the aim is
always the same -- exploitation.

This can be achieved in many ways. For example, allowing the import of
cheaper raw materials and goods; the export of goods to markets
sheltered from foreign competitors; the export of capital from
capital-rich areas to capital-poor areas as the investing of capital in
less industrially developed countries allows the capitalists in question
to benefit from lower wages; relocating factories to countries with
fewer (or no) social and environmental laws, controls or regulations.
All these allow profits to be gathered at the expense of the working
people of the oppressed nation (the rulers of these nations generally do
well out of imperialism, as would be expected). The initial source of
exported capital is, of course, the exploitation of labour at home but
it is exported to less developed countries where capital is scarcer and
the price of land, labour and raw materials cheaper. These factors all
contribute to enlarging profit margins:

> *"The relationship of these global corporations with the poorer
> countries had long been an exploiting one . . . Whereas U.S.
> corporations in Europe between 1950 and 1965 invested \$8.1 billion
> and made \$5.5 billion in profits, in Latin America they invested
> \$3.8 billion and made \$11.2 billion in profits, and in Africa they
> invested \$5.2 billion and made \$14.3 bullion in profits."* [Howard
> Zinn, **A People's History of the United States**, p. 556]

Betsy Hartman, looking at the 1980s, concurs. *"Despite the popular
Western image of the Third World as a bottomless begging bowl,"* she
observes, *"it today gives more to the industrialised world than it
takes. Inflows of official 'aid' and private loans and investments are
exceeded by outflows in the form of repatriated profits, interest
payments, and private capital sent abroad by Third World Elites."*
[quoted by George Bradford, **Woman's Freedom: Key to the Population
Question**, p. 77]

In addition, imperialism allows big business to increase its strength
with respect to its workforce in the imperialist nation by the threat of
switching production to other countries or by using foreign investments
to ride out strikes. This is required because, while the "home" working
class are still exploited and oppressed, their continual attempts at
organising and resisting their exploiters proved more and more
successful. As such, *"the opposition of the white working classes to
the . . . capitalist class continually gain[ed] strength, and the
workers . . . [won] increased wages, shorter hours, insurances,
pensions, etc., the white exploiters found it profitable to obtain their
labour from men [,women and children] of so-called inferior race . . .
Capitalists can therefore make infinitely more out there than at home."*
[Bart de Ligt, **Op. Cit.**, p. 49]

As such, imperialism (like capitalism) is not only driven by the need to
increase profits (important as this is, of course), it is also driven by
the class struggle -- the need for capital to escape from the strength
of the working class in a particular country. From this perspective, the
export of capital can be seen in two ways. Firstly, as a means of
disciplining rebellious workers at home by an "investment strike"
(capital, in effect, runs away, so causing unemployment which
disciplines the rebels). Secondly, as a way to increase the 'reserve
army' of the unemployed facing working people in the imperialist nations
by creating new competitors for their jobs (i.e. dividing, and so
ruling, workers by playing one set of workers against another). Both are
related, of course, and both seek to weaken working class power by the
fear of unemployment. This process played a key role in the rise of
globalisation -- see [section D.5.3](secD5.html#secd53) for details.

Thus imperialism, which is rooted in the search from surplus profits for
big business, is also a response to working class power at home. The
export of capital is done by emerging and established transnational
companies to overcome a militant and class consciousness working class
which is often too advanced for heavy exploitation, and finance capital
can make easier and bigger profits by investing productive capital
elsewhere. It aids the bargaining position of business by pitting the
workers in one country against another, so while they are being
exploited by the same set of bosses, those bosses can use this fictional
"competition" of foreign workers to squeeze concessions from workers at
home.

Imperialism has another function, namely to hinder or control the
industrialisation of other countries. Such industrialisation will, of
course, mean the emergence of new capitalists, who will compete with the
existing ones both in the "less developed" countries and in the world
market as a whole. Imperialism, therefore, attempts to reduce
competition on the world market. As we discuss in the [next
section](secD5.html#secd51), the nineteenth century saw the
industrialisation of many European nations as well as America, Japan and
Russia by means of state intervention. However, this state-led
industrialisation had a drawback, namely that it created more and more
competitors on the world market. Moreover, as Kropotkin noted, they has
the advantage that the *"new manufacturers . . . begin where"* the old
have *"arrived after a century of experiments and groupings"* and so
they *"are built according to the newest and best models which have been
worked out elsewhere."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 32 and p. 49] Hence the need
to stop new competitors and secure raw materials and markets, which was
achieved by colonialism:

> *"Industries of all kinds decentralise and are scattered all over the
> globe; and everywhere a variety, an integrated variety, of trades
> grows, instead of specialisation . . . each nation becomes in its turn
> a manufacturing nation . . . For each new-comer the first steps only
> are difficult . . . The fact is so well felt, if not understood, that
> the race for colonies has become the distinctive feature of the last
> twenty years [Kropotkin is writing in 1912]. Each nation will have her
> own colonies. But colonies will not help."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 75]

Imperialism hinders industrialisation in two ways. The first way was
direct colonisation, a system which has effectively ended. The second is
by indirect means -- namely the extraction of profits by international
big business. A directly dominated country can be stopped from
developing industry and be forced to specialise as a provider of raw
materials. This was the aim of "classic" imperialism, with its empires
and colonial wars. By means of colonisation, the imperialist powers
ensure that the less-developed nation stays that way -- so ensuring one
less competitor as well as favourable access to raw materials and cheap
labour. French anarchist Elisee Reclus rightly called this a process of
creating *"colonies of exploitation."* [quoted by John P Clark and
Camille Martin (eds.), **Anarchy, Geography, Modernity**, p. 92]

This approach has been superseded by indirect means (see [next
section](secD5.html#secd51)). Globalisation can be seen as an
intensification of this process. By codifying into international
agreements the ability of corporations to sue nation states for
violating "free trade," the possibility of new competitor nations
developing is weakened. Industrialisation will be dependent on
transnational corporations and so development will be hindered and
directed to ensure corporate profits and power. Unsurprisingly, those
nations which **have** industrialised over the last few decades (such as
the East Asian Tiger economies) have done so by using the state to
protect industry and control international finance.

The new attack of the capitalist class ("globalisation") is a means of
plundering local capitalists and diminish their power and area of
control. The steady weakening and ultimate collapse of the Eastern Block
(in terms of economic/political performance and ideological appeal) also
played a role in this process. The end of the Cold War meant a reduction
in the space available for local elites to manoeuvre. Before this local
ruling classes could, if they were lucky, use the struggle between US
and USSR imperialism to give them a breathing space in which they could
exploit to pursue their own agenda (within limits, of course, and with
the blessing of the imperialist power in whose orbit they were in). The
Eastern Tiger economies were an example of this process at work. The
West could use them to provide cheap imports for the home market as well
as in the ideological conflict of the Cold War as an example of the
benefits of the "free market" (not that they were) and the ruling
elites, while maintaining a pro-west and pro-business environment (by
force directed against their own populations, of course), could pursue
their own economic strategies. With the end of the Cold War, this factor
is no longer in play and the newly industrialised nations are now an
obvious economic competitor. The local elites are now "encouraged" (by
economic blackmail via the World Bank and the IMF) to embrace US
economic ideology. Just as neo-liberalism attacks the welfare state in
the Imperialist nations, so it results in a lower tolerance of local
capital in "less developed" nations.

However, while imperialism is driven by the needs of capitalism it
cannot end the contradictions inherent in that system. As Reclus put it
in the late nineteenth century, *"the theatre expands, since it now
embraces the whole of the land and seas. But the forces that struggled
against one another in each particularly state are precisely those that
fight across the earth. In each country, capital seeks to subdue the
workers. Similarly, on the level of the broadest world market, capital,
which had grown enormously, disregards all the old borders and seeks to
put the entire mass of producers to work on behalf of its profits, and
to secure all the consumers in the world."* [Reclus, quoted by Clark and
Martin (eds.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 97]

This struggle for markets and resources does, by necessity, lead to
conflict. This may be the wars of conquest required to initially
dominate an economically "backward" nation (such as the US invasion of
the Philippines, the conquest of Africa by West European states, and so
on) or maintain that dominance once it has been achieved (such as the
Vietnam War, the Algerian War, the Gulf War and so on). Or it may be the
wars between major imperialist powers once the competition for markets
and colonies reaches a point when they cannot be settled peacefully (as
in the First and Second World Wars). As Kropotkin argued:

> *"men no longer fight for the pleasure of kings, they fight for the
> integrity of revenues and for the growing wealth . . . [for the]
> benefit of the barons of high finance and industry . . . [P]olitical
> preponderance . . . is quite simply a matter of economic preponderance
> in international markets. What Germany, France, Russia, England, and
> Austria are all trying to win . . . is not military preponderance: it
> is economic domination. It is the right to impose their goods and
> their customs tariffs on their neighbours; the right to exploit
> industrially backward peoples; the privilege of building railroads . .
> . to appropriate from a neighbour either a port which will activate
> commerce, or a province where surplus merchandise can be unloaded . .
> . When we fight today, it is to guarantee our great industrialists a
> profit of 30%, to assure the financial barons their domination at the
> Bourse [stock-exchange], and to provide the shareholders of mines and
> railways with their incomes."* [**Words of a Rebel**, pp. 65-6]

In summary, current imperialism is caused by, and always serves, the
needs and interests of Capital. If it did not, if imperialism were bad
for business, the business class would oppose it. This partly explains
why the colonialism of the 19th century is no more (the other reasons
being social resistance to foreign domination, which obviously helped to
make imperialism bad for business as well, and the need for US
imperialism to gain access to these markets after the second world war).
There are now more cost-effective means than direct colonialism to
ensure that "underdeveloped" countries remain open to exploitation by
foreign capital. Once the costs exceeded the benefits, colonialist
imperialism changed into the neo-colonialism of multinationals,
political influence, and the threat of force. Moreover, we must not
forget that any change in imperialism relates to changes in the
underlying economic system and so the changing nature of modern
imperialism can be roughly linked to developments within the capitalist
economy.

Imperialism, then, is basically the ability of countries to globally and
locally dictate trade relations and investments with other countries in
such a way as to gain an advantage over the other countries. When
capital is invested in foreign nations, the surplus value extracted from
the workers in those nations are not re-invested in those nations.
Rather a sizeable part of it returns to the base nation of the
corporation (in the form of profits for that company). Indeed, that is
to be expected as the whole reason for the investment of capital in the
first place was to get more out of the country than the corporation put
into it. Instead of this surplus value being re-invested into industry
in the less-developed nation (as would be the case with home-grown
exploiters, who are dependent on local markets and labour) it ends up in
the hands of foreign exploiters who take them out of the dominated
country. This means that industrial development as less resources to
draw on, making the local ruling class dependent on foreign capital and
its whims.

This can be done directly (by means of invasion and colonies) or
indirectly (by means of economic and political power). Which method is
used depends on the specific circumstances facing the countries in
question. Moreover, it depends on the balance of class forces within
each country as well (for example, a nation with a militant working
class would be less likely to pursue a war policy due to the social
costs involved). However, the aim of imperialism is always to enrich and
empower the capitalist and bureaucratic classes.

D.5.1 How has imperialism changed over time?
--------------------------------------------

The development of Imperialism cannot be isolated from the general
dynamics and tendencies of the capitalist economy. Imperialist
capitalism, therefore, is not identical to pre-capitalist forms of
imperialism, although there can, of course, be similarities. As such, it
must be viewed as an advanced stage of capitalism and not as some kind
of deviation of it. This kind of imperialism was attained by some
nations, mostly Western European, in the late 19th and early
20th-century. Since then it has changed and developed as economic and
political developments occurred, but it is based on the same basic
principles. As such, it is useful to describe the history of capitalism
in order to fully understand the place imperialism holds within it, how
it has changed, what functions it provides and, consequently, how it may
change in the future.

Imperialism has important economic advantages for those who run the
economy. As the needs of the business class change, the forms taken by
imperialism also change. We can identify three main phases: classic
imperialism (i.e. conquest), indirect (economic) imperialism, and
globalisation. We will consider the first two in this section and
globalisation in [section D.5.3](secD5.html#secd53). However, for all
the talk of globalisation in recent years, it is important to remember
that capitalism has always been an international system, that the
changing forms of imperialism reflect this international nature and that
the changes within imperialism are in response to developments within
capitalism itself.

Capitalism has always been expansive. Under mercantilism, for example,
the "free" market was nationalised **within** the nation state while
state aid was used to skew international trade on behalf of the home
elite and favour the development of capitalist industry. This meant
using the centralised state (and its armed might) to break down
"internal" barriers and customs which hindered the free flow of goods,
capital and, ultimately, labour. We should stress this as the state has
always played a key role in the development and protection of
capitalism. The use of the state to, firstly, protect infant capitalist
manufacturing and, secondly, to create a "free" market (i.e. free from
the customs and interference of society) should not be forgotten,
particularly as this second ("internal") role is repeated "externally"
through imperialism. Needless to say, this process of "internal"
imperialism within the country by the ruling class by means of the state
was accompanied by extensive violence against the working class (also
see [section F.8](secF8.html)).

So, state intervention was used to create and ensure capital's dominant
position at home by protecting it against foreign competition and the
recently dispossessed working class. This transition from feudal to
capitalist economy enjoyed the active promotion of the state
authorities, whose increasing centralisation ran parallel with the
growing strength and size of merchant capital. It also needed a powerful
state to protect its international trade, to conquer colonies and to
fight for control over the world market. The absolutist state was used
to actively implant, help and develop capitalist trade and industry.

The first industrial nation was Britain. After building up its
industrial base under mercantilism and crushing its rivals in various
wars, it was in an ideal position to dominate the international market.
It embraced free trade as its unique place as the only
capitalist/industrialised nation in the world market meant that it did
not have to worry about competition from other nations. Any free
exchange between unequal traders will benefit the stronger party. Thus
Britain, could achieve domination in the world market by means of free
trade. This meant that goods were exported rather than capital.

Faced with the influx of cheap, mass produced goods, existing industry
in Europe and the Americas faced ruin. As economist Nicholas Kaldor
notes, *"the arrival of cheap factory-made English goods **did** cause a
loss of employment and output of small-scale industry (the artisanate)
both in European countries (where it was later offset by large-scale
industrialisation brought about by protection) and even more in India
and China, where it was no so offset."* [**Further Essays on Applied
Economics**, p. 238] The existing industrial base was crushed,
industrialisation was aborted and unemployment rose. These countries
faced two possibilities: turn themselves into providers of raw materials
for Britain or violate the principles of the market and industrialise by
protectionism.

In many nations of Western Europe (soon to be followed by the USA and
Japan), the decision was simple. Faced with this competition, these
countries utilised the means by which Britain had industrialised --
state protection. Tariff barriers were raised, state aid was provided
and industry revived sufficiently to turn these nations into successful
competitors of Britain. This process was termed by Kropotkin as *"the
consecutive development of nations"* (although he underestimated the
importance of state aid in this process). No nation, he argued, would
let itself become specialised as the provider of raw materials or the
manufacturer of a few commodities but would diversify into many
different lines of production. Obviously no national ruling class would
want to see itself be dependent on another and so industrial development
was essential (regardless of the wishes of the general population). Thus
a nation in such a situation *"tries to emancipate herself from her
dependency . . . and rapidly begins to manufacture all those goods she
used to import."* [**Fields, Factories and Workshops**, p. 49 and p. 32]

Protectionism may have violated the laws of neo-classical economics, but
it proved essential for industrialisation. While, as Kropotkin argued,
protectionism ensured *"the high profits of those manufacturers who do
not improve their factories and chiefly rely upon cheap labour and long
hours,"* it also meant that these profits would be used to finance
industry and develop an industrial base. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 41] Without
this state aid, it is doubtful that these countries would have
industrialised (as Kaldor notes, *"all the present 'developed' or
'industrialised' countries established their industries through 'import
substitution' by means of protective tariffs and/or differential
subsidies."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 127]).

Within the industrialising country, the usual process of competition
driving out competitors continued. More and more markets became
dominated by big business (although, as Kropotkin stressed, without
totally eliminating smaller workshops within an industry and even
creating more around them). Indeed, as Russian anarchist G. P. Maximoff
stressed, the *"specific character of Imperialism is . . . the
concentration and centralisation of capital in syndicates, trusts and
cartels, which . . . have a decisive voice, not only in the economic and
political life of their countries, but also in the life of the nations
of the worlds a whole."* [**Program of Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 10] The
modern multi-national and transnational corporations are the latest
expression of this process.

Simply put, the size of big business was such that it had to expand
internationally as their original national markets were not sufficient
and to gain further advantages over their competitors. Faced with high
tariff barriers and rising international competition, industry responded
by exporting capital as well as finished goods. This export of capital
was an essential way of beating protectionism (and even reap benefits
from it) and gain a foothold in foreign markets (*"protective duties
have no doubt contributed . . . towards attracting German and English
manufacturers to Poland and Russia"* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 41]).
In addition, it allowed access to cheap labour and raw materials by
placing capital in foreign lands As part of this process colonies were
seized to increase the size of "friendly" markets and, of course, allow
the easy export of capital into areas with cheap labour and raw
materials. The increased concentration of capital this implies was
essential to gain an advantage against foreign competitors and dominate
the international market as well as the national one.

This form of imperialism, which arose in the late nineteenth century,
was based on the creation of larger and larger businesses and the
creation of colonies across the globe by the industrialised nations.
Direct conquest had the advantage of opening up more of the planet for
the capitalist market, thus leading to more trade and exploitation of
raw materials and labour. This gave a massive boost to both the state
and the industries of the invading country in terms of new profits, so
allowing an increase in the number of capitalists and other social
parasites that could exist in the developed nation. As Kropotkin noted
at the time, *"British, French, Belgian and other capitalists, by means
of the ease with which they exploit countries which themselves have no
developed industry, today control the labour of hundreds of millions of
those people in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. The result is that the
number of those people in the leading industrialised countries of Europe
who live off the work of others doesn't gradually decrease at all. Far
from it."* [*"Anarchism and Syndicalism"*, **Black Flag**, no. 210, p.
26]

As well as gaining access to raw materials, imperialism allows the
dominating nation to gain access to markets for its goods. By having an
empire, products produced at home can be easily dumped into foreign
markets with less developed industry, undercutting locally produced
goods and consequently destroying the local economy (and so potential
competitors) along with the society and culture based on it. Empire
building is a good way of creating privileged markets for one's goods.
By eliminating foreign competition, the imperialist nation's capitalists
can charge monopoly prices in the dominated country, so ensuring high
profit margins for capitalist business. This adds with the problems
associated with the over-production of goods:

> *"The workman being unable to purchase with their wages the riches
> they are producing, industry must search for new markets elsewhere,
> amidst the middle classes of other nations. It must find markets, in
> the East, in Africa, anywhere; it must increase, by trade, the number
> of its serfs in Egypt, in India, on the Congo. But everywhere it finds
> competitors in other nations which rapidly enter into the same line of
> industrial development. And wars, continuous wars, must be fought for
> the supremacy in the world-market -- wars for the possession of the
> East, wars for getting possession of the seas, wars for the right of
> imposing heavy duties on foreign merchandise."* [Kropotkin,
> **Anarchism**, pp. 55-6]

This process of expansion into non-capitalist areas also helps Capital
to weather both the subjective and objective economic pressures upon it
which cause the business cycle (see [section C.7](secC7.html) for more
details). As wealth looted from less industrially developed countries is
exported back to the home country, profit levels can be protected both
from working-class demands and from any relative decline in
surplus-value production caused by increased capital investment (see
[section C.2](secC2.html) for more on surplus value). In fact, the
working class of the imperialist country could receive improved wages
and living conditions as the looted wealth was imported into the country
and that meant that the workers could fight for, and win, improvements
that otherwise would have provoked intense class conflict. And as the
sons and daughters of the poor emigrated to the colonies to make a
living for themselves on stolen land, the wealth extracted from those
colonies helped to overcome the reduction in the supply of labour at
home which would increase its market price. This loot also helps reduce
competitive pressures on the nation's economy. Of course, these
advantages of conquest cannot totally **stop** the business cycle nor
eliminate competition, as the imperialistic nations soon discovered.

Therefore, the "classic" form of imperialism based on direct conquest
and the creation of colonies had numerous advantages for the imperialist
nations and the big business which their states represented.

These dominated nations were, in the main, pre-capitalist societies. The
domination of imperialist powers meant the importation of capitalist
social relationships and institutions into them, so provoking extensive
cultural and physical resistance to these attempts of foreign
capitalists to promote the growth of the free market. However,
peasants', artisans' and tribal people's desires to be "left alone" was
never respected, and "civilisation" was forced upon them "for their own
good." As Kropotkin realised, *"force is necessary to continually bring
new 'uncivilised nations' under the same conditions [of wage labour]."*
[**Anarchism and Anarchist Communism**, p. 53] Anarchist George Bradford
also stresses this, arguing that we *"should remember that,
historically, colonialism, bringing with it an emerging capitalist
economy and wage system, destroyed the tradition economies in most
countries. By substituting cash crops and monoculture for forms of
sustainable agriculture, it destroyed the basic land skills of the
people whom it reduced to plantation workers."* [**How Deep is Deep
Ecology**, p. 40] Indeed, this process was in many ways similar to the
development of capitalism in the "developed" nations, with the creation
of a class of landless workers who forms the nucleus of the first
generation of people given up to the mercy of the manufacturers.

However, this process had objective limitations. Firstly, the expansion
of empires had the limitation that there were only so many potential
colonies out there. This meant that conflicts over markets and colonies
was inevitable (as the states involved knew, and so they embarked on a
policy of building larger and larger armed forces). As Kropotkin argued
before the First World War, the real cause of war at the time was *"the
competition for markets and the right to exploit nations backward in
industry."* [quoted by Martin Miller, **Kropotkin**, p. 225] Secondly,
the creation of trusts, the export of goods and the import of cheap raw
materials cannot stop the business cycle nor "buy-off" the working class
indefinitely (i.e. the excess profits of imperialism will never be
enough to grant more and more reforms and improvements to the working
class in the industrialised world). Thus the need to overcome economic
slumps propelled business to find new ways of dominating the market, up
to and including the use of war to grab new markets and destroy rivals.
Moreover, war was a good way of side tracking class conflict at home --
which, let us not forget, had been reaching increasingly larger, more
militant and more radical levels in all the imperialist nations (see
John Zerzan's *"Origins and Meaning of WWI"* in his **Elements of
Refusal**).

Thus this first phase of imperialism began as the growing capitalist
economy started to reach the boundaries of the nationalised market
created by the state within its own borders. Imperialism was then used
to expand the area that could be colonised by the capital associated
with a given nation-state. This stage ended, however, once the dominant
powers had carved up the planet into different spheres of influence and
there was nowhere left to expand into. In the competition for access to
cheap raw materials and foreign markets, nation-states came into
conflict with each other. As it was obvious that a conflict was brewing,
the major European countries tried to organise a "balance of power."
This meant that armies were built and navies created to frighten other
countries and so deter war. Unfortunately, these measures were not
enough to countermand the economic and power processes at play (*"Armies
equipped to the teeth with weapons, with highly developed instruments of
murder and backed by military interests, have their own dynamic
interests,"* as Goldman put it [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 353]). War did
break out, a war over empires and influence, a war, it was claimed, that
would end all wars. As we now know, of course, it did not because it did
not fight the root cause of modern wars, capitalism.

After the First World War, the identification of nation-state with
national capital became even more obvious, and can be seen in the rise
of extensive state intervention to keep capitalism going -- for example,
the rise of Fascism in Italy and Germany and the efforts of "national"
governments in Britain and the USA to "solve" the economic crisis of the
Great Depression. However, these attempts to solve the problems of
capital did not work. The economic imperatives at work before the first
world war had not gone away. Big business still needed markets and raw
materials and the statification of industry under fascism only aided to
the problems associated with imperialism. Another war was only a matter
of time and when it came most anarchists, as they had during the first
world war, opposed both sides and called for revolution:

> *"the present struggle is one between rival Imperialisms and for the
> protection of vested interests. The workers in every country,
> belonging to the oppressed class, have nothing in common with these
> interests and the political aspirations of the ruling class. Their
> immediate struggle is their **emancipation.** **Their** front line is
> the workshop and factory, not the Maginot Line where they will just
> rot and die, whilst their masters at home pile up their ill-gotten
> gains."* [*"War Commentary"*, quoted Mark Shipway,
> **Anti-Parliamentary Communism**, p. 170]

After the Second World War, the European countries yielded to pressure
from the USA and national liberation movements and grated many former
countries "independence" (often after intense conflict). As Kropotkin
predicted, such social movements were to be expected for with the growth
of capitalism *"the number of people with an interest in the
capitulation of the capitalist state system also increases."*
[*"Anarchism and Syndicalism"*, **Op. Cit.**, p. 26] Unfortunately these
"liberation" movements transformed mass struggle from a potential
struggle against capitalism into movements aiming for independent
capitalist nation states (see [section D.7](secD7.html)). Not, we must
stress, that the USA was being altruistic in its actions, independence
for colonies weakened its rivals as well as allowing US capital access
to those markets.

This process reflected capital expanding even more **beyond** the
nation-state into multinational corporations. The nature of imperialism
and imperialistic wars changed accordingly. In addition, the various
successful struggles for National Liberation ensured that imperialism
had to change itself in face of popular resistance. These two factors
ensured that the old form of imperialism was replaced by a new system of
"neo-colonialism" in which newly "independent" colonies are forced, via
political and economic pressure, to open their borders to foreign
capital. If a state takes up a position which the imperial powers
consider "bad for business," action will be taken, from sanctions to
outright invasion. Keeping the world open and "free" for capitalist
exploitation has been America's general policy since 1945. It springs
directly from the expansion requirements of private capital and so
cannot be fundamentally changed. However, it was also influenced by the
shifting needs resulting from the new political and economic order and
the rivalries existing between imperialist nations (particularly those
of the Cold War). As such, which method of intervention and the shift
from direct colonialism to neo-colonialism (and any "anomalies") can be
explained by these conflicts.

Within this basic framework of indirect imperialism, many "developing"
nations did manage to start the process of industrialising. Partly in
response to the Great Depression, some former colonies started to apply
the policies used so successfully by imperialist nations like Germany
and America in the previous century. They followed a policy of "import
substitution" which meant that they tried to manufacture goods like, for
instance, cars that they had previously imported. Without suggesting
this sort of policy offered a positive alternative (it was, after all,
just local capitalism) it did have one big disadvantage for the
imperialist powers: it tended to deny them both markets and cheap raw
materials (the current turn towards globalisation was used to break
these policies). As such, whether a nation pursued such policies was
dependent on the costs involved to the imperialist power involved.

So instead of direct rule over less developed nations (which generally
proved to be too costly, both economically and politically), indirect
forms of domination were now preferred. These are rooted in economic and
political pressure rather than the automatic use of violence, although
force is always an option and is resorted to if "business interests" are
threatened. This is the reality of the expression "the international
community" -- it is code for imperialist aims for Western governments,
particularly the U.S. and its junior partner, the U.K. As discussed in
[section D.2.1](secD2.html#secd21), economic power can be quite
effective in pressuring governments to do what the capitalist class
desire even in advanced industrial countries. This applies even more so
to so-called developing nations.

In addition to the stick of economic and political pressure, the
imperialist countries also use the carrot of foreign aid and investment
to ensure their aims. This can best be seen when Western governments
provide lavish funds to "developing" states, particularly petty
right-wing despots, under the pseudonym "foreign aid." Hence the all to
common sight of US Presidents supporting authoritarian (indeed,
dictatorial) regimes while at the same time mouthing nice platitudes
about "liberty" and "progress." The purpose of this foreign aid,
noble-sounding rhetoric about freedom and democracy aside, is to ensure
that the existing world order remains intact and that US corporations
have access to the raw materials and markets they need. Stability has
become the watchword of modern imperialists, who see **any** indigenous
popular movements as a threat to the existing world order. The U.S. and
other Western powers provide much-needed war material and training for
the military of these governments, so that they may continue to keep the
business climate friendly to foreign investors (that means tacitly and
overtly supporting fascism around the globe).

Foreign aid also channels public funds to home based transnational
companies via the ruling classes in Third World countries. It is, in
other words, is a process where the poor people of rich countries give
their money to the rich people of poor countries to ensure that the
investments of the rich people of rich countries is safe from the poor
people of poor countries! Needless to say, the owners of the companies
providing this "aid" also do very well out of it. This has the advantage
of securing markets as other countries are "encouraged" to buy
imperialist countries' goods (often in exchange for "aid", typically
military "aid") and open their markets to the dominant power's companies
and their products.

Thus, the Third World sags beneath the weight of well-funded oppression,
while its countries are sucked dry of their native wealth, in the name
of "development" and in the spirit of "democracy" and "freedom". The
United States leads the West in its global responsibility (another
favourite buzzword) to ensure that this peculiar kind of "freedom"
remains unchallenged by any indigenous movements. The actual form of the
regime supported is irrelevant, although fascist states are often
favoured due to their stability (i.e. lack of popular opposition
movements). As long as the fascist regimes remain compliant and obedient
to the West and capitalism thrives unchallenged then they can commit any
crime against their own people while being praised for making progress
towards "democracy." However, the moment they step out of line and act
in ways which clash with the interests of the imperialist powers then
their short-comings will used to justify intervention (the example of
Saddam Hussein is the most obvious one to raise here). As for
"democracy," this can be tolerated by imperialism as long as its in
*"the traditional sense of 'top-down' rule by elites linked to US power,
with democratic forms of little substance -- unless they are compelled
to do so, by their own populations in particular."* This applies
*"internally"* as well as abroad, for *"democracy is fine as long as it
. . . does not risk popular interference with primary interests of power
and wealth."* Thus the aim is to ensure *"an obedient client state is
firmly in place, the general perferene of conquerors, leaving just
military bases for future contingencies."* [**Failed States**, p. 171,
p. 204 and p. 148]

In these ways, markets are kept open for corporations based in the
advanced nations all without the apparent use of force or the need for
colonies. However, this does not mean that war is not an option and,
unsurprisingly, the post-1945 period has been marked by imperialist
conflict. These include old-fashioned direct war by the imperialist
nation (such as the Vietnam and Iraq wars) as well as new-style
imperialistic wars by proxy (such as US support for the Contras in
Nicaragua or support for military coups against reformist or nationalist
governments). As such, if a regime becomes too independent, military
force always remains an option. This can be seen from the 1990 Gulf War,
when Saddam invaded Kuwait (and all his past crimes, conducted with the
support of the West, were dragged from the Memory Hole to justify war).

Least it be considered that we are being excessive in our analysis, let
us not forget that the US *"has intervened well over a hundred times in
the internal affairs of other nations since 1945. The rhetoric has been
that we have done so largely to preserve or restore freedom and
democracy, or on behalf of human rights. The reality has been that
[they] . . . have been consistently designed and implemented to further
the interests of US (now largely transnational) corporations, and the
elites both at home and abroad who profit from their depredations."*
[Henry Rosemont, Jr., *"U.S. Foreign Policy: the Execution of Human
Rights"*, pp. 13-25, **Social Anarchism**, no. 29 p. 13] This has
involved the overthrow of democratically elected governments (such as in
Iran, 1953; Guatemala, 1954; Chile, 1973) and their replacement by
reactionary right-wing dictatorships (usually involving the military).
As George Bradford argues, *"[i]n light of [the economic] looting [by
corporations under imperialism], it should become clearer . . . why
nationalist regimes that cease to serve as simple conduits for massive
U.S. corporate exploitation come under such powerful attack -- Guatemala
in 1954, Chile in 1973 . . . Nicaragua [in the 1980s] . . . [U.S.] State
Department philosophy since the 1950s has been to rely on various police
states and to hold back 'nationalistic regimes' that might be more
responsive to 'increasing popular demand for immediate improvements in
the low living standards of the masses,' in order to 'protect our
resources' -- in their countries!"* [**How Deep is Deep Ecology?**, p.
62]

This is to be expected, as imperialism is the only means of defending
the foreign investments of a nation's capitalist class, and by allowing
the extraction of profits and the creation of markets, it also
safeguards the future of private capital.

This process has not come to an end and imperialism is continuing to
evolve based on changing political and economic developments. The most
obvious political change is the end of the USSR. During the cold war,
the competition between the USA and the USSR had an obvious impact on
how imperialism worked. On the one hand, acts of imperial power could be
justified in fighting "Communism" (for the USA) or "US imperialism" (for
the USSR). On the other, fear of provoking a nuclear war or driving
developing nations into the hands of the other side allowed more leeway
for developing nations to pursue policies like import substitution. With
the end of the cold-war, these options have decreased considerably for
developing nations as US imperialism how has, effectively, no
constraints beyond international public opinion and pressure from below.
As the invasion of Iraq in 2003 shows, this power is still weak but
sufficient to limit some of the excesses of imperial power (for example,
the US could not carpet bomb Iraq as it had Vietnam).

The most obvious economic change is the increased global nature of
capitalism. Capital investments in developing nations have increased
steadily over the years, with profits from the exploitation of cheap
labour flowing back into the pockets of the corporate elite in the
imperialist nation, not to its citizens as a whole (though there are
sometimes temporary benefits to other classes, as discussed in [section
D.5.4](secD5.html#secd54)). With the increasing globalisation of big
business and markets, capitalism (and so imperialism) is on the
threshold of a new transformation. Just as direct imperialism
transformed into in-direct imperialism, so in-direct imperialism is
transforming into a global system of government which aims to codify the
domination of corporations over governments. This process is often
called "globalisation" and we discuss it in [section
D.5.3](secD5.html#secd53). First, however, we need to discuss
non-private capitalist forms of imperialism associated with the
Stalinist regimes and we do that in the [next
section](secD5.html#secd52).

D.5.2 Is imperialism just a product of private capitalism?
----------------------------------------------------------

While we are predominantly interested in **capitalist** imperialism, we
cannot avoid discussing the activities of the so-called "socialist"
nations (such as the Soviet Union, China, etc.). Given that modern
imperialism has an economic base caused in developed capitalism by, in
part, the rise of big business organised on a wider and wider scale, we
should not be surprised that the state capitalist ("socialist") nations
are/were also imperialistic. As the state-capitalist system expresses
the logical end point of capital concentration (the one big firm) the
same imperialistic pressures that apply to big business and its state
will also apply to the state capitalist nation.

In the words of libertarian socialist Cornelius Castoriadis:

> "But if imperialist expansion is the necessary expression of an
> economy in which the process of capital concentration has arrived at
> the stage of monopoly domination, this is true a fortiori for an
> economy in which this process of concentration has arrived at its
> natural limit . . . In other words, imperialist expansion is even more
> necessary for a totally concentrated economy . . . That they are
> realised through different modes (for example, capital exportation
> play a much more restricted role and acts in a different way than is
> the case with monopoly domination) is the result of the differences
> separating bureaucratic capitalism from monopoly capitalism, but at
> bottom this changes nothing.
> "We must strongly emphasise that the imperialistic features of capital
> are not tied to 'private' or 'State' ownership of the means of
> production . . . the same process takes place if, instead of
> monopolies, there is an exploiting bureaucracy; in other words, this
> bureaucracy also can **exploit**, but only on the condition that it
> **dominates.**" [**Political and Social Writings**, vol. 1, p. 159]

Given this, it comes as no surprise that the state-capitalist countries
also participated in imperialist activities, adventures and wars,
although on a lesser scale and for slightly different reasons than those
associated with private capitalism. However, regardless of the exact
cause the USSR *"has always pursued an imperialist foreign policy, that
it is the state and not the workers which owns and controls the whole
life of the country."* Given this, it is unsurprising that *"world
revolution was abandoned in favour of alliances with capitalist
countries. Like the bourgeois states the USSR took part in the
manoeuvrings to establish a balance of power in Europe."* This has its
roots in its internal class structure, as *"it is obvious that a state
which pursues an imperialist foreign policy cannot itself by
revolutionary"* and this is shown in *"the internal life of the USSR"*
where *"the means of wealth production"* are *"owned by the state which
represents, as always, a privileged class -- the bureaucracy."* [*"USSR
-- Anarchist Position,"* pp. 21-24, Vernon Richards (ed.), **The Left
and World War II**, p. 22 and p. 23]

This process became obvious after the defeat of Nazi Germany and the
creation of Stalinist states in Eastern Europe. As anarchists at the
time noted, this was *"the consolidation of Russian imperialist power"*
and their *"incorporation . . . within the structure of the Soviet
Union."* As such, *"all these countries behind the Iron Curtain are
better regarded as what they really [were] -- satellite states of
Russia."* [*"Russia's Grip Tightens"*, pp. 283-5, Vernon Richards (ed.),
**World War - Cold War**, p. 285 and p. 284] Of course, the creation of
these satellite states was based on the inter-imperialist agreements
reached at the Yalta conference of February 1945.

As can be seen by Russia's ruthless policy towards her satellite
regimes, Soviet imperialism was more inclined to the defence of what she
already had and the creation of a buffer zone between herself and the
West. This is not to deny that the ruling elite of the Soviet Union did
not try to exploit the countries under its influence. For example, in
the years after the end of the Second World War, the Eastern Block
countries paid the USSR millions of dollars in reparations. As in
private capitalism, the *"satellite states were regarded as a source of
raw materials and of cheap manufactured goods. Russia secured the
satellites exports at below world prices. And it exported to them at
above world prices."* Thus trade *"was based on the old imperialist
principle of buying cheap and selling dear -- very, very dear!"* [Andy
Anderson, **Hungary '56**, pp. 25-6 and p. 25] However, the nature of
the imperialist regime was such that it discouraged too much
expansionism as *"Russian imperialism [had] to rely on armies of
occupation, utterly subservient quisling governments, or a highly
organised and loyal political police (or all three). In such
circumstances considerable dilution of Russian power occur[red] with
each acquisition of territory."* [*"Russian Imperialism"*, pp. 270-1,
Vernon Richards (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, p. 270]

Needless to say, the form and content of the state capitalist domination
of its satellite countries was dependent on its own economic and
political structure and needs, just as traditional capitalist
imperialism reflected its needs and structures. While direct
exploitation declined over time, the satellite states were still
expected to develop their economies in accordance with the needs of the
Soviet Bloc as a whole (i.e., in the interests of the Russian elite).
This meant the forcing down of living standards to accelerate
industrialisation in conformity with the requirements of the Russian
ruling class. This was because these regimes served not as outlets for
excess Soviet products but rather as a means of *"plugging holes in the
Russian economy, which [was] in a chronic state of underproduction in
comparison to its needs."* As such, the *"form and content"* of this
regimes' *"domination over its satellite countries are determined
fundamentally by its own economic structure"* and so it would be
*"completely incorrect to consider these relations identical to the
relations of classical colonialism."* [Castoriadis, **Op. Cit.**, p.
187] So part of the difference between private and state capitalist was
drive by the need to plunder these countries of commodities to make up
for shortages caused by central planning (in contrast, capitalist
imperialism tended to export goods). As would be expected, within this
overall imperialist agenda the local bureaucrats and elites feathered
their own nests, as with any form of imperialism.

As well as physical expansionism, the state-capitalist elites also aided
"anti-imperialist" movements when it served their interests. The aim of
this was to placed such movements and any regimes they created within
the Soviet or Chinese sphere of influence. Ironically, this process was
aided by imperialist rivalries with US imperialism as American pressure
often closed off other options in an attempt to demonise such movements
and states as "communist" in order to justify supporting their
repression or for intervening itself. This is **not** to suggest that
Soviet regime was encouraging "world revolution" by this support. Far
from it, given the Stalinist betrayals and attacks on genuine
revolutionary movements and struggles (the example of the Spanish
Revolution is the obvious one to mention here). Soviet aid was limited
to those parties which were willing to subjugate themselves and any
popular movements they influenced to the needs of the Russian ruling
class. Once the Stalinist parties had replaced the local ruling class,
trade relations were formalised between the so-called "socialist"
nations for the benefit of both the local and Russian rulers. In a
similar way, and for identical needs, the Western Imperialist powers
supported murderous local capitalist and feudal elites in their struggle
against their own working classes, arguing that it was supporting
"freedom" and "democracy" against Soviet aggression.

The turning of Communist Parties into conduits of Soviet elite interests
became obvious under Stalin, when the twists and turns of the party line
were staggering. However, it actually started under Lenin and Trotsky
and *"almost from the beginning"* the Communist International
(Comintern) *"served primarily not as an instrument for World
Revolution, but as an instrument of Russian Foreign Policy."* This
explains *"the most bewildering changes of policy and political
somersaults"* it imposed on its member parties. Ultimately, *"the
allegedly revolutionary aims of the Comintern stood in contrast to the
diplomatic relations of the Soviet Union with other countries."*
[Marie-Louise Berneri, **Neither East Nor West**, p. 64 and p. 63] As
early as 1920, the Dutch Council Communist Anton Pannekoek was arguing
that the Comintern opposition to anti-parliamentarianism was rooted *"in
the needs of the Soviet Republic"* for *"peaceful trade with the rest of
the world."* This meant that the Comintern's policies were driven *"by
the political needs of Soviet Russia."* [*"Afterword to World Revolution
and Communist Tactics,"* D.A. Smart (ed.), **Pannekoek and Gorter's
Marxism**, p. 143 and p. 144] This is to be expected, as the regime had
always been state capitalist and so the policies of the Comintern were
based on the interests of a (state) capitalist regime.

Therefore, imperialism is not limited to states based on private
capitalism -- the state capitalist regimes have also been guilty of it.
This is to be expected, as both are based on minority rule, the
exploitation and oppression of labour and the need to expand the
resources available to it. This means that anarchists oppose all forms
of capitalist imperialism and raise the slogan *"Neither East nor
West."* We *"cannot alter our views about Russia [or any other state
capitalist regime] simply because, for imperialist reasons, American and
British spokesmen now denounce Russia totalitarianism. We know that
their indignation is hypocritical and that they may become friendly to
Russia again if it suits their interests."* [Marie-Louise Berneri, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 187] In the clash of imperialism, anarchists support neither
side as both are rooted in the exploitation and oppression of the
working class.

Finally, it is worthwhile to refute two common myths about state
capitalist imperialism. The first myth is that state-capitalist
imperialism results in a non-capitalist regimes and that is why it is so
opposed to by Western interests. From this position, held by many
Trotskyists, it is argued that we should support such regimes against
the West (for example, that socialists should have supported the Russian
invasion of Afghanistan). This position is based on a fallacy rooted in
the false Trotskyist notion that state ownership of the means of
production is inherently socialist.

Just as capitalist domination saw the transformation of the satellite's
countries social relations from pre-capitalist forms in favour of
capitalist ones, the domination of "socialist" nations meant the
elimination of traditional bourgeois social relations in favour of state
capitalist ones. As such, the nature and form of imperialism was
fundamentally identical and served the interests of the appropriate
ruling class in each case. This transformation of one kind of class
system into another explains the root of the West's very public attacks
on Soviet imperialism. It had nothing to do with the USSR being
considered a "workers' state" as Trotsky, for example, argued.
*"Expropriation of the capitalist class,"* argued one anarchist in 1940,
*"is naturally terrifying"* to the capitalist class *"but that does not
prove anything about a workers' state . . . In Stalinist Russia
expropriation is carried out . . . by, and ultimately for the benefit
of, the bureaucracy, not by the workers at all. The bourgeoisie are
afraid of expropriation, of power passing out of their hands, whoever
seizes it from them. They will defend their property against any class
or clique. The fact that they are indignant [about Soviet imperialism]
proves their fear -- it tells us nothing at all about the agents
inspiring that fear."* [J.H., *"The Fourth International"*, pp. 37-43,
Vernon Richards (ed.), **Op. Cit.**, pp. 41-2] This elimination of
tradition forms of class rule and their replacement with new forms is
required as these are the only economic forms compatible with the needs
of the state capitalist regimes to exploit these countries on a regular
basis.

The second myth is the notion that opposition to state-capitalist
imperialism by its subject peoples meant support for Western capitalism.
In fact, the revolts and revolutions which repeatedly flared up under
Stalinism almost always raised genuine socialist demands. For example,
the 1956 Hungarian revolution *"was a social revolution in the fullest
sense of the term. Its object was a fundamental change in the relations
of production, and in the relations between ruler and ruled in
factories, pits and on the land."* Given this, unsurprisingly Western
political commentary *"was centred upon the nationalistic aspects of the
Revolution, no matter how trivial."* This was unsurprising, as the West
was *"opposed both to its methods and to its aims . . . What capitalist
government could genuinely support a people demanding 'workers'
management of industry' and already beginning to implement this on an
increasing scale?"* The revolution *"showed every sign of making both
them and their bureaucratic counterparts in the East redundant."* The
revolt itself was rooted *"[n]ew organs of struggle,"* workers' councils
*"which embodied, in embryo, the new society they were seeking to
achieve."* [Anderson, **Op. Cit.**, p.6, p. 106 and p. 107]

The ending of state capitalism in Eastern Europe in 1989 has ended its
imperialist domination of those countries. However, it has simply opened
the door for private-capitalist imperialism as the revolts themselves
remained fundamentally at the political level. The ruling bureaucracy
was faced with both popular pressure from the streets and economic
stagnation flowing from its state-run capitalism. Being unable to
continue as before and unwilling, for obvious reasons, to encourage
economic and political participation, it opted for the top-down
transformation of state to private capitalism. Representative democracy
was implemented and state assets were privatised into the hands of a new
class of capitalists (often made up of the old bureaucrats) rather than
the workers themselves. In other words, the post-Stalinist regimes are
still class systems and now subject to a different form of imperialism
-- namely, globalisation.

D.5.3 Does globalisation mean the end of imperialism?
-----------------------------------------------------

No. While it is true that the size of multinational companies has
increased along with the mobility of capital, the need for nation-states
to serve corporate interests still exists. With the increased mobility
of capital, i.e. its ability to move from one country and invest in
another easily, and with the growth in international money markets, we
have seen what can be called a "free market" in states developing.
Corporations can ensure that governments do as they are told simply by
threatening to move elsewhere (which they will do anyway, if it results
in more profits).

Therefore, as Howard Zinn stresses, *"it's very important to point out
that globalisation is in fact imperialism and that there is a
disadvantage to simply using the term 'globalisation' in a way that
plays into the thinking of people at the World Bank and journalists . .
. who are agog at globalisation. They just can't contain their joy at
the spread of American economic and corporate power all over the world.
. . it would be very good to puncture that balloon and say 'This is
imperialism.'"* [**Bush Drives us into Bakunin's Arms**] Globalisation
is, like the forms of imperialism that preceded it, a response to both
objective economic forces and the class struggle. Moreover, like the
forms that came before, it is rooted in the economic power of
corporations based in a few developed nations and political power of the
states that are the home base of these corporations. These powers
influence international institutions and individual countries to pursue
neo-liberal policies, the so-called "Washington Consensus" of free
market reforms, associated with globalisation.

Globalisation cannot be understood unless its history is known. The
current process of increasing international trade, investment and
finance markets started in the late 60s and early 1970s. Increased
competition from a re-built Europe and Japan challenged US domination
combined with working class struggle across the globe to leave the
capitalist world feeling the strain. Dissatisfaction with factory and
office life combined with other social movements (such as the women's
movement, anti-racist struggles, anti-war movements and so on) which
demanded more than capitalism could provide. The near revolution in
France, 1968, is the most famous of these struggles but it occurred all
across the globe.

For the ruling class, the squeeze on profits and authority from
ever-increasing wage demands, strikes, stoppages, boycotts, squatting,
protests and other struggles meant that a solution had to be found and
the working class disciplined (and profits regained). One part of the
solution was to "run away" and so capital flooded into certain areas of
the "developing" world. This increased the trends towards globalisation.
Another solution was the embrace of Monetarism and tight money (i.e.
credit) policies. It is a moot point whether those who applied
Monetarism actually knew it was nonsense and, consequently, sought an
economic crisis or whether they were simply incompetent ideologues who
knew little about economics and mismanaged the economy by imposing its
recommendations, the outcome was the same. It resulted in increases in
the interest rate, which helped deepen the recessions of the early 1980s
which broke the back of working class resistance in the U.K. and U.S.A.
High unemployment helped to discipline a rebellious working class and
the new mobility of capital meant a virtual "investment strike" against
nations which had a "poor industrial record" (i.e. workers who were not
obedient wage slaves). Moreover, as in any economic crisis, the "degree
of monopoly" (i.e. the dominance of large firms) in the market increased
as weaker firms went under and others merged to survive. This enhancing
the tendencies toward concentration and centralisation which always
exist in capitalism, so ensuring an extra thrust towards global
operations as the size and position of the surviving firms required
wider and larger markets to operate in.

Internationally, another crisis played its role in promoting
globalisation. This was the Debit Crisis of the late 1970s and early
1980s. Debt plays a central role for the western powers in dictating how
their economies should be organised. The debt crisis proved an ideal
leverage for the western powers to force "free trade" on the "third
world." This occurred when third world countries faced with falling
incomes and rising interest rates defaulted on their loans (loans that
were mainly given as a bribe to the ruling elites of those countries and
used as a means to suppress the working people of those countries -- who
now, sickenly, are expected to repay them!).

Before this, as noted in [section D.5.1](secD5.html#secd51), many
countries had followed a policy of "import substitution." This tended to
create new competitors who could deny transnational corporations both
markets and cheap raw materials. With the debt crisis, the imperialist
powers could end this policy but instead of military force, the
governments of the west sent in the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
and World Bank (WB). The loans required by "developing" nations in the
face of recession and rising debt repayments meant that they had little
choice but to agree to an IMF-designed economic reform programme. If
they refused, not only were they denied IMF funds, but also WB loans.
Private banks and lending agencies would also pull out, as they lent
under the cover of the IMF -- the only body with the power to both
underpin loans and squeeze repayment from debtors. These policies meant
introducing austerity programmes which, in turn, meant cutting public
spending, freezing wages, restricting credit, allowing foreign
multinational companies to cherry pick assets at bargain prices, and
passing laws to liberalise the flow of capital into and out of the
country. Not surprisingly, the result was disastrous for the working
population, but the debts were repaid and both local and international
elites did very well out of it. So while workers in the West suffered
repression and hardship, the fate of the working class in the
"developing" world was considerably worse.

Leading economist Joseph Stiglitz worked in the World Bank and described
some of dire consequences of these policies. He notes how the
neo-liberalism the IMF and WB imposed has, *"too often, not been
followed by the promised growth, but by increased misery"* and workers
*"lost their jobs [being] forced into poverty"* or *"been hit by a
heightened sense of insecurity"* if they remained in work. For many *"it
seems closer to an unmitigated disaster."* He argues that part of the
problem is that the IMF and WB have been taken over by true believers in
capitalism and apply market fundamentalism in all cases. Thus, they
*"became the new missionary institutions"* of *"free market ideology"*
through which *"these ideas were pushed on reluctant poor countries."*
Their policies were *"based on an ideology -- market fundamentalism --
that required little, if any, consideration of a country's particular
circumstances and immediate problems. IMF economists could ignore the
short-term effects their policies might have on [a] country, content in
the belief **in the long run** the country would be better off"* -- a
position which many working class people there rejected by rioting and
protest. In summary, globalisation *"as it has been practised has not
lived up to what its advocates promised it would accomplish . . . In
some cases it has not even resulted in growth, but when it has, it has
not brought benefits to all; the net effect of the policies set by the
Washington Consensus had all too often been to benefit the few at the
expense of the many, the well-off at the expense of the poor."*
[**Globalisation and Its Discontents**, p. 17, p. 20, p. 13, p. 36 and
p. 20]

While transnational companies are, perhaps, the most well-known
representatives of this process of globalisation, the power and mobility
of modern capitalism can be seen from the following figures. From 1986
to 1990, foreign exchange transactions rose from under \$300 billion to
\$700 billion daily and were expected to exceed \$1.3 trillion in 1994.
The World Bank estimates that the total resources of international
financial institutions at about \$14 trillion. To put some kind of
perspective on these figures, the Balse-based Bank for International
Settlement estimated that the aggregate daily turnover in the foreign
exchange markets at nearly \$900 billion in April 1992, equal to 13
times the Gross Domestic Product of the OECD group of countries on an
annualised basis [**Financial Times**, 23/9/93]. In Britain, some
\$200-300 billion a day flows through London's foreign exchange markets.
This is the equivalent of the UK's annual Gross National Product in two
or three days. Needless to say, since the early 1990s, these amounts
have grown to even higher levels (daily currency transactions have risen
from a mere \$80 billion in 1980 to \$1.26 billion in 1995. In
proportion to world trade, this trading in foreign exchange rose from a
ration of 10:1 to nearly 70:1 [Mark Weisbrot, **Globalisation for
Whom?**]).

Little wonder that a **Financial Times** special supplement on the IMF
stated that *"Wise governments realise that the only intelligent
response to the challenge of globalisation is to make their economies
more acceptable."* [**Op. Cit.**] More acceptable to business, that is,
not their populations. As Chomsky put it, *"free capital flow creates
what's sometimes called a 'virtual parliament' of global capital, which
can exercise veto power over government policies that it considers
irrational. That means things like labour rights, or educational
programmes, or health, or efforts to stimulate the economy, or, in fact,
anything that might help people and not profits (and therefore
irrational in the technical sense)."* [**Rogue States**, pp. 212-3]

This means that under globalisation, states will compete with each other
to offer the best deals to investors and transnational companies -- such
as tax breaks, union busting, no pollution controls, and so forth. The
effects on the countries' ordinary people will be ignored in the name of
future benefits (not so much pie in the sky when you die, more like pie
in the future, maybe, if you are nice and do what you are told). For
example, such an "acceptable" business climate was created in Britain,
where *"market forces have deprived workers of rights in the name of
competition."* [**Scotland on Sunday**, 9/1/95] Unsurprisingly. number
of people with less than half the average income rose from 9% of the
population in 1979 to 25% in 1993. The share of national wealth held by
the poorer half of the population has fallen from one third to one
quarter. However, as would be expected, the number of millionaires has
increased, as has the welfare state for the rich, with the public's tax
money being used to enrich the few via military Keynesianism,
privatisation and funding for Research and Development. Like any
religion, the free-market ideology is marked by the hypocrisy of those
at the top and the sacrifices required from the majority at the bottom.

In addition, the globalisation of capital allows it to play one work
force against another. For example, General Motors plans to close two
dozen plants in the United States and Canada, but it has become the
largest employer in Mexico. Why? Because an *"economic miracle"* has
driven wages down. Labour's share of personal income in Mexico has
*"declined from 36 percent in the mid-1970's to 23 percent by 1992."*
Elsewhere, General Motors opened a \$690 million assembly plant in the
former East Germany. Why? Because there workers are willing to *"work
longer hours than their pampered colleagues in western Germany"* (as the
**Financial Times** put it) at 40% of the wage and with few benefits.
[Noam Chomsky, **World Orders, Old and New**, p. 160]

This mobility is a useful tool in the class war. There has been *"a
significant impact of NAFTA on strikebreaking. About half of union
organising efforts are disrupted by employer threats to transfer
production abroad, for example . . . The threats are not idle. When such
organising drives succeed, employers close the plant in whole or in part
at triple the pre-NAFTA rate (about 15 percent of the time).
Plant-closing threats are almost twice as high in more mobile industries
(e.g. manufacturing vs. construction)."* [**Rogue States**, pp. 139-40]
This process is hardly unique to America, and takes place all across the
world (including in the "developing" world itself). This process has
increased the bargaining power of employers and has helped to hold wages
down (while productivity has increased). In the US, the share of
national income going to corporate profits increased by 3.2 percentage
points between 1989 and 1998. This represents a significant
redistribution of the economic pie. [Mark Weisbrot, **Op. Cit.**] Hence
the need for **international** workers' organisation and solidarity (as
anarchists have been arguing since Bakunin [**The Political Philosophy
of Bakunin**, pp. 305-8]).

This means that such agreements such as NAFTA and the Multilateral
Agreement on Investment (shelved due to popular protest and outrage but
definitely not forgotten) considerably weaken the governments of
nation-states -- but only in one area, the regulation of business. Such
agreements restrict the ability of governments to check capital flight,
restrict currency trading, eliminate environment and labour protection
laws, ease the repatriation of profits and anything else that might
impede the flow of profits or reduce business power. Indeed, under
NAFTA, corporations can sue governments if they think the government is
hindering its freedom on the market. Disagreements are settled by
unelected panels outside the control of democratic governments. Such
agreements represent an increase in corporate power and ensure that
states can only intervene when it suits corporations, not the general
public.

The ability of corporations to sue governments was enshrined in chapter
11 of NAFTA. In a small town in the Mexican state of San Luis Potosi, a
California firm -- Metalclad -- a commercial purveyor of hazardous
wastes, bought an abandoned dump site nearby. It proposed to expand on
the dumpsite and use it to dump toxic waste material. The people in the
neighbourhood of the dump site protested. The municipality, using powers
delegated to it by the state, rezoned the site and forbid Metalclad to
extend its land holdings. Metalclad, under Chapter 11 of NAFTA, then
sued the Mexican government for damage to its profit margins and balance
sheet as a result of being treated unequally by the people of San Luis
Potosi. A trade panel, convened in Washington, agreed with the company.
[Naomi Klein, **Fences and Windows**, pp. 56-59] In Canada, the Ethyl
corporation sued when the government banned its gasoline additive as a
health hazard. The government settled "out of court" to prevent a public
spectacle of a corporation overruling the nation's Parliament.

NAFTA and other Free Trade agreements are designed for corporations and
corporate rule. Chapter 11 was not enshrined in the NAFTA in order to
make a better world for the people of Canada, any more than for the
people of San Luis Potosi but, instead, for the capitalist elite. This
is an inherently imperialist situation, which will "justify" further
intervention in the "developing" nations by the US and other imperialist
nations, either through indirect military aid to client regimes or
through outright invasion, depending on the nature of the *"crisis of
democracy"* (a term used by the Trilateral Commission to characterise
popular uprisings and a politicising of the general public).

However, force is always required to protect private capital. Even a
globalised capitalist company still requires a defender. After all,
*"[a]t the international level, U.S. corporations need the government to
insure that target countries are 'safe for investment' (no movements for
freedom and democracy), that loans will be repaid, contracts kept, and
international law respected (but only when it is useful to do so)."*
[Henry Rosemont, Jr., **Op. Cit.**, p. 18] For the foreseeable future,
America seems to be the global rent-a-cop of choice -- particularly as
many of the largest corporations are based there.

It makes sense for corporations to pick and choose between states for
the best protection, blackmailing their citizens to pay for the armed
forces via taxes. It is, in other words, similar to the process at work
within the US when companies moved to states which promised the most
favourable laws. For example, New Jersey repealed its anti-trust law in
1891-2 and amended its corporation law in 1896 to allow companies to be
as large as they liked, to operate anywhere and to own other
corporations. This drew corporations to it until Delaware offered even
more freedoms to corporate power until other states offered similar
laws. In other words, competed for revenue by writing laws to sell to
corporations and the mobility of corporations meant that they bargained
from a superior position. Globalisation is simply this process on a
larger scale, as capital will move to countries whose governments supply
what it demands (and punish those which do not). Therefore, far from
ending imperialism, globalisation will see it continue, but with one
major difference: the citizens in the imperialist countries will see
even fewer benefits from imperialism than before, while, as ever, still
having to carry the costs.

So, in spite of claims that governments are powerless in the face of
global capital, we should never forget that state power has increased
drastically in one area -- in state repression against its own citizens.
No matter how mobile capital is, it still needs to take concrete form to
generate surplus value. Without wage salves, capital would not survive.
As such, it can never permanently escape from its own contradictions --
wherever it goes, it has to create workers who have a tendency to
disobey and do problematic things like demand higher wages, better
working conditions, go on strike and so on (indeed, this fact has seen
companies based in "developing" nations move to less "developed" to find
more compliant labour).

This, of course, necessitates a strengthening of the state in its role
as protector of property and as a defence against any unrest provoked by
the inequalities, impoverishment and despair caused by globalisation
(and, of course, the hope, solidarity and direct action generated by
that unrest within the working class). Hence the rise of the neo-liberal
consensus in both Britain and the USA saw an increase in state
centralisation as well as the number of police, police powers and in
laws directed against the labour and radical movements.

As such, it would be a mistake (as many in the anti-globalisation
movement do) to contrast the market to the state. State and capital are
not opposed to each other -- in fact, the opposite is the case. The
modern state exists to protect capitalist rule, just as every state
exists to defend minority rule, and it is essential for nation states to
attract and retain capital within their borders to ensure their revenue
by having a suitably strong economy to tax. Globalisation is a state-led
initiative whose primary aim is to keep the economically dominant happy.
The states which are being "undermined" by globalisation are not
horrified by this process as certain protestors are, which should give
pause for thought. States are complicit in the process of globalisation
-- unsurprisingly, as they represent the ruling elites who favour and
benefit from globalisation. Moreover, with the advent of a "global
market" under GATT, corporations still need politicians to act for them
in creating a "free" market which best suits their interests. Therefore,
by backing powerful states, corporate elites can increase their
bargaining powers and help shape the "New World Order" in their own
image.

Governments may be, as Malatesta put it, the property owners
**gendarme**, but they can be influenced by their subjects, unlike
multinationals. NAFTA was designed to reduce this influence even more.
Changes in government policy reflect the changing needs of business,
modified, of course, by fear of the working population and its strength.
Which explains globalisation -- the need for capital to strengthen its
position vis--vis labour by pitting one labour force against -- and our
next step, namely to strengthen and globalise working class resistance.
Only when it is clear that the costs of globalisation -- in terms of
strikes, protests, boycotts, occupations, economic instability and so on
-- is higher than potential profits will business turn away from it.
Only international working class direct action and solidarity will get
results. Until that happens, we will see governments co-operating in the
process of globalisation.

So, for better or for worse, globalisation has become the latest buzz
word to describe the current stage of capitalism and so we shall use it
here. It use does have two positive side effects though. Firstly, it
draws attention to the increased size and power of transnational
corporations and their impact on global structures of governance **and**
the nation state. Secondly, it allows anarchists and other protesters to
raise the issue of international solidarity and a globalisation from
below which respects diversity and is based on people's needs, not
profit.

After all, as Rebecca DeWitt stresses, anarchism and the WTO *"are well
suited opponents and anarchism is benefiting from this fight. The WTO is
practically the epitome of an authoritarian structure of power to be
fought against. People came to Seattle because they knew that it was
wrong to let a secret body of officials make policies unaccountable to
anyone except themselves. A non-elected body, the WTO is attempting to
become more powerful than any national government . . . For anarchism,
the focus of global capitalism couldn't be more ideal."* [*"An Anarchist
Response to Seattle,"* pp. 5-12, **Social Anarchism**, no. 29, p. 6]

To sum up, globalisation will see imperialism change as capitalism
itself changes. The need for imperialism remains, as the interests of
private capital still need to be defended against the dispossessed. All
that changes is that the governments of the imperialistic nations become
even more accountable to capital and even less to their populations.

D.5.4 What is the relationship between imperialism and the social classes within capitalism?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The two main classes within capitalist society are, as we indicated in
[section B.7](secB7.html), the ruling class and the working class. The
grey area between these two classes is sometimes called the middle
class. As would be expected, different classes have different positions
in society and, therefore, different relationships with imperialism.
Moreover, we have to also take into account the differences resulting
from the relative positions of the nations in question in the world
economic and political systems. The ruling class in imperialist nations
will not have identical interests as those in the dominated ones, for
example. As such, our discussion will have indicate these differences as
well.

The relationship between the ruling class and imperialism is quite
simple: It is in favour of it when it supports its interests and when
the benefits outweigh the costs. Therefore, for imperialist countries,
the ruling class will always be in favour of expanding their influence
and power as long as it pays. If the costs outweigh the benefits, of
course, sections of the ruling class will argue against imperialist
adventures and wars (as, for example, elements of the US elite did when
it was clear that they would lose both the Vietnam war and, perhaps, the
class war at home by continuing it).

There are strong economic forces at work as well. Due to capital's need
to grow in order to survive and compete on the market, find new markets
and raw materials, it needs to expand (as we discussed in [section
D.5](secD5.html)). Consequently, it needs to conquer foreign markets and
gain access to cheap raw materials and labour. As such, a nation with a
powerful capitalist economy will need an aggressive and expansionist
foreign policy, which it achieves by buying politicians, initiating
media propaganda campaigns, funding right-wing think tanks, and so on,
as previously described.

Thus the ruling class benefits from, and so usually supports,
imperialism -- only, we stress, when the costs out-weight the benefits
will we see members of the elite oppose it. Which, of course, explains
the elites support for what is termed "globalisation." Needless to say,
the ruling class has done **very** well over the last few decades. For
example, in the US, the gaps between rich and poor **and** between the
rich and middle income reaching their widest point on record in 1997
(from the **Congressional Budget Office** study on Historic Effective
Tax Rates 1979-1997). The top 1% saw their after-tax incomes rise by
\$414,200 between 1979-97, the middle fifth by \$3,400 and the bottom
fifth fell by -\$100. The benefits of globalisation are concentrated at
the top, as is to be expected (indeed, almost all of the income gains
from economic growth between 1989 and 1998 accrued to the top 5% of
American families).

Needless to say, the local ruling classes of the dominated nations may
not see it that way. While, of course, local ruling classes do extremely
well from imperialism, they need not **like** the position of dependence
and subordination they are placed in. Moreover, the steady stream of
profits leaving the country for foreign corporations cannot be used to
enrich local elites even more. Just as the capitalist dislikes the state
or a union limiting their power or taxing/reducing their profits, so the
dominated nation's ruling class dislikes imperialist domination and will
seek to ignore or escape it whenever possible. This is because *"every
State, in so far as it wants to live not only on paper and not merely by
sufferance of its neighbours, but to enjoy real independence --
inevitably must become a conquering State."* [Bakunin, **Op. Cit.**, p.
211] So the local ruling class, while benefiting from imperialism, may
dislike its dependent position and, if it feels strong enough, may
contest their position and gain more independence for themselves.

Many of the post-war imperialist conflicts were of this nature, with
local elites trying to disentangle themselves from an imperialist power.
Similarly, many conflicts (either fought directly by imperialist powers
or funded indirectly by them) were the direct result of ensuring that a
nation trying to free itself from imperialist domination did not serve
as a positive example for other satellite nations. Which means that
local ruling classes can come into conflict with imperialist ones. These
can express themselves as wars of national liberation, for example, or
just as normal conflicts (such as the first Gulf War). As competition is
at the heart of capitalism, we should not be surprised that sections of
the international ruling class disagree and fight each other.

The relationship between the working class and imperialism is more
complex. In traditional imperialism, foreign trade and the export of
capital often make it possible to import cheap goods from abroad and
increase profits for the capitalist class, and in this sense, workers
can gain because they can improve their standard of living without
necessarily coming into system threatening conflict with their employers
(i.e. struggle can win reforms which otherwise would be strongly
resisted by the capitalist class). Thus living standard may be improved
by low wage imports while rising profits may mean rising wages for some
key workers (CEOs giving themselves higher wages because they control
their own pay rises does not, of course, count!). Therefore, in
imperialistic nations during economic boom times, one finds a tendency
among the working class (particularly the unorganised sector) to support
foreign military adventurism and an aggressive foreign policy. This is
part of what is often called the "embourgeoisement" of the proletariat,
or the co-optation of labour by capitalist ideology and "patriotic"
propaganda. Needless to say, those workers made redundant by these cheap
imports may not consider this as a benefit and, by increasing the pool
of unemployment and the threat of companies outsourcing work and moving
plants to other countries, help hold or drive down wages for most of the
working population (as has happened in various degrees in Western
countries since the 1970s).

However, as soon as international rivalry between imperialist powers
becomes too intense, capitalists will attempt to maintain their profit
rates by depressing wages and laying people off in their own country.
Workers' real wages will also suffer if military spending goes beyond a
certain point. Moreover, if militarism leads to actual war, the working
class has much more to lose than to gain as they will be fighting it and
making the necessary sacrifices on the "home front" in order to win it.
In addition, while imperialism can improve living conditions (for a
time), it cannot remove the hierarchical nature of capitalism and
therefore cannot stop the class struggle, the spirit of revolt and the
instinct for freedom. So, while workers in the developed nations may
sometimes benefit from imperialism, such periods cannot last long and
cannot end the class struggle.

Rudolf Rocker was correct to stress the contradictory (and
self-defeating) nature of working class support for imperialism:

> *"No doubt some small comforts may sometimes fall to the share of the
> workers when the bourgeoisie of their country attain some advantage
> over that of another country; but this always happens at the cost of
> their own freedom and the economic oppression of other peoples. The
> worker . . . participates to some extent in the profits which, without
> effort on their part, fall into the laps of the bourgeoisie of his
> country from the unrestrained exploitation of colonial peoples; but
> sooner or later there comes the time when these people too, wake up,
> and he has to pay all the more dearly for the small advantages he has
> enjoyed. . . . Small gains arising from increased opportunity of
> employment and higher wages may accrue to the workers in a successful
> state from the carving out of new markets at the cost of others; but
> at the same time their brothers on the other side of the border have
> to pay for them by unemployment and the lowering of the standards of
> labour. The result is an ever widening rift in the international
> labour movement . . . By this rift the liberation of the workers from
> the yoke of wage-slavery is pushed further and further into the
> distance. As long as the worker ties up his interests with those of
> the bourgeoisie of his country instead of with his class, he must
> logically also take in his stride all the results of that
> relationship. He must stand ready to fight the wars of the possessing
> classes for the retention and extension of their markets, and to
> defend any injustice they may perpetrate on other people . . . Only
> when the workers in every country shall come to understand clearly
> that their interests are everywhere the same, and out of this
> understanding learn to act together, will the effective basis be laid
> for the international liberation of the working class."*
> [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 71]

Ultimately, any *"collaboration of workers and employers . . . can only
result in the workers being condemned to . . . eat the crumbs that fall
from the rich man's table."* [Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 70-1] This
applies to both the imperialist and the satellite state, of course.
Moreover, as imperialism needs to have a strong military force available
for it and as a consequence it required militarism at home. This has an
impact at home in that resources which could be used to improve the
quality of life for all are funnelled towards producing weapons (and
profits for corporations). Moreover, militarism is directed not only at
external enemies, but also against those who threaten elite role at
home. We discuss militarism in more detail in [section D.8](secD8.html).

However, under globalisation things are somewhat different. With the
increase in world trade and the signing of "free trade" agreements like
NAFTA, the position of workers in the imperialist nations need not
improve. For example, since the 1970s, the wages -- adjusted for
inflation -- of the typical American employee have actually fallen, even
as the economy has grown. In other words, the majority of Americans are
no longer sharing in the gains from economic growth. This is very
different from the previous era, for example 1946-73, when the real
wages of the typical worker rose by about 80 percent. Not that this
globalisation has aided the working class in the "developing" nations.
In Latin America, for example, GDP per capita grew by 75 percent from
1960-1980, whereas between 1981 and 1998 it has only risen 6 percent.
[Mark Weisbrot, Dean Baker, Robert Naiman, and Gila Neta, **Growth May
Be Good for the Poor-- But are IMF and World Bank Policies Good for
Growth?**]

As Chomsky noted, *"[t]o the credit of the **Wall Street Journal**, it
points out that there's a 'but.' Mexico has 'a stellar reputation,' and
it's an economic miracle, but the population is being devastated.
There's been a 40 percent drop in purchasing power since 1994. The
poverty rate is going up and is in fact rising fast. The economic
miracle wiped out, they say, a generation of progress; most Mexicans are
poorer than their parents. Other sources reveal that agriculture is
being wiped out by US-subsidised agricultural imports, manufacturing
wages have declines about 20 percent, general wages even more. In fact,
NAFTA is a remarkable success: it's the first trade agreement in history
that's succeeded in harming the populations of all three countries
involved. That's quite an achievement."* In the U.S., *"the medium
income (half above, half below) for families has gotten back now to what
it was in 1989, which is below what it was in the 1970s."* [**Rogue
States**, pp. 98-9 and p. 213]

An achievement which was predicted. But, of course, while occasionally
admitting that globalisation may harm the wages of workers in developed
countries, it is argued that it will benefit those in the "developing"
world. It is amazing how open to socialist arguments capitalists and
their supporters are, as long as its not their income being
redistributed! As can be seen from NAFTA, this did not happen. Faced
with cheap imports, agriculture and local industry would be undermined,
increasing the number of workers seeking work, so forcing down wages as
the bargaining power of labour is decreased. Combine this with
governments which act in the interests of capital (as always) and force
the poor to accept the costs of economic austerity and back business
attempts to break unions and workers resistance then we have a situation
where productivity can increase dramatically while wages fall behind
(either relatively or absolutely). As has been the case in both the USA
and Mexico, for example.

This reversal has had much to do with changes in the global "rules of
the game," which have greatly favoured corporations and weakened labour.
Unsurprisingly, the North American union movement has opposed NAFTA and
other treaties which empower business over labour. Therefore, the
position of labour within both imperialist and dominated nations can be
harmed under globalisation, so ensuring international solidarity and
organisation have a stronger reason to be embraced by both sides. This
should not come as a surprise, however, as the process towards
globalisation was accelerated by intensive class struggle across the
world and was used as a tool against the working class (see [last
section](secD5.html#secd53)).

It is difficult to generalise about the effects of imperialism on the
"middle class" (i.e. professionals, self-employed, small business
people, peasants and so on -- **not** middle income groups, who are
usually working class). Some groups within this strata stand to gain,
others to lose (in particular, peasants who are impoverished by cheap
imports of food). This lack of common interests and a common
organisational base makes the middle class unstable and susceptible to
patriotic sloganeering, vague theories of national or racial
superiority, or fascist scapegoating of minorities for society's
problems. For this reason, the ruling class finds it relatively easy to
recruit large sectors of the middle class to an aggressive and
expansionist foreign policy, through media propaganda campaigns. Since
many in organised labour tends to perceive imperialism as being against
its overall best interests, and thus usually opposes it, the ruling
class is able to intensify the hostility of the middle class to the
organised working class by portraying the latter as "unpatriotic" and
"unwilling to sacrifice" for the "national interest." Sadly, the trade
union bureaucracy usually accepts the "patriotic" message, particularly
at times of war, and often collaborates with the state to further
imperialistic interests. This eventually brings them into conflict with
the rank-and-file, whose interests are ignored even more than usual when
this occurs.

To summarise, the ruling class is usually pro-imperialism -- as long as
it is in their interests (i.e. the benefits outweigh the costs). The
working class, regardless of any short term benefit its members may
gain, end up paying the costs of imperialism by having to fight its wars
and pay for the militarism it produces. So, under imperialism, like any
form of capitalism, the working class will pay the bill required to
maintain it. This means that we have a real interest in ending it --
particularly as under globalisation the few benefits that used to accrue
to us are much less.
