D.6 Are anarchists against Nationalism?
=======================================

Yes, anarchists are opposed to nationalism in all its forms. British
anarchists Stuart Christie and Albert Meltzer simply point out the
obvious: *"As a nation implies a state, it is not possible to be a
nationalist and an anarchist."* [**The Floodgates of Anarchy**, p. 59fn]

To understand this position, we must first define what anarchists mean
by nationalism. For many people, it is just the natural attachment to
home, the place one grew up. Nationality, as Bakunin noted, is a
*"natural and social fact,"* as *"every people and the smallest
folk-unit has its own character, its own specific mode of existence, its
own way of speaking, feeling, thinking, and acting; and it is this
idiosyncrasy that constitutes the essence of nationality."* [**The
Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 325] These feelings, however,
obviously do not exist in a social vacuum. They cannot be discussed
without also discussing the nature of these groups and what classes and
other social hierarchies they contain. Once we do this, the anarchist
opposition to nationalism becomes clear.

This means that anarchists distinguish between **nationality** (that is,
cultural affinity) and **nationalism** (confined to the state and
government itself). This allows us to define what we support and oppose
-- nationalism, at root, is destructive and reactionary, whereas
cultural difference and affinity is a source of community, social
diversity and vitality.

Such diversity is to be celebrated and allowed to express it itself on
its own terms. Or, as Murray Bookchin puts it, *"[t]hat specific peoples
should be free to fully develop their own cultural capacities is not
merely a right but a desideratum. The world would be a drab place indeed
if a magnificent mosaic of different cultures does not replace the
largely decultured and homogenised world created by modern capitalism."*
[*"Nationalism and the 'National Question'"*, pp. 8-36. **Society and
Nature**, No. 5, pp. 28-29] But, as he also warns, such cultural freedom
and variety should **not** be confused with nationalism. The latter is
far more (and ethically, a lot less) than simple recognition of cultural
uniqueness and love of home. Nationalism is the love of, or the desire
to create, a nation-state and for this reason anarchists are opposed to
it, in all its forms.

This means that nationalism cannot and must not be confused with
nationality. The later is a product of social processes while the former
to a product of state action and elite rule. Social evolution cannot be
squeezed into the narrow, restricting borders of the nation state
without harming the individuals whose lives **make** that social
development happen in the first place.

The state, as we have seen, is a centralised body invested with power
and a social monopoly of force. As such it pre-empts the autonomy of
localities and peoples, and in the name of the "nation" crushes the
living, breathing reality of "nations" (i.e. peoples and their cultures)
with one law, one culture and one "official" history. Unlike most
nationalists, anarchists recognise that almost all "nations" are in fact
not homogeneous, and so consider nationality to be far wider in
application than just lines on maps, created by conquest. Hence we think
that recreating the centralised state in a slightly smaller area, as
nationalist movements generally advocate, cannot solve what is called
the "national question."

Ultimately, as Rudolf Rocker argued, the *"**nation is not the cause,
but the result of the state. It is the state that creates the nation,
not the nation the state**."* Every state *"is an artificial mechanism
imposed upon [people] from above by some ruler, and it never pursues any
other ends but to defend and make secure the interests of privileged
minorities within society."* Nationalism *"has never been anything but
the political religion of the modern state."* [**Nationalism and
Culture**, p. 200 and p. 201] It was created to reinforce the state by
providing it with the loyalty of a people of shared linguistic, ethnic,
and cultural affinities. And if these shared affinities do not exist,
the state will create them by centralising education in its own hands,
imposing an "official" language and attempting to crush cultural
differences from the peoples within its borders.

This is because it treats groups of people not as unique individuals but
rather *"as if they were individuals with definite traits of character
and peculiar psychic properties or intellectual qualities"* which *"must
irrevocably lead to the most monstrously deceptive conclusions."*
[Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, p. 437] This creates the theoretical
justification for authoritarianism, as it allows the stamping out of all
forms of individuality and local customs and cultures which do not
concur with the abstract standard. In addition, nationalism hides class
differences within the "nation" by arguing that all people must unite
around their supposedly common interests (as members of the same
"nation"), when in fact they have nothing in common due to the existence
of hierarchies and classes.

Malatesta recognised this when he noted that you cannot talk about
states like they were *"homogeneous ethnographic units, each having its
proper interests, aspirations, and mission, in opposition to the
interests, aspirations, and mission of rival units. This may be true
relatively, as long as the oppressed, and chiefly the workers, have no
self-consciousness, fail to recognise the injustice of their inferior
position, and make themselves the docile tools of the oppressors."* In
that case, it is *"the dominating class only that counts"* and this
*"owning to its desire to conserve and to enlarge its power . . . may
excite racial ambitions and hatred, and send its nation, its flock,
against 'foreign' countries, with a view to releasing them from their
present oppressors, and submitting them to its own political and
economical domination."* Thus anarchists have *"always fought against
patriotism, which is a survival of the past, and serves well the
interests of the oppressors."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and
Ideas**, p. 244]

Thus nationalism is a key means of obscuring class differences and
getting those subject to hierarchies to accept them as "natural." As
such, it plays an important role in keeping the current class system
going (unsurprisingly, the nation-state and its nationalism arose at the
same time as capitalism). As well dividing the working class
internationally, it is also used within a nation state to turn working
class people born in a specific nation against immigrants. By getting
native-born workers to blame newcomers, the capitalist class weakens the
resistance to their power as well as turning economic issues into
racial/nationalist ones. In practice, however, nationalism is a *"state
ideology"* which boils down to saying it is *"'our country' as opposed
to **theirs**, meaning **we** were the serfs of the government first."*
[Christie and Meltzer, **Op. Cit.**, p. 71] It tries to confuse love of
where you grow up or live with *"love of the State"* and so nationalism
is *"not the faithful expression"* of this natural feeling but rather
*"an expression distorted by means of a false abstraction, always for
the benefit of an exploiting minority."* [Bakunin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 324]

Needless to say, the nationalism of the bourgeoisie often comes into
direct conflict with the people who make up the nation it claims to
love. Bakunin simply stated a truism when he noted that the capitalist
class *"would rather submit"* to a *"foreign yoke than renounce its
social privileges and accept economic equality."* This does not mean
that the *"bourgeoisie is unpatriotic; on the contrary patriotism, in
the narrowest sense, is its essential virtue. But the bourgeoisie love
their country only because, for them, the country, represented by the
State, safeguards their economic, political, and social privileges. Any
nation withdrawing their protection would be disowned by them,
Therefore, for the bourgeoisie, the country **is** the State. Patriots
of the State, they become furious enemies of the masses if the people,
tried of sacrificing themselves, of being used as a passive footstool by
the government, revolt against it. If the bourgeoisie had to choose
between the masses who rebel against the State"* and a foreign invader,
*"they would surely choose the latter."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, pp.
185-6] Given this, Bakunin would have not been surprised by either the
rise of Fascism in Italy nor when the Allies in post-fascist Italy
*"crush[ed] revolutionary movements"* and gave *"their support to
fascists who made good by becoming Allied Quislings."* [Marie-Louise
Berneri, **Neither East Nor West**, p. 97]

In addition, nationalism is often used to justify the most horrific
crimes, with the Nation effectively replacing God in terms of justifying
injustice and oppression and allowing individuals to wash their hands of
their own actions. For *"under cover of the nation everything can be
hid"* argues Rocker (echoing Bakunin, we must note). *"The national flag
covers every injustice, every inhumanity, every lie, every outrage,
every crime. The collective responsibility of the nation kills the sense
of justice of the individual and brings man to the point where he
overlooks injustice done; where, indeed, it may appear to him a
meritorious act if committed in the interests of the nation."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 252] So when discussing nationalism:

> *"we must not forget that we are always dealing with the organised
> selfishness of privileged minorities which hide behind the skirts of
> the nation, hide behind the credulity of the masses. We speak of
> national interests, national capital, national spheres of interest,
> national honour, and national spirit; but we forget that behind all
> this there are hidden merely the selfish interests of power-loving
> politicians and money-loving business men for whom the nation is a
> convenient cover to hide their personal greed and their schemes for
> political power from the eyes of the world."* [Rocker, **Op. Cit.**,
> pp. 252-3]

Hence we see the all too familiar sight of successful "national
liberation" movements replacing foreign oppression with a home-based
one. Nationalist governments introduce *"the worse features of the very
empires from which oppressed peoples have tried to shake loose. Not only
do they typically reproduce state machines that are as oppressive as the
ones that colonial powers imposed on them, but they reinforce those
machines with cultural, religious, ethnic, and xenophobic traits that
are often used to foster regional and even domestic hatreds and
sub-imperialisms."* [Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 30] This is unsurprising
as nationalism delivers power to local ruling classes as it relies on
taking state power. As a result, nationalism can never deliver freedom
to the working class (the vast majority of a given "nation") as its
function is to build a mass support base for local elites angry with
imperialism for blocking their ambitions to rule and exploit "their"
nation and fellow country people.

In fact, nationalism is no threat to capitalism or even to imperialism.
It replaces imperialist domination with local elite and foreign
oppression and exploitation with native versions. That sometimes the
local elites, like imperial ones, introduce reforms which benefit the
majority does not change the nature of the new regimes although this
does potentially bring them into conflict with imperialist powers. As
Chomsky notes, for imperialism the *"threat is not nationalism, but
independent nationalism, which focuses on the needs of the population,
not merely the wealthy sectors and the foreign investors to whom they
are linked. Subservient nationalism that does not succumb to these
heresies is quite welcome"* and it is *"quite willing to deal with them
if they are willing to sell the country to the foreign master, as Third
World elites (including now those in much of Eastern Europe) are often
quite willing to do, since they may greatly benefit even as their
countries are destroyed."* [*"Nationalism and the New World Order"* pp.
1-7, **Society and Nature**, No. 5, pp. 4-5] However, independent
nationalism is like social democracy in imperialist countries in that it
may, at best, reduce the evils of the class system and social
hierarchies but it never gets rid of them (at worse, it creates new
classes and hierarchies clustered around the state bureaucracy).

Anarchists oppose nationalism in all its forms as harmful to the
interests of those who make up a given nation and their cultural
identities. As Rocker put it, peoples and groups of peoples have
*"existed long before the state put in its appearance"* and *"develop
without the assistance of the state. They are only hindered in their
natural development when some external power interferes by violence with
their life and forces it into patterns which it has not known before."*
A nation, in contrast, *"encompasses a whole array of different peoples
and groups of peoples who have by more or less violent means been
pressed together into the frame of a common state."* In other words, the
*"nation is, then, unthinkable without the state."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
201]

Given this, we do support nationality and cultural difference, diversity
and self-determination as a natural expression of our love of freedom
and support for decentralisation. This should not, however, be confused
with supporting nationalism. In addition, it goes without saying that a
nationality that take on notions of racial, cultural or ethnic
"superiority" or "purity" or believe that cultural differences are
somehow rooted in biology get no support from anarchists. Equally
unsurprisingly, anarchists have been the most consistent foes of that
particularly extreme form of nationalism, fascism (*"a politico-economic
state where the ruling class of each country behaves towards its own
people as . . . it has behaved to the colonial peoples under its heel."*
[Bart de Ligt, **The Conquest of Violence**, p. 74]). Moreover, we do
not support those aspects of specific cultures which reflect social
hierarchies (for example, many traditional cultures have sexist and
homophobic tendencies). By supporting nationality, we do not advocate
tolerating these. Nor do the negative aspects of specific cultures
justify another state imposing its will on it in the name of
"civilising" it. As history shows, such "humanitarian" intervention is
just a mask for justifying imperialist conquest and exploitation and it
rarely works as cultural change has to flow from below, by the actions
of the oppressed themselves, in order to be successful.

In opposition to nationalism, Anarchists are *"proud of being
internationalists."* We seek *"the end of all oppression and of all
exploitation,"* and so aim *"to awaken a consciousness of the antagonism
of interests between dominators and dominated, between exploiters and
workers, and to develop the class struggle inside each country, and the
solidarity among all workers across the frontiers, as against any
prejudice and any passion of either race or nationality."* [Malatesta,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 244]

We must stress that anarchists, being opposed to all forms of
exploitation and oppression, are against a situation of external
domination where the one country dominates the people and territory of
another country (i.e., imperialism -- see [section D.5](secD5.html)).
This flows from our basic principles as *"[t]rue internationalism will
never be attained except by the independence of each nationality, little
or large, compact or disunited -- just as anarchy is in the independence
of each individual. If we say no government of man over man, how can
[we] permit the government of conquered nationalities by the conquering
nationalities?"* [Kropotkin, quoted by Martin A. Miller, **Kropotkin**,
p. 231] As we discuss in the [next section](secD7.html), while rejecting
Nationalism anarchists do not necessarily oppose national liberation
struggles against foreign domination.
