Section E - What do anarchists think causes ecological problems?
================================================================

This section of the FAQ expands upon section D.4 (["What is the
relationship between capitalism and the ecological
crisis?"](secD4.html)) in which we indicated that since capitalism is
based upon the principle of "grow or die," a "green" capitalism is
impossible. By its very nature capitalism must expand, creating new
markets, increasing production and consumption, and so invading more
ecosystems, using more resources, and upsetting the interrelations and
delicate balances that exist with ecosystems. We have decided to include
a separate section on this to stress how important green issues are to
anarchism and what a central place ecology has in modern anarchism.

Anarchists have been at the forefront of ecological thinking and the
green movement for decades. This is unsurprisingly, as many key concepts
of anarchism are also key concepts in ecological thought. In addition,
the ecological implications of many anarchist ideas (such as
decentralisation, integration of industry and agriculture, and so forth)
has meant that anarchists have quickly recognised the importance of
ecological movements and ideas.

Murray Bookchin in particular has placed anarchist ideas at the centre
of green debate as well as bringing out the links anarchism has with
ecological thinking. His eco-anarchism (which he called **social
ecology**) was based on emphasising the **social** nature of the
ecological problems we face. In such classic works as **Post-Scarcity
Anarchism**, **Toward an Ecological Society** and **The Ecology of
Freedom** he has consistently argued that humanity's domination of
nature is the result of domination **within** humanity itself.

However, anarchism has always had an ecological dimension. As Peter
Marshall notes in his extensive overview of ecological thought,
ecologists *"find in Proudhon two of their most cherished social
principles: federalism and decentralisation."* He *"stands as an
important forerunner of the modern ecological movement for his stress on
the close communion between humanity and nature, for his belief in
natural justice, for his doctrine of federalism and for his insight that
liberty is the mother and not the daughter of order."* [**Nature's
Web**, p. 307 and p. 308] For Proudhon, a key problem was that people
viewed the land as *"something which enables them to levy a certain
revenue each year. Gone is the deep feeling for nature."* People *"no
longer love the soil. Landowners sell it, lease it, divide it into
shares, prostitute it, bargain with it and treat it as an object of
speculation. Farmers torture it, violate it, exhaust it and sacrifice it
to their impatient desire for gain. They never become one with it."* We
*"have lost our feeling for nature."* [**Selected Writings of
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 261]

Other precursors of eco-anarchism can be found in Peter Kropotkin's
writings. For example, in his classic work **Fields, Factories and
Workshops**, Kropotkin argued the case for *"small is beautiful"* 70
years before E. F. Schumacher coined the phase, advocating *"a
harmonious balance between agriculture and industry. Instead of the
concentration of large factories in cities, he called for economic as
well as social decentralisation, believing that diversity is the best
way to organise production by mutual co-operation. He favoured the
scattering of industry throughout the country and the integration of
industry and agriculture at the local level."* His vision of a
decentralised commonwealth based on an integration of agriculture and
industry as well as manual and intellectual work has obvious parallels
with much modern green thought, as does his stress on the need for
**appropriate** levels of technology and his recognition that the
capitalist market distorts the development, size and operation of
technology and industry. Through his investigations in geography and
biology, Kropotkin discovered species to be interconnected with each
other and with their environment. **Mutual Aid** is the classic source
book on the survival value of co-operation within species which
Kropotkin regarded as an important factor of evolution, arguing that
those who claim competition within and between species is the chief or
only factor have distorted Darwin's work. All this ensures that
Kropotkin is *"a great inspiration to the modern ecological movement."*
[Marshall, **Op. Cit.**, p. 311 and p. 312]

As well as Kropotkin's work, special note must be made of French
anarchist Elisee Reclus. As Clark and Martin note, Reclus introduced *"a
strongly ecological dimension into the tradition of anarchist and
libertarian social theory".* He made *"a powerful contribution to
introducing this more ecological perspective into anarchist thought,"*
of *"looking beyond the project of planetary domination and attempting
to restore humanity to its rightful place within, rather than above,
nature."* Reclus, *"much more than Kropotkin, introduced into anarchist
theory themes that were later developed in social ecology and
eco-anarchism."* [John P. Clark and Camille Martin (ed.), **Anarchy,
Geography, Modernity**, p. 19] For example, in 1866 Reclus argued as
follows:

> "Wild nature is so beautiful. Is it really necessary for man, in
> seizing it, to proceed with mathematical precision in exploiting each
> new conquered domain and then mark his possession with vulgar
> constructions and perfectly straight boundaries? If this continues to
> occur, the harmonious contrasts that are one of the beauties of the
> earth will soon give way to depressing uniformity . . .
>
> "The question of knowing which of the works of man serves to beautify
> and which contributes to the degradation of external nature can seem
> pointless to so-called practical minds; nevertheless, it is a matter
> of the greatest importance. Humanity's development is most intimately
> connected with the nature that surrounds it. A secret harmony exists
> between the earth and the peoples whom it nourishes, and when reckless
> societies allow themselves to meddle with that which creates the
> beauty of their domain, they always end up regretting it." [quoted by
> Clark and Martin, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 125-6]

*"Man,"* Reclus says, can find beauty in *"the intimate and deeply
seated harmony of his work with that of nature."* Like the
eco-anarchists a century later, he stressed the social roots of our
environmental problems arguing that a *"complete union of Man with
Nature can only be effected by the destruction of the frontiers between
castes as well as between peoples."* He also indicated that the
exploitation of nature is part and parcel of capitalism, for *"it
matters little to the industrialist . . . whether he blackens the
atmosphere with fumes . . . or contaminates it with foul-smelling
vapours."* *"Since nature is so often desecrated by speculators
precisely because of its beauty,"* Reclus argued, *"it is not surprising
that farmers and industrialists, in their own exploitative endeavours,
fail to consider whether they contribute to defacing the land."* The
capitalist is *"concerned not with making his work harmonious with the
landscape."* [quoted by Clark and Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 28, p. 30, p.
124 and p. 125] Few modern day eco-anarchists would disagree.

So, while a specifically ecological anarchism did not develop until the
revolutionary work done by Murray Bookchin from the 1950's onwards,
anarchist theory has had a significant "proto-green" content since at
least the 1860s. What Bookchin and writers like him did was to make
anarchism's implicit ecological aspects explicit, a work which has
immensely enriched anarchist theory and practice.

In addition to pointing out the key role ecology plays within anarchism,
this section is required to refute some commonly proposed solutions to
the ecological problems we face. While it is wonderful that green ideas
have becoming increasingly commonplace, the sad fact is that many people
have jumped on the green bandwagon whose basic assumptions and practices
are deeply anti-ecological. Thus we find fascists expounding on their
environmental vision or defenders of capitalism proposing "ecological"
solutions based on expanding private property rights. Similarly, we find
the notion of green consumerism raised as viable means of greening the
planet (rather than as an addition to social struggle) or a focus on
symptoms (such as population growth) rather than root causes. This
section refutes many such flawed suggestions.

A key concept to remember in our discussion is that between
environmentalism and ecology. Following Bookchin, eco-anarchists
contrast their ideas with those who seek to reform capitalism and make
it more green (a position they term *"environmentalism"* rather than
ecology). The latter *"focus on specific issues like air and water
pollution"* while ignoring the social roots of the problems they are
trying to solve. In other words, their outlook *"rest[s] on an
instrumental, almost engineering approach to solving ecological
dislocations. To all appearances, they wanted to adapt the natural world
to the needs of the existing society and its exploitative, capitalist
imperatives by way of reforms that minimise harm to human health and
well-being. The much-needed goals of formulating a project for radical
social change and for cultivating a new sensibility toward the natural
world tended to fall outside the orbit of their practical concerns."*
Eco-anarchists, while supporting such partial struggles, stress that
*"these problems originate in a hierarchical, class, and today,
competitive capitalist system that nourishes a view of the natural world
as a mere agglomeration of 'resources' for human production and
consumption."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, pp. 15-6] This means that
while some kind of environmentalism may be possible under capitalism or
some other authoritarian system, an ecological approach is impossible.
Simply put, the concerns of ecology cannot be squeezed into a
hierarchical perspective or private property. Just as an eco-system
cannot be commanded, divided and enclosed, nor can a truly ecological
vision. Attempts to do so will impoverish both.

As we discuss in the [next section](secE1.html), for anarchists the root
cause of our ecological problems is hierarchy in society compounded by a
capitalist economy. For anarchists, the notion of an ecological
capitalism is, literally, impossible. Libertarian socialist Takis
Fotopoulous has argued that the main reason why the project of
"greening" capitalism is just a utopian dream *"lies in a fundamental
contradiction that exists between the logic and dynamic of the growth
economy, on the one hand, and the attempt to condition this dynamic with
qualitative interests"* on the other. [*"Development or Democracy?"*,
pp. 57-92, **Society and Nature**, No. 7, p. 82] Green issues, like
social ones, are inherently qualitative in nature and, as such, it is
unsurprising that a system based on profit would ignore them.

Under capitalism, ethics, nature and humanity all have a price tag. And
that price tag is god. This is understandable as every hierarchical
social system requires a belief-system. Under feudalism, the
belief-system came from the Church, whereas under capitalism, it
pretends to come from science, whose biased practitioners (usually
funded by the state and capital) are the new priesthood. Like the old
priesthoods, only those members who produce "objective research" become
famous and influential -- "objective research" being that which accepts
the status quo as "natural" and produces what the elite want to hear
(i.e. apologetics for capitalism and elite rule will always be praised
as "objective" and "scientific" regardless of its actual scientific and
factual content, the infamous "bell curve" and Malthus's "Law of
Population" being classic examples). More importantly, capitalism needs
science to be able to measure and quantify everything in order to sell
it. This mathematical faith is reflected in its politics and economics,
where quantity is more important than quality, where 5 votes are better
than 2 votes, where \$5 is better than \$2. And like all religions,
capitalism needs sacrifice. In the name of "free enterprise," "economic
efficiency," "stability" and "growth" it sacrifices individuality,
freedom, humanity, and nature for the power and profits of the few.

Understanding the social roots of the problems we face is the key. Many
greens attack what they consider the "wrong ideas" of modern society,
its "materialistic values" and counter-pose **new** ideas, more in tune
with a green society. This approach, however, misses the point. Ideas
and values do not "just happen", but are the **product** of a given set
of social relationships and the struggles they produce. This means that
it is not just a matter of changing our values in a way that places
humanity in harmony with nature (important though that is), but also of
understanding the **social** and **structural** origins of the
ecological crisis. Ideas and values **do** need to be challenged, but
unless the authoritarian social relationships, hierarchy and
inequalities in power (i.e. what produces these values and ideas) are
also challenged and, more importantly, **changed** an ecological society
is impossible. So unless other Greens recognise that this crisis did not
develop in a social vacuum and is not the "fault" of people as
**people** (as opposed to people in a hierarchical society), little can
be done root out the systemic causes of the problems that we and the
planet face.

Besides its alliance with the ecology movement, eco-anarchism also finds
allies in the feminist and peace movements, which it regards, like the
ecology movement, as implying the need for anarchist principles. Thus
eco-anarchists think that global competition between nation-states is
responsible not only for the devouring of nature but is also the primary
cause of international military tensions, as nations seek to dominate
each other by military force or the threat thereof. As international
competition becomes more intense and weapons of mass destruction spread,
the seeds are being sown for catastrophic global warfare involving
nuclear, chemical, and/or biological weapons. Because such warfare would
be the ultimate ecological disaster, eco-anarchism and the peace
movement are but two aspects of the same basic project. Similarly,
eco-anarchists recognise that domination of nature and male domination
of women have historically gone hand in hand, so that eco-feminism is
yet another aspect of eco-anarchism. Since feminism, ecology, and peace
are key issues of the Green movement, anarchists believe that many
Greens are implicitly committed to anarchism, whether they realise it or
not, and hence that they should adopt anarchist principles of direct
action rather than getting bogged down in trying to elect people to
state offices.

Here we discuss some of the main themes of eco-anarchism and consider a
few suggestions by non-anarchists about how to protect the environment.
In [section E.1](secE1.html), we summarise why anarchists consider why a
green society cannot be a capitalist one (and vice versa). [Section
E.2](secE2.html) presents a short overview of what an ecological society
would be like. [Section E.3](secE3.html) refutes the false capitalist
claim that the answer to the ecological crisis is to privatise
everything while [section E.4](secE4.html) discusses why capitalism is
anti-ecological and its defenders, invariably, anti-green. Then we
indicate why green consumerism is doomed to failure in [section
E.5](secE5.html) before, in [section E.6](secE6.html), refuting the myth
that population growth is a **cause** of ecological problems rather than
the **effect** of deeper issues.

Obviously, these are hardly the end of the matter. Some tactics popular
in the green movement are shared by others and we discuss these
elsewhere. For example, the issue of electing Green Parties to power
will be addressed in section J.2.4 (["Surely voting for radical parties
will be effective?"](secJ2.html#secj24)) and so will be ignored here.
The question of "single-issue" campaigns (like C.N.D. and Friends of the
Earth) will be discussed in [section J.1.4](secJ1.html#secj14). Remember
that eco-anarchists, like all anarchists, take a keen interest in many
other issues and struggles and just because we do not discuss something
here does not mean we are indifferent to it.

For anarchists, unless we resolve the underlying contradictions within
society, which stem from domination, hierarchy and a capitalist economy,
ecological disruption will continue and grow, putting our Earth in
increasing danger. We need to resist the system and create new values
based on quality, not quantity. We must return the human factor to our
alienated society before we alienate ourselves completely off the
planet.

Peter Marshall's **Nature's Web** presents a good overview of all
aspects of green thought over human history from a libertarian
perspective, including excellent summaries of such anarchists as
Proudhon, Kropotkin and Bookchin (as well as libertarian socialist
William Morris and his ecologically balanced utopia **News from
Nowhere**).
