E.2 What do eco-anarchists propose instead of capitalism?
=========================================================

Given what eco-anarchists consider to be the root cause of our
ecological problems (as discussed in the [last section](secE1.html)), it
should come as no surprise that they think that the current ecological
crisis can only be really solved by eliminating those root causes,
namely by ending domination within humanity and creating an anarchist
society. So here we will summarise the vision of the free society
eco-anarchists advocate before discussing the limitations of various
non-anarchist proposals to solve environmental problems in subsequent
sections.

However, before so doing it is important to stress that eco-anarchists
consider it important to fight against ecological and social problems
today. Like all anarchists, they argue for direct action and solidarity
to struggle for improvements and reforms under the current system. This
means that eco-anarchism *"supports every effort to conserve the
environment"* in the here and now. The key difference between them and
environmentalists is that eco-anarchists place such partial struggles
within a larger context of changing society as a whole. The former is
part of *"waging a delaying action against the rampant destruction of
the environment"* the other is *"a create movement to totally
revolutionise the social relations of humans to each other and of
humanity to nature."* [Murray Bookchin, **Toward an Ecological
Society**, p. 43] This is one of the key differences between an
ecological perspective and an environmental one (a difference discussed
in [section E.1.2](secE1.html#sece12)). Finding ways to resist
capitalism's reduction of the living world to resources and commodities
and its plunder of the planet, our resistance to specific aspects of an
eco-cidal system, are merely a starting point in the critique of the
whole system and of a wider struggle for a better society. As such, our
outline of an ecological society (or ecotopia) is not meant to suggest
an indifference to partial struggles and reforms within capitalism. It
is simply to indicate why anarchists are confident that ending
capitalism and the state will create the necessary preconditions for a
free and ecologically viable society.

This perspective flows from the basic insight of eco-anarchism, namely
that ecological problems are not separate from social ones. As we are
part of nature, it means that how we interact and shape with it will be
influenced by how we interact and shape ourselves. As Reclus put it
*"every people gives, so to speak, new clothing to the surrounding
nature. By means of its fields and roads, by its dwelling and every
manner of construction, by the way it arranges the trees and the
landscape in general, the populace expresses the character of its own
ideals. If it really has a feeling for beauty, it will make nature more
beautiful. If, on the other hand, the great mass of humanity should
remain as it is today, crude, egoistic and inauthentic, it will continue
to mark the face of the earth with its wretched traces. Thus will the
poet's cry of desperation become a reality: 'Where can I flee? Nature
itself has become hideous.'"* In order to transform how we interact with
nature, we need to transform how we interact with each other.
*"Fortunately,"* Reclus notes, *"a complete alliance of the beautiful
and the useful is possible."* [quoted by Clark and Martin (eds.) ,
**Anarchy, Geography, Modernity**, p. 125 and p. 28]

Over a century later, Murray Bookchin echoed this insight:

> "The views advanced by anarchists were deliberately called **social**
> ecology to emphasise that major ecological problems have their roots
> in social problems -- problems that go back to the very beginnings of
> patricentric culture itself. The rise of capitalism, with a law of
> life based on competition, capital accumulation, and limitless growth,
> brought these problems -- ecological and social -- to an acute point;
> indeed, one that was unprecedented in any prior epoch of human
> development. Capitalist society, by recycling the organise world into
> an increasingly inanimate, inorganic assemblage of commodities, was
> destined to simplify the biosphere, thereby cutting across the grain
> of natural evolution with its ages-long thrust towards differentiation
> and diversity.
> "To reverse this trend, capitalism had to be replaced by an ecological
> society based on non-hierarchical relationships, decentralised
> communities, eco-technologies like solar power, organic agriculture,
> and humanly scaled industries -- in short, by face-to-face democratic
> forms of settlement economically and structurally tailored to the
> ecosystems in which they were located." [**Remaking Society**, pp.
> 154-5]

The vision of an ecological society rests on the obvious fact that
people can have both positive and negative impacts on the environment.
In current society, there are vast differences and antagonisms between
privileged whites and people of colour, men and women, rich and poor,
oppressor and oppressed. Remove those differences and antagonisms and
our interactions with ourselves and nature change radically. In other
words, there is a vast difference between free, non-hierarchical, class,
and stateless societies on the one hand, and hierarchical, class-ridden,
statist, and authoritarian ones and how they interact with the
environment.

Given the nature of ecology, it should come as no surprise that social
anarchists have been at the forefront of eco-anarchist theory and
activism. It would be fair to say that most eco-anarchists, like most
anarchists in general, envision an ecotopia based on communist-anarchist
principles. This does not mean that individualist anarchists are
indifferent to environmental issues, simply that most anarchists are
unconvinced that such solutions will actually end the ecological crisis
we face. Certain of the proposals in this section are applicable to
individualist anarchism (for example, the arguments that co-operatives
will produce less growth and be less likely to pollute). However, others
are not. Most obviously, arguments in favour of common ownership and
against the price mechanism are not applicable to the market based
solutions of individualist anarchism. It should also be pointed out,
that much of the eco-anarchist critique of capitalist approaches to
ecological problems are also applicable to individualist and mutualist
anarchism as well (particularly the former, as the latter does recognise
the need to regulate the market). While certain aspects of capitalism
would be removed in an individualist anarchism (such as massive
inequalities of wealth, capitalist property rights as well as direct and
indirect subsidies to big business), it is still has the informational
problems associated with markets as well as a growth orientation.

Here we discuss the typical eco-anarchist view of a free ecological
society, namely one rooted in social anarchist principles.
Eco-anarchists, like all consistent anarchists advocate workers'
self-management of the economy as a necessary component of an
ecologically sustainable society. This usually means society-wide
ownership of the means of production and all productive enterprises
self-managed by their workers (as described further in [section
I.3](secI3.html)). This is a key aspect of making a truly ecological
society. Most greens, even if they are not anarchists, recognise the
pernicious ecological effects of the capitalist "grow or die" principle;
but unless they are also anarchists, they usually fail to make the
connection between that principle and the **hierarchical form** of the
typical capitalist corporation. The capitalist firm, like the state, is
centralised, top-down and autocratic. These are the opposite of what an
ecological ethos would suggest. In contrast, eco-anarchists emphasise
the need for socially owned and worker self-managed firms.

This vision of co-operative rather than hierarchical production is a
common position for almost all anarchists. Communist and non-communist
social anarchists, like mutualists and collectivists, propose
co-operative workplaces but differ in how best to distribute the
products produced. The former urge the abolition of money and sharing
according to need while the latter see income related to work and
surpluses are shared equally among all members. Both of these systems
would produce workplaces which would be under far less pressure toward
rapid expansion than the traditional capitalist firm (as individualist
anarchism aims for the abolition of rent, profit and interest it, too,
will have less expansive workplaces).

The slower growth rate of co-operatives has been documented in a number
of studies, which show that in the traditional capitalist firm, owners'
and executives' percentage share of profits greatly increases as more
employees are added to the payroll. This is because the corporate
hierarchy is designed to facilitate exploitation by funnelling a
disproportionate share of the surplus value produced by workers to those
at the top of the pyramid (see [section C.2](secC2.html)) Such a design
gives ownership and management a very strong incentive to expand, since,
other things being equal, their income rises with every new employee
hired. [David Schweickart, **Against Capitalism**, pp. 153-4] Hence the
hierarchical form of the capitalist corporation is one of the main
causes of runaway growth as well as social inequality and the rise of
big business and oligopoly in the so-called "free" market.

By contrast, in an equal-share worker co-operative, the addition of more
members simply means more people with whom the available pie will have
to be equally divided -- a situation that immensely reduces the
incentive to expand. Thus a libertarian-socialist economy will not be
under the same pressure to grow. Moreover, when introducing
technological innovations or facing declining decline for goods, a
self-managed workplace would be more likely to increase leisure time
among producers rather than increase workloads or reduce numbers of
staff.

This means that rather than produce a few big firms, a worker-controlled
economy would tend to create an economy with more small and medium sized
workplaces. This would make integrating them into local communities and
eco-systems far easier as well as making them more easily dependent on
green sources of energy. Then there are the other ecological advantages
to workers' self-management beyond the relative lack of expansion of
specific workplaces and the decentralisation this implies. These are
explained well by market socialist David Schweickart:

> "To the extent that emissions affect the workers directly on the job
> (as they often do), we can expect a self-managed firm to pollute less.
> Workers will control the technology; it will not be imposed on them
> from without.
> "To the extent that emissions affect the local community, they are
> likely to be less severe, for two reasons. Firstly, workers (unlike
> capitalist owners) will necessarily live nearby, and so the
> decision-makers will bear more of the environmental costs directly.
> Second . . . a self-managed firm will not be able to avoid local
> regulation by running away (or threatening to do so). The great stick
> that a capitalist firm holds over the head of a local community will
> be absent. Hence absent will be the macrophenomenon of various regions
> of the country trying to compete for firms by offering a 'better
> business climate' (i.e. fewer environmental restrictions)." [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 145]

For an ecological society to work, it requires the active participation
of those doing productive activity. They are often the first to be
affected by industrial pollution and have the best knowledge of how to
stop it happening. As such, workplace self-management is an essential
requirement for a society which aims to life in harmony with its
surrounds (and with itself, as a key aspect of social unfreedom would be
eliminated in the form of wage slavery).

For these reasons, libertarian socialism based on producer co-operatives
is essential for the type of economy necessary to solve the ecological
crisis. These all feed directly into the green vision as *"ecology
points to the necessity of decentralisation, diversity in natural and
social systems, human-scale technology, and an end to the exploitation
of nature."* [John Clark, **The Anarchist Moment**, p. 115] This can
only be achieved on a society which bases itself on workers'
self-management as this would facilitate the decentralisation of
industries in ways which are harmonious with nature.

So far, all forms of social anarchism are in agreement. However,
eco-anarchists tend to be communist-anarchists and oppose both mutualism
and collectivism. This is because workers' ownership and self-management
places the workers of an enterprise in a position where they can become
a particularistic interest within their community. This may lead to
these firms acting purely in their own narrow interests and against the
local community. They would be, in other words, outside of community
input and be solely accountable to themselves. This could lead to a
situation where they become "collective capitalists" with a common
interest in expanding their enterprises, increasing their "profits" and
even subjecting themselves to irrational practices to survive in the
market (i.e., harming their own wider and long-term interests as market
pressures have a distinct tendency to produce a race to the bottom --
see [section I.1.3](secI1.html#seci13) for more discussion). This leads
most eco-anarchists to call for a confederal economy and society in
which communities will be decentralised and freely give of their
resources without the use of money.

As a natural compliment to workplace self-management, eco-anarchists
propose communal self-management. So, although it may have appeared that
we focus our attention on the economic aspects of the ecological crisis
and its solution, this is not the case. It should always be kept in mind
that all anarchists see that a complete solution to our many ecological
and social problems must be multi-dimensional, addressing all aspects of
the total system of hierarchy and domination. This means that only
anarchism, with its emphasis on the elimination of authority in **all**
areas of life, goes to the fundamental root of the ecological crisis.

The eco-anarchist argument for direct (participatory) democracy is that
effective protection of the planet's ecosystems requires that all people
are able to take part at the grassroots level in decision-making that
affects their environment, since they are more aware of their immediate
eco-systems and more likely to favour stringent environmental safeguards
than politicians, state bureaucrats and the large, polluting special
interests that now dominate the "representative" system of government.
Moreover, real change must come from below, not from above as this is
the very source of the social and ecological problems that we face as it
divests individuals, communities and society as a whole of their power,
indeed right, to shape their own destinies as well as draining them of
their material and "spiritual" resources (i.e., the thoughts, hopes and
dreams of people).

Simply put, it should be hardly necessary to explore in any great depth
the sound ecological and social reasons for decentralising decision
making power to the grassroots of society, i.e. to the people who have
to live with the decisions being reached. The decentralised nature of
anarchism would mean that any new investments and proposed solutions to
existing problems would be tailored to local conditions. Due to the
mobility of capital, laws passed under capitalism to protect the
environment have to be created and implemented by the central government
to be effective. Yet the state, as discussed in [section
E.1](secE1.html), is a centralised structure unsuited to the task of
collecting and processing the information and knowledge required to
customise decisions to local ecological and social circumstances. This
means that legislation, precisely due to its scope, cannot be finely
tuned to local conditions (and so can generate local opposition,
particularly if whipped up by corporate front organisations). In an
eco-anarchist society, decentralisation would not have the threat of
economic power hanging over it and so decisions would be reached which
reflected the actual local needs of the population. As they would be
unlikely to want to pollute themselves or their neighbours,
eco-anarchists are confident that such local empowerment will produce a
society which lives with, rather than upon, the environment.

Thus eco-communities (or eco-communes) are a key aspect of an ecotopia.
Eco-communes, Bookchin argued, will be *"networked confederally through
ecosystems, bioregions, and biomes"* and be *"artistically tailored to
their naturally surrounding. We can envision that their squares will be
interlaced by streams, their places of assembly surrounded by groves,
their physical contours respected and tastefully landscaped, their soils
nurtured caringly to foster plant variety for ourselves, our domestic
animals, and wherever possible the wildlife they may support on their
fringes."* They would be decentralised and *"scaled to human
dimensions,"* using recycling as well as integrating *"solar, wind,
hydraulic, and methane-producing installations into a highly variegated
pattern for producing power. Agriculture, aquaculture, stockraising, and
hunting would be regarded as crafts -- an orientation that we hope would
be extended as much as possible to the fabrication of use-values of
nearly all kinds. The need to mass-produce goods in highly mechanised
installations would be vastly diminished by the communities'
overwhelming emphasis on quality and permanence."* [**The Ecology of
Freedom**, p. 444]

This means that local communities will generate social and economic
policies tailored to their own unique ecological circumstances, in
co-operation with others (it is important stress that eco-communes do
not imply supporting local self-sufficiency and economic autarchy as
values in themselves). Decisions that have regional impact are worked
out by confederations of local assemblies, so that everybody affected by
a decision can participate in making it. Such a system would be
self-sufficient as workplace and community participation would foster
creativity, spontaneity, responsibility, independence, and respect for
individuality -- the qualities needed for a self-management to function
effectively. Just as hierarchy shapes those subject to it in negative
ways, participation would shape us in positive ways which would
strengthen our individuality and enrich our freedom and interaction with
others and nature.

That is not all. The communal framework would also impact on how
industry would develop. It would allow eco-technologies to be
prioritised in terms of R&D and subsidised in terms of consumption. No
more would green alternatives and eco-technologies be left unused simply
because most people cannot afford to buy them nor would their
development be under-funded simply because a capitalist sees little
profit form it or a politician cannot see any benefit from it. It also
means that the broad outlines of production are established at the
community assembly level while they are implemented in practice by
smaller collective bodies which also operate on an egalitarian,
participatory, and democratic basis. Co-operative workplaces form an
integral part of this process, having control over the production
process and the best way to implement any general outlines.

It is for these reasons that anarchists argue that common ownership
combined with a use-rights based system of possession is better for the
environment as it allows everyone the right to take action to stop
pollution, not simply those who are directly affected by it. As a
framework for ecological ethics, the communal system envisioned by
social anarchists would be far better than private property and markets
in protecting the environment. This is because the pressures that
markets exert on their members would not exist, as would the perverse
incentives which reward anti-social and anti-ecological practices.
Equally, the anti-ecological centralisation and hierarchy of the state
would be ended and replaced with a participatory system which can take
into account the needs of the local environment and utilise the local
knowledge and information that both the state and capitalism suppresses.

Thus a genuine solution to the ecological crisis presupposes communes,
i.e. participatory democracy in the social sphere. This is a
transformation that would amount to a political revolution. However, as
Bakunin continually emphasised, a political revolution of this nature
cannot be envisioned without a **socio-economic** revolution based on
workers' self-management. This is because the daily experience of
participatory decision-making, non-authoritarian modes of organisation,
and personalistic human relationships would not survive if those values
were denied during working hours. Moreover, as mentioned above,
participatory communities would be hard pressed to survive the pressure
that big business would subject them to.

Needless to say, the economic and social aspects of life cannot be
considered in isolation. For example, the negative results of workplace
hierarchy and its master-servant dynamic will hardly remain there. Given
the amount of time that most people spend working, the political
importance of turning it into a training ground for the development of
libertarian values can scarcely be overstated. As history has
demonstrated, political revolutions that are not based upon social
changes and mass psychological transformation -- that is, by a
deconditioning from the master/slave attitudes absorbed from the current
system -- result only in the substitution of new ruling elites for the
old ones (e.g. Lenin becoming the new "Tsar" and Communist Party
aparatchiks becoming the new "aristocracy"). Therefore, besides having a
slower growth rate, worker co-operatives with democratic self-management
would lay the psychological foundations for the kind of directly
democratic political system necessary to protect the biosphere. Thus
"green" libertarian socialism is the only proposal radical enough to
solve the ecological crisis.

Ecological crises become possible only within the context of social
relations which weaken people's capacities to fight an organised defence
of the planet's ecology and their own environment. This means that the
restriction of participation in decision-making processes within
hierarchical organisations such as the state and capitalism firms help
create environmental along with social problems by denying those most
affected by a problem the means of fixing it. Needless to say, hierarchy
within the workplace is a prerequisite to accumulation and so growth
while hierarchy within a community is a prerequisite to defend economic
and social inequality as well as minority rule as the disempowered
become indifferent to community and social issues they have little or no
say in. Both combine to create the basis of our current ecological
crisis and both need to be ended.

Ultimately, a free nature can only begin to emerge when we live in a
fully participatory society which itself is free of oppression,
domination and exploitation. Only then will we be able to rid ourselves
of the idea of dominating nature and fulfil our potential as individuals
and be a creative force in natural as well social evolution. That means
replacing the current system with one based on freedom, equality and
solidarity. Once this is achieved, *"social life will yield a sensitive
development of human and natural diversity, falling together into a well
balanced harmonious whole. Ranging from community through region to
entire continents, we will see a colourful differentiation of human
groups and ecosystems, each developing its unique potentialities and
exposing members of the community to a wide spectrum of economic,
cultural and behavioural stimuli. Falling within our purview will be an
exciting, often dramatic, variety of communal forms -- here marked by
architectural and industrial adaptations to semi-arid ecosystems, there
to grasslands, elsewhere by adaptation to forested areas. We will
witness a creative interplay between individual and group, community and
environment, humanity and nature."* [Bookchin, **Post-Scarcity
Anarchism**, p. 39]

So, to conclude, in place of capitalism eco-anarchists favour
ecologically responsible forms of libertarian socialism, with an economy
based on the principles of complementarily with nature; decentralisation
(where possible and desirable) of large-scale industries, reskilling of
workers, and a return to more artisan-like modes of production; the use
of eco-technologies and ecologically friendly energy sources to create
green products; the use of recycled and recyclable raw materials and
renewable resources; the integration of town and country, industry and
agriculture; the creation of self-managed eco-communities which exist in
harmony with their surroundings; and self-managed workplaces responsive
to the wishes of local community assemblies and labour councils in which
decisions are made by direct democracy and co-ordinated (where
appropriate and applicable) from the bottom-up in a free federation.
Such a society would aim to develop the individuality and freedom of all
its members in order to ensure that we end the domination of nature by
humanity by ending domination within humanity itself.

This is the vision of a green society put forth by Murray Bookchin. To
quote him:

> "We must create an ecological society -- not merely because such a
> society is desirable but because it is direly necessary. We must begin
> to live in order to survive. Such a society involves a fundamental
> reversal of all the trends that mark the historic development of
> capitalist technology and bourgeois society -- the minute
> specialisation or machines and labour, the concentration of resources
> and people in gigantic industrial enterprises and urban entities, the
> stratification and bureaucratisation of life, the divorce of town from
> country, the objectification of nature and human beings. In my view,
> this sweeping reversal means that we must begin to decentralise our
> cities and establish entirely new eco-communities that are
> artistically moulded to the ecosystems in which they are located . . .
> "Such an eco-community . . . would heal the split between town and
> country, indeed, between mind and body by fusing intellectual with
> physical work, industry with agriculture in a rotation or
> diversification of vocational tasks. An eco-community would be
> supported by a new kind of technology -- or eco-technology -- one
> composed of flexible, versatile machinery whose productive
> applications would emphasise durability and quality . . ." [**Toward
> an Ecological Society**, pp. 68-9]

Lastly, we need to quickly sketch out how anarchists see the change to
an ecological society happening as there is little point having an aim
if you have no idea how to achieve it.

As noted above, eco-anarchists (like all anarchists) do not counterpoise
an ideal utopia to existing society but rather participate in current
ecological struggles. Moreover, we see that struggle itself as the link
between what is and what could be. This implies, at minimum, a two
pronged strategy of neighbourhood movements and workplace organising as
a means of both fighting and abolishing capitalism. These would work
together, with the former targeting, say, the disposal of toxic wastes
and the latter stopping the production of toxins in the first place.
Only when workers are in a position to refuse to engage in destructive
practices or produce destructive goods can lasting ecological change
emerge. Unsurprisingly, modern anarchists and anarcho-syndicalists have
been keen to stress the need for a green syndicalism which addresses
ecological as well as economical exploitation. The ideas of community
and industrial unionism are discussed in more detail in [section
J.5](secJ5.html) along with other anarchist tactics for social change.
Needless to say, such organisations would use direct action as their
means of achieving their goals (see [section J.2](secJ2.html)). It
should be noted that some of Bookchin's social ecologist followers
advocate, like him, greens standing in local elections as a means to
create a counter-power to the state. As we discuss in [section
J.5.14](secJ5.html#secj514), this strategy (called Libertarian
Municipalism) finds few supporters in the wider anarchist movement.

This strategy flows, of course, into the structures of an ecological
society. As we discuss in [section I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23), anarchists
argue that the framework of a free society will be created in the
process of fighting the existing one. Thus the structures of an
eco-anarchist society (i.e. eco-communes and self-managed workplaces)
will be created by fighting the ecocidal tendencies of the current
system. In other words, like all anarchists eco-anarchists seek to
create the new world while fighting the old one. This means what we do
now is, however imperfect, an example of what we propose instead of
capitalism. That means we act in an ecological fashion today in order to
ensure that we can create an ecological society tomorrow.

For more discussion of how an anarchist society would work, see [section
I](secIcon.html). We will discuss the limitations of various proposed
solutions to the environmental crisis in the following sections.
