E.1 What are the root causes of our ecological problems?
========================================================

The dangers associated with environmental damage have become better
known over the last few decades. In fact, awareness of the crisis we
face has entered into the mainstream of politics. Those who assert that
environmental problems are minor or non-existent have, thankfully,
become marginalised (effectively, a few cranks and so-called
"scientists" funded by corporations and right-wing think tanks). Both
politicians and corporations have been keen to announce their "green"
credentials. Which is ironic, as anarchists would argue that both the
state and capitalism are key causes for the environmental problems we
are facing.

In other words, anarchists argue that pollution and the other
environmental problems we face are symptoms. The disease itself is
deeply imbedded in the system we live under and need to be addressed
alongside treating the more obvious results of that deeper cause.
Otherwise, to try and eliminate the symptoms **by themselves** can be
little more than a minor palliative and, fundamentally, pointless as
they will simply keep reappearing until their root causes are
eliminated.

For anarchists, as we noted in [section A.3.3](secA3.html#seca33), the
root causes for our ecological problems lie in social problems. Bookchin
uses the terms *"first nature"* and *"second nature"* to express this
idea. First nature is the environment while second nature is humanity.
The latter can shape and influence the former, for the worse or for the
better. How it does so depends on how it treats itself. A decent, sane
and egalitarian society will treat the environment it inhabits in a
decent, sane and respective way. A society marked by inequality,
hierarchies and exploitation will trend its environment as its members
treat each other. Thus *"all our notions of dominating nature stem from
the very real domination of human by human."* The *"domination of human
by human **preceded** the notion of dominating nature. Indeed, human
domination of human gave rise to the very **idea** of dominating
nature."* This means, obviously, that *"it is not until we eliminate
domination in all its forms . . . that we will really create a rational,
ecological society."* [**Remaking Society**, p. 44]

By degrading ourselves, we create the potential for degrading our
environment. This means that anarchists *"emphasise that ecological
degradation is, in great part, a product of the degradation of human
beings by hunger, material insecurity, class rule, hierarchical
domination, patriarchy, ethnic discrimination, and competition."*
[Bookchin, *"The Future of the Ecology Movement,"* pp. 1-20, **Which Way
for the Ecology Movement?**, p. 17] This is unsurprising, for *"nature,
as every materialist knows, is not something merely external to
humanity. We are a part of nature. Consequently, in dominating nature we
not only dominate an 'external world' -- we also dominate ourselves."*
[John Clark, **The Anarchist Moment**, p. 114]

We cannot stress how important this analysis is. We cannot ignore *"the
deep-seated division in society that came into existence with
hierarchies and classes."* To do so means placing *"young people and
old, women and men, poor and rich, exploited and exploiters, people of
colour and whites **all** on a par that stands completely at odds with
social reality. Everyone, in turn, despite the different burdens he or
she is obliged to bear, is given the same responsibility for the ills of
our planet. Be they starving Ethiopian children or corporate barons, all
people are held to be equally culpable in producing present ecological
problems."* These become *"**de-socialised**"* and so this perspective
*"side-step[s] the profoundly social roots of present-day ecological
dislocations"* and *"**deflects** innumerable people from engaging in a
practice that could yield effective social change."* It *"easily plays
into the hands of a privileged stratum who are only too eager to blame
all the human victims of an exploitative society for the social and
ecological ills of our time."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 33]

Thus, for eco-anarchists, hierarchy is the fundamental root cause of our
ecological problems. Hierarchy, notes Bookchin includes economic class
*"and even gives rise to class society historically"* but it *"goes
beyond this limited meaning imputed to a largely economic form of
stratification."* It refers to a system of *"command and obedience in
which elites enjoy varying degrees of control over their subordinates
without necessarily exploiting them."* [**Ecology of Freedom**, p. 68]
Anarchism, he stressed, *"anchored ecological problems for the first
time in hierarchy, not simply in economic classes."* [**Remaking
Society**, p. 155]

Needless to say, the forms of hierarchy have changed and evolved over
the years. The anarchist analysis of hierarchies goes *"well beyond
economic forms of exploitation into cultural forms of domination that
exist in the family, between generations and sexes, among ethnic groups,
in institutions of political, economic, and social management, and very
significantly, in the way we experience reality as a whole, including
nature and non-human life-forms."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 46] This means that
anarchists recognise that ecological destruction has existed in most
human societies and is not limited just to capitalism. It existed, to
some degree, in all hierarchical pre-capitalist societies and, of
course, in any hierarchical post-capitalist ones as well. However, as
most of us live under capitalism today, anarchists concentrate our
analysis to that system and seek to change it. Anarchists stress the
need to end capitalism simply because of its inherently anti-ecological
nature (*"The history of 'civilisation' has been a steady process of
estrangement from nature that has increasingly developed into outright
antagonism."*). Our society faces *"a breakdown not only of its values
and institutions, but also of its natural environment. This problem is
not unique to our times"* but previous environmental destruction *"pales
before the massive destruction of the environment that has occurred
since the days of the Industrial Revolution, and especially since the
end of the Second World War. The damage inflicted on the environment by
contemporary society encompasses the entire world . . . The exploitation
and pollution of the earth has damaged not only the integrity of the
atmosphere, climate, water resources, soil, flora and fauna of specific
regions, but also the basic natural cycles on which all living things
depend."* [Bookchin, **Ecology of Freedom**, p. 411 and p. 83]

This has its roots in the "grow-or-die" nature of capitalism we
discussed in [section D.4](secD4.html). An ever-expanding capitalism
must inevitably come into collision with a finite planet and its fragile
ecology. Firms whose aim is to maximise their profits in order to grow
will happily exploit whoever and whatever they can to do so. As
capitalism is based on exploiting people, can we doubt that it will also
exploit nature? It is unsurprising, therefore, that this system results
in the exploitation of the real sources of wealth, namely nature and
people. It is as much about robbing nature as it is about robbing the
worker. To quote Murray Bookchin:

> *"Any attempt to solve the ecological crisis within a bourgeois
> framework must be dismissed as chimerical. Capitalism is inherently
> anti-ecological. Competition and accumulation constitute its very law
> of life, a law . . . summarised in the phrase, 'production for the
> sake of production.' Anything, however hallowed or rare, 'has its
> price' and is fair game for the marketplace. In a society of this
> kind, nature is necessarily treated as a mere resource to be plundered
> and exploited. The destruction of the natural world, far being the
> result of mere hubristic blunders, follows inexorably from the very
> logic of capitalist production."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, pp.
> viii-ix]

So, in a large part, environmental problems derive from the fact that
capitalism is a competitive economy, guided by the maxim "grow or die."
This is its very law of life for unless a firm expands, it will be
driven out of business or taken over by a competitor. Hence the
capitalist economy is based on a process of growth and production for
their own sake. *"No amount of moralising or pietising,"* stresses
Bookchin, *"can alter the fact that rivalry at the most molecular base
of society is a bourgeois law of life . . . Accumulation to undermine,
buy out, or otherwise absorb or outwit a competitor **is a condition for
existence in a capitalist economic order.**"* This means *"a
capitalistic society based on competition and growth for its own sake
must ultimately devour the natural world, just like an untreated cancer
must ultimately devour its host. Personal intentions, be they good or
bad, have little to do with this unrelenting process. An economy that is
structured around the maxim, 'Grow or Die,' must **necessarily** pit
itself against the natural world and leave ecological ruin in its wake
as its works it way through the biosphere."* [**Remaking Society**, p.
93 and p. 15]

This means that good intentions and ideals have no bearing on the
survival of a capitalist enterprise. There is a very simple way to be
"moral" in the capitalist economy: namely, to commit economic suicide.
This helps explain another key anti-ecological tendency within
capitalism, namely the drive to externalise costs of production (i.e.,
pass them on to the community at large) in order to minimise private
costs and so maximise profits and so growth. As we will discuss in more
detail in [section E.3](secE3.html), capitalism has an in-built tendency
to externalise costs in the form of pollution as it rewards the kind of
short-term perspective that pollutes the planet in order to maximise the
profits of the capitalist. This is also driven by the fact that
capitalism's need to expand also reduces decision making from the
quantitative to the qualitative. In other words, whether something
produces a short-term profit is the guiding maxim of decision making and
the price mechanism itself suppresses the kind of information required
to make ecologically informed decisions.

As Bookchin summarises, capitalism *"has made social evolution
hopelessly incompatible with ecological evolution."* [**Ecology of
Freedom**, p. 14] It lacks a sustainable relation to nature not due to
chance, ignorance or bad intentions but due to its very nature and
workings.

Fortunately, as we discussed in [section D.1](secD1.html), capitalism
has rarely been allowed to operate for long entirely on its own logic.
When it does, counter-tendencies develop to stop society being destroyed
by market forces and the need to accumulate money. Opposition forces
always emerge, whether these are in the form of state intervention or in
social movements aiming for reforms or more radical social change (the
former tends to be the result of the latter, but not always). Both force
capitalism to moderate its worst tendencies.

However, state intervention is, at best, a short-term. This is because
the state is just as much a system of social domination, oppression and
exploitation as capitalism. Which brings us to the next key institution
which anarchists argue needs to be eliminated in order to create an
ecological society: the state. If, as anarchists argue, the oppression
of people is the fundamental reason for our ecological problems then it
logically follows that the state **cannot** be used to either create and
manage an ecological society. It is a hierarchical, centralised,
top-down organisation based on the use of coercion to maintain elite
rule. It is, as we stressed in [section B.2](secB2.html), premised on
the monopolisation of power in the hands of a few. In other words, it is
the opposite of commonly agreed ecological principles such as freedom to
develop, decentralisation and diversity.

As Bookchin put it, the *"notion that human freedom can be achieved,
much less perpetuated, through a state of **any** kind is monstrously
oxymoronic -- a contradiction in terms."* This is because *"statist
forms"* are based on *"centralisation, bureaucratisation, and the
professionalisation of power in the hands of elite bodies."* This flows
from its nature for one of its *"**essential functions is to confine,
restrict, and essentially suppress local democratic institutions and
initiatives.**"* It has been organised to reduce public participation
and control, even scrutiny. [*"The Ecological Crisis, Socialism, and the
need to remake society,"* pp. 1-10, **Society and Nature**, vol. 2, no.
3, p. 8 and p. 9] If the creation of an ecological society requires
individual freedom and social participation (and it does) then the state
by its very nature and function excludes both.

The state's centralised nature is such that it cannot handle the
complexities and diversity of life. *"No administrative system is
capable of representing"* a community or, for that matter, an eco-system
argues James C. Scott *"except through a heroic and greatly schematised
process of abstraction and simplification. It is not simply a question
of capacity . . . It is also a question of purpose. State agents have no
interest -- nor should they -- in describing an entire social reality .
. . Their abstractions and simplifications are disciplined by a small
number of objectives."* This means that the state is unable to
effectively handle the needs of ecological systems, including human
ones. Scott analyses various large-scale state schemes aiming at social
improvement and indicates their utter failure. This failure was rooted
in the nature of centralised systems. He urges us *"to consider the kind
of human subject for whom all these benefits were being provided. This
subject was singularly abstract."* The state was planning *"for generic
subjects who needed so many square feet of housing space, acres of
farmland, litres of clean water, and units of transportation and so much
food, fresh air, and recreational space. Standardised citizens were
uniform in their needs and even interchangeable. What is striking, of
course, is that such subjects . . . have, for purposes of the planning
exercise, no gender; no tastes; no history; no values; no opinions or
original ideas, no traditions, and no distinctive personalities to
contribute to the enterprise . . . The lack of context and particularity
is not an oversight; it is the necessary first premise of any
large-scale planning exercise. To the degree that the subjects can be
treated as standardised units, the power of resolution in the planning
exercise is enhanced . . . The same logic applies to the transformation
of the natural world."* [**Seeing like a State**, pp. 22-3 and p. 346]

A central power reduces the participation and diversity required to
create an ecological society and tailor humanity's interaction with the
environment in a way which respects local conditions and eco-systems. In
fact, it helps creates ecological problems by centralising power at the
top of society, limiting and repressing the freedom of individuals
communities and peoples as well as standardising and so degrading
complex societies and eco-systems. As such, the state is just as
anti-ecological as capitalism is as it shares many of the same features.
As Scott stresses, capitalism *"is just as much an agency of
homogenisation, uniformity, grids, and heroic simplification as the
state is, with the difference being that, for capitalists,
simplification must pay. A market necessarily reduces quality to
quantity via the price mechanism and promotes standardisation; in
markets, money talks, not people . . . the conclusions that can be drawn
from the failures of modern projects of social engineering are as
applicable to market-driven standardisation as they are to bureaucratic
homogeneity."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 8]

In the short term, the state may be able to restrict some of the worse
excesses of capitalism (this can be seen from the desire of capitalists
to fund parties which promise to deregulate an economy, regardless of
the social and environmental impact of so doing). However, the
interactions between these two anti-ecological institutions are unlikely
to produce long term environmental solutions. This is because while
state intervention can result in beneficial constraints on the
anti-ecological and anti-social dynamics of capitalism, it is always
limited by the nature of the state itself. As we noted in [section
B.2.1](secB2.html#secb21), the state is an instrument of class rule and,
consequently, extremely unlikely to impose changes that may harm or
destroy the system itself. This means that any reform movement will have
to fight hard for even the most basic and common-sense changes while
constantly having to stop capitalists ignoring or undermining any
reforms actually passed which threaten their profits and the
accumulation of capital as a whole. This means that counterforces are
always set into motion by ruling class and even sensible reforms (such
as anti-pollution laws) will be overturned in the name of "deregulation"
and profits.

Unsurprisingly, eco-anarchists, like all anarchists, reject appeals to
state power as this *"invariably legitimates and strengthens the State,
with the result that it disempowers the people."* They note that ecology
movements *"that enter into parliamentary activities not only legitimate
State power at the expense of popular power,"* they also are *"obligated
to function **within** the State"* and *"must 'play the game,' which
means that they must shape their priorities according to predetermined
rules over which they have no control."* This results in *"an ongoing
**process** of degeneration, a steady devolution of ideals, practices,
and party structures"* in order to achieve *"very little"* in
*"arrest[ing] environmental decay."* [**Remaking Society**, p. 161, p.
162 and p. 163] The fate of numerous green parties across the world
supports that analysis.

That is why anarchists stress the importance of creating social
movements based on direct action and solidarity as the means of enacting
reforms under a hierarchical society. Only when we take a keen interest
and act to create and enforce reforms will they stand any chance of
being applied successfully. If such social pressure does not exist, then
any reform will remain a dead-letter and ignored by those seeking to
maximise their profits at the expense of both people and planet. As we
discuss in [section J](secJcon.html), this involves creating alternative
forms of organisation like federations of community assemblies (see
[section J.5.1](secJ5.html#secj51)) and industrial unions (see [section
J.5.2](secJ5.html#secj52)). Given the nature of both a capitalist
economy and the state, this makes perfect sense.

In summary, the root cause of our ecological problems likes in hierarchy
within humanity, particularly in the form of the state and capitalism.
Capitalism is a "grow-or-die" system which cannot help destroy the
environment while the state is a centralised system which destroys the
freedom and participation required to interact with eco-systems. Based
on this analysis, anarchists reject the notion that all we need do is
get the state to regulate the economy as the state is part of the
problem as well as being an instrument of minority rule. Instead, we aim
to create an ecological society and end capitalism, the state and other
forms of hierarchy. This is done by encouraging social movements which
fight for improvements in the short term by means direct action,
solidarity and the creation of popular libertarian organisations.

E.1.1 Is industry the cause of environmental problems?
------------------------------------------------------

Some environmentalists argue that the root cause of our ecological
crisis lies in industry and technology. This leads them to stress that
"industrialism" is the problem and that needs to be eliminated. An
extreme example of this is primitivism (see [section
A.3.9](secA3.html#seca39)), although it does appear in the works of
"deep ecologists" and liberal greens. However, most anarchists are
unconvinced and agree with Bookchin when he noted that "cries against
'technology' and 'industrial society' [are] two very safe, socially
natural targets against which even the bourgeoisie can inveigh in Earth
Day celebrations, as long as minimal attention is paid to the social
relations in which the mechanisation of society is rooted." Instead,
ecology needs *"a confrontational stance toward capitalism and
hierarchical society"* in order to be effective and fix the root causes
of our problems. [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 54]

Claiming that "industrialism" rather than "capitalism" is the cause of
our ecological problems allowed greens to point to both the west and the
so-called "socialist" countries and draw out what was common to both
(i.e. terrible environmental records and a growth mentality). In
addition, it allowed green parties and thinkers to portray themselves as
being "above" the "old" conflicts between socialism and capitalism
(hence the slogan *"Neither Right nor Left, but in front"*). Yet this
position rarely convinced anyone as any serious green thinker soon notes
that the social roots of our environmental problems need to be addressed
and that brings green ideas into conflict with the status quo (it is no
coincidence that many on the right dismiss green issues as nothing more
than a form of socialism or, in America, "liberalism"). However, by
refusing to clearly indicate opposition to capitalism this position
allowed many reactionary ideas (and people!) to be smuggled into the
green movement (the population myth being a prime example). As for
"industrialism" exposing the similarities between capitalism and
Stalinism, it would have been far better to do as anarchists had done
since 1918 and call the USSR and related regimes what they actually
were, namely "state capitalism."

Some greens (like many defenders of capitalism) point to the terrible
ecological legacy of the Stalinist countries of Eastern Europe and
elsewhere. For supporters of capitalism, this was due to the lack of
private property in these systems while, for greens, it showed that
environmental concerns where above both capitalism and "socialism."
Needless to say, by "capitalism" anarchists mean both private and state
forms of that system. As we argued in [section
B.3.5](secB3.html#secb35), under Stalinism the state bureaucracy
controlled and so effectively owned the means of production. As under
private capitalism, an elite monopolised decision making and aimed to
maximise their income by oppressing and exploiting the working class.
Unsurprisingly, they had as little consideration "first nature" (the
environment) as they had for "second nature" (humanity) and dominated,
oppressed and exploited both (just as private capitalism does).

As Bookchin emphasised the ecological crisis stems not only from private
property but from the principle of domination itself -- a principle
embodied in institutional hierarchies and relations of command and
obedience which pervade society at many different levels. Thus,
*"[w]ithout changing the most molecular relationships in society --
notably, those between men and women, adults and children, whites and
other ethnic groups, heterosexuals and gays (the list, in fact, is
considerable) -- society will be riddled by domination even in a
socialistic 'classless' and 'non-exploitative' form. It would be infused
by hierarchy even as it celebrated the dubious virtues of 'people's
democracies,' 'socialism' and the 'public ownership' of 'natural
resources,' And as long as hierarchy persists, as long as domination
organises humanity around a system of elites, the project of dominating
nature will continue to exist and inevitably lead our planet to
ecological extinction."* [**Toward an Ecological Society**, p. 76]

Given this, the real reasons for why the environmental record of
Stalinist regimes were worse that private capitalism can easily be
found. Firstly, any opposition was more easily silenced by the police
state and so the ruling bureaucrats had far more lee-way to pollute than
in most western countries. In other words, a sound environment requires
freedom, the freedom of people to participate and protest. Secondly,
such dictatorships can implement centralised, top-down planning which
renders their ecological impact more systematic and widespread (James C.
Scott explores this at great length in his excellent book **Seeing like
a State**).

Fundamentally, though, there is no real difference between private and
state capitalism. That this is the case can be seen from the willingness
of capitalist firms to invest in, say, China in order to take advantage
of their weaker environmental laws and regulations plus the lack of
opposition. It can also be seen from the gutting of environmental laws
and regulation in the west in order to gain competitive advantages.
Unsurprisingly, laws to restrict protest have been increasingly passed
in many countries as they have embraced the neo-liberal agenda with the
Thatcher regime in the UK and its successors trail-blazing this process.
The centralisation of power which accompanies such neo-liberal
experiments reduces social pressures on the state and ensures that
business interests take precedence.

As we argued in [section D.10](secD10.html), the way that technology is
used and evolves will reflect the power relations within society. Given
a hierarchical society, we would expect a given technology to be used in
repressive ways regardless of the nature of that technology itself.
Bookchin points to the difference between the Iroquois and the Inca.
Both societies used the same forms of technology, but the former was a
fairly democratic and egalitarian federation while the latter was a
highly despotic empire. As such, technology *"does not fully or even
adequately account for the institutional differences"* between
societies. [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 331] This means that
technology does not explain the causes for ecological harm and it is
possible to have an anti-ecological system based on small-scale
technologies:

> *"Some of the most dehumanising and centralised social systems were
> fashioned out of very 'small' technologies; but bureaucracies,
> monarchies, and military forces turned these systems into brutalising
> cudgels to subdue humankind and, later, to try to subdue nature. To be
> sure, a large-scale technics will foster the development of an
> oppressively large-scale society; but every warped society follows the
> dialectic of its own pathology of domination, irrespective of the
> scale of its technics. It can organise the 'small' into the repellent
> as surely as it can imprint an arrogant sneer on the faces of the
> elites who administer it . . . Unfortunately, a preoccupation with
> technical size, scale, and even artistry deflects our attention away
> from the most significant problems of technics -- notably, its ties
> with the ideals and social structures of freedom."* [Bookchin, **Op.
> Cit.**, pp. 325-6]

In other words, "small-scale" technology will not transform an
authoritarian society into an ecological one. Nor will applying
ecologically friendly technology to capitalism reduce its drive to grow
at the expense of the planet and the people who inhabit it. This means
that technology is an aspect of a wider society rather than a socially
neutral instrument which will **always** have the same (usually
negative) results. As Bookchin stressed, a *"liberatory technology
presupposes liberatory institutions; a liberatory sensibility requires a
liberatory society. By the same token, artistic crafts are difficult to
conceive without an artistically crafted society, and the 'inversion of
tools' is impossible with a radical inversion of all social and
productive relationships."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 328-9]

Finally, it should be stressed that attempts to blame technology or
industry for our ecological problems have another negative effect than
just obscuring the real causes of those problems and turning attention
away from the elites who implement specific forms of technology to
further their aims. It also means denying that technology can be
transformed and new forms created which can help produce an ecologically
balanced society:

> *"The knowledge and physical instruments for promoting a harmonisation
> of humanity with nature and of human with human are largely at hand or
> could easily be devised. Many of the physical principles used to
> construct such patently harmful facilities as conventional power
> plants, energy-consuming vehicles, surface-mining equipment and the
> like could be directed to the construction of small-scale solar and
> wind energy devices, efficient means of transportation, and
> energy-saving shelters."* [Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 83]

We must understand that *"the very **idea** of dominating first nature
has its origins in the domination of human by human"* otherwise *"we
will lose what little understanding we have of the social origin of our
most serious ecological problems."* It this happens then we cannot solve
these problems, as it *"will grossly distort humanity's potentialities
to play a creative role in non-human as well as human development."* For
*"the human capacity to reason conceptually, to fashion tools and devise
extraordinary technologies"* can all *"be used for the good of the
biosphere, not simply for harming it. What is of **pivotal** importance
in determining whether human beings will creatively foster the evolution
of first nature or whether they will be highly destructive to non-human
and human beings alike is precisely the kind of **society** we
establish, not only the kind of sensibility we develop."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 34]

E.1.2 What is the difference between environmentalism and ecology?
------------------------------------------------------------------

As we noted in [section A.3.3](secA3.html#seca33), eco-anarchists
contrast ecology with environmentalism. The difference is important as
it suggests both a different analysis of where our ecological problems
come from and the best way to solve them. As Bookchin put it:

> *"By 'environmentalism' I propose to designate a mechanistic,
> instrumental outlook that sees nature as a passive habitat composed of
> 'objects' such as animals, plants, minerals, and the like that must
> merely be rendered more serviceable for human use . . . Within this
> context, very little of a social nature is spared from the
> environmentalist's vocabulary: cities become 'urban resources' and
> their inhabitants 'human resources' . . . Environmentalism . . . tends
> to view the ecological project for attaining a harmonious relationship
> between humanity and nature as a truce rather than a lasting
> equilibrium. The 'harmony' of the environmentalist centres around the
> development of new techniques for plundering the natural world with
> minimal disruption of the human 'habitat.' Environmentalism does not
> question the most basic premise of the present society, notably, that
> humanity must dominant nature; rather, it seeks to **facilitate** than
> notion by developing techniques for diminishing the hazards caused by
> the reckless despoliation of the environment."* [**The Ecology of
> Freedom**, p. 86]

So eco-anarchists call the position of those who seek to reform
capitalism and make it more green "environmentalism" rather than
ecology. The reasons are obvious, as environmentalists *"focus on
specific issues like air and water pollution"* while ignoring the social
roots of the problems they are trying to solve. In other words, their
outlook *"rest[s] on an instrumental, almost engineering approach to
solving ecological dislocations. To all appearances, they wanted to
adapt the natural world to the needs of the existing society and its
exploitative, capitalist imperatives by way of reforms that minimise
harm to human health and well-being. The much-needed goals of
formulating a project for radical social change and for cultivating a
new sensibility toward the natural world tended to fall outside the
orbit of their practical concerns."* Eco-anarchists, while supporting
such partial structures, stress that *"these problems originate in a
hierarchical, class, and today, competitive capitalist system that
nourishes a view of the natural world as a mere agglomeration of
'resources' for human production and consumption."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
15-6]

This is the key. As environmentalism does not bring into question the
underlying notion of the present society that man must dominate nature
it cannot present anything other than short-term solutions for the
various symptoms of the underlying problem. Moreover, as it does not
question hierarchy, it simply adjusts itself to the status quo. Thus
liberal environmentalism is so *"hopelessly ineffectual"* because *"it
takes the present social order for granted"* and is mired in *"the
paralysing belief that a market society, privately owned property, and
the present-day bureaucratic nation-state cannot be changed in any basic
sense. Thus, it is the prevailing order that sets the terms of any
'compromise' or 'trade-off'"* and so *"the natural world, including
oppressed people, always loses something piece by piece, until
everything is lost in the end. As long as liberal environmentalism is
structured around the social status quo, property rights always prevail
over public rights and power always prevails over powerlessness. Be it a
forest, wetlands, or good agricultural soil, a 'developer' who owns any
of these 'resources' usually sets the terms on which every negotiation
occurs and ultimately succeeds in achieving the triumph of wealth over
ecological considerations."* [Bookchin, **Remaking Society**, p. 15]

This means that a truly ecological perspective seeks to end the
situation where a few govern the many, not to make the few nicer. As
Chomsky once noted on the issue of *"corporate social responsibility"*,
he could not discuss the issue as such because he did *"not accept some
of its presuppositions, specifically with regard to the legitimacy of
corporate power"* as he did not see any *"justification for
concentration of private power"* than *"in the political domain."* Both
would *"act in a socially responsible way -- as benevolent despots --
when social strife, disorder, protest, etc., induce them to do so for
their own benefit."* He stressed that in a capitalist society *"socially
responsible behaviour would be penalised quickly in that competitors,
lacking such social responsibility, would supplant anyone so misguided
as to be concerned with something other than private benefit."* This
explains why real capitalist systems have always *"been required to
safeguard social existence in the face of the destructive forces of
private capitalism"* by means of *"substantial state control."* However,
the *"central questions . . . are not addressed, but rather begged"*
when discussing corporate social responsibility. [**Language and
Politics**, p. 275]

Ultimately, the key problem with liberal environmentalism (as with
liberalism in general) is that it tends, by definition, to ignore class
and hierarchy. The "we are all in this together" kind of message ignores
that most of decisions that got us into our current ecological and
social mess were made by the rich as they have control over resources
and power structures (both private and public). It also suggests that
getting us out of the mess must involve taking power and wealth back
from the elite -- if for no other reason because working class people do
not, by themselves, have the resources to solve the problem.

Moreover, the fact is the ruling class do **not** inhabit quite the same
polluted planet as everyone else. Their wealth protects them, to a large
degree, to the problems that they themselves have created and which, in
fact, they owe so much of that wealth to (little wonder, then, they deny
there is a serious problem). They have access to a better quality of
life, food and local environment (no toxic dumps and motorways are near
their homes or holiday retreats). Of course, this is a short term
protection but the fate of the planet is a long-term abstraction when
compared to the immediate returns on one's investments. So it is not
true to say that **all** parts of the ruling class are in denial about
the ecological problems. A few are aware but many more show utter hatred
towards those who think the planet is more important than profits.

This means that such key environmentalist activities such as education
and lobbying are unlikely to have much effect. While these may produce
**some** improvements in terms of our environmental impact, it cannot
stop the long-term destruction of our planet as the ecological crisis is
*"**systemic** -- and not a matter of misinformation, spiritual
insensitivity, or lack of moral integrity. The present social illness
lies not only in the outlook that pervades the present society; it lies
above all in the very **structure** and **law of life** in the system
itself, in its imperative, which no entrepreneur or corporation can
ignore without facing destruction: growth, more growth, and still more
growth."* [Murray Bookchin, *"The Ecological Crisis, Socialism, and the
need to remake society,"* pp. 1-10, **Society and Nature**, vol. 2, no.
3, pp. 2-3] This can only be ended by ending capitalism, not by appeals
to consumers to buy eco-friendly products or to capitalists to provide
them:

> *"Accumulation is determined not by the good or bad intentions of the
> individual bourgeois, but by the commodity relationship itself . . .
> It is not the perversity of the bourgeois that creates production for
> the sake of production, but the very market nexus over which he
> presides and to which he succumbs. . . . It requires a grotesque
> self-deception, or worse, an act of ideological social deception, to
> foster the belief that this society can undo its very law of life in
> response to ethical arguments or intellectual persuasion."* [**Toward
> an Ecological Society**, p. 66]

Sadly, much of what passes for the green movement is based on this kind
of perspective. At worse, many environmentalists place their hopes on
green consumerism and education. At best, they seek to create green
parties to work within the state to pass appropriate regulations and
laws. Neither option gets to the core of the problem, namely a system in
which there are *"oppressive human beings who literally own society and
others who are owned by it. Until society can be reclaimed by an
undivided humanity that will use its collective wisdom, cultural
achievements, technological innovations, scientific knowledge, and
innate creativity for its own benefit and for that of the natural world,
all ecological problems will have their roots in social problems."*
[Bookchin, **Remaking Society**, p. 39]
