E.5 Can ethical consumerism stop the ecological crisis?
=======================================================

No. At best, it can have a limited impact in reducing environmental
degradation and so postpone the ecological crisis. At worse, it could
accelerate that crisis by creating new markets and thus increasing
growth.

Before discussing why and just so there is no misunderstanding, we must
stress that anarchists fully recognise that using recycled or renewable
raw materials, reducing consumption and buying "ecologically friendly"
products and technologies **are** very important. As such, we would be
the last to denounce such a thing. But such measures are of very limited
use as solutions to the ecological problems we face. At best they can
only delay, not prevent, capitalism's ultimate destruction of the
planet's ecological base.

Green consumerism is often the only thing capitalism has to offer in the
face of mounting ecological destruction. Usually it boils down to
nothing more than slick advertising campaigns by big corporate polluters
to hype band-aid measures such as using a few recycled materials or
contributing money to a wildlife fund, which are showcased as "concern
for the environment" while off camera the pollution and devouring of
non-renewable resources goes on. They also engage in "greenwashing", in
which companies lavishly fund PR campaigns to paint themselves "green"
without altering their current polluting practices!

This means that apparently "green" companies and products actually are
not. Many firms hire expensive Public Relations firms and produce
advertisements to paint a false image of themselves as being
ecologically friendly (i.e. perform "greenwashing"). This indicates a
weakness of market economies -- they hinder (even distort) the flow of
information required for consumers to make informed decisions. The
market does not provide enough information for consumers to determine
whether a product **is** actually green or not -- it just gives them a
price supplemented by (often deliberately misleading) advertising
designed to manipulate the consumer and present an appropriate corporate
image. Consumers have to rely on other sources, many of which are
minority journals and organisations and so difficult to find, to provide
them with the accurate information required to countermand the power and
persuasion of advertising and the work of PR experts. This helps explain
why, for example, *"large agribusiness firms are now attempting, like
Soviet commissars, to stifle criticism of their policies"* by means of
*"veggie libel laws."* These laws, which in 2001 had been passed in 13
American states (*"backed by agribusiness"*) *"make it illegal to
criticise agricultural commodities in a manner inconsistent with
'reasonable' scientific evidence. The whole concept of 'veggie libel'
laws is probably unconstitutional; nevertheless, these laws remain on
the books."* [Eric Schlosser, **Fast Food Nation**, p. 266]

We should not discount the impact of PR experts in shaping the way
people see the world or decide to consume. A lot of resources are poured
into corporate Public Relations in order to present a green image. *"In
the perverse world of corporate public relations,"* note critics John
Stauber and Sheldon Rampton, *"propagandising and lobbying **against**
environmental protection is called 'environmental' or 'green' PR.
'Greenwashing' is a more accurate pejorative now commonly used to
describe the ways that polluters employ deceptive PR to falsely paint
themselves an environmentally responsible public image . . . Today a
virulent, pro-industry, **anti**-environmentalism is on the rise . . .
PR experts . . . are waging and winning a war against environmentalists
on behalf of corporate clients in the chemical, energy, food,
automobile, forestry and mining industries."* A significant amount of
cash is spent (an estimated \$1 billion a year by the mid-1990s) *"on
the services of anti-environmental PR professionals and on
'greenwashing' their corporate image."* [**Toxic Sludge is Good for
You!**, p. 125] See the chapter called *"Silencing Spring"* in Stauber's
and Rampton's book **Toxic Sludge is Good for You!** for a good summary
of this use of PR firms.

Even apparently ecologically friendly firms like "The Body Shop" can
present a false image of what they do. For example, journalist Jon
Entine investigated that company in 1994 and discovered that only a
minuscule fraction of its ingredients came from **Trade Not Aid** (a
program claimed to aid developing countries). Entine also discovered
that the company also used many outdated, off-the-shelf product formulas
filled with non-renewable petrochemicals as well as animal tested
ingredients. When Entine contacted the company he received libel threats
and it hired a PR company to combat his story. [Stauber and Rampton,
**Op. Cit.**, pp. 74-5] This highlights the dangers of looking to
consumerism to solve ecological problems. As Entine argued:

> *"The Body Shop is a corporation with the privileges and power in
> society as all others. Like other corporations it makes products that
> are unsustainable, encourages consumerism, uses non-renewable
> materials, hires giant PR and law firms, and exaggerates its
> environment policies. If we are to become a sustainable society, it is
> crucial that we have institutions . . . that are truly sustainable.
> The Body Shop has deceived the public by trying to make us think that
> they are a lot further down the road to sustainability than they
> really are. We should . . . no longer . . . lionise the Body Shop and
> others who claim to be something they are not."* [quoted by Stauber
> and Rampton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 76]

Even ignoring the distorting influence of advertising and corporate-paid
PR, the fundamental issue remains of whether consumerism can actually
fundamentally influence how business works. One environmental journalist
puts the arguments well in his excellent book on "Fast Food" (from the
industrialisation of farming, to the monopolisation of food processing,
to the standardisation of food consumption it). As he puts corporations
will *"sell free-range, organic, grass-fed hamburgers if you demand it.
They will sell whatever sells at a profit."* [Eric Schlosser, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 269] He complements this position by suggesting various
regulations and some role for trade unions.

Which, of course, is true. It is equally true that we are not forced to
buy any specific product, which is why companies spend so much in
convincing us to buy their products. Yet even ignoring the influence of
advertising, it is unlikely that using the market will make capitalism
nicer. Sadly, the market rewards the anti-social activities that
Schlosser and other environmentalists chronicle. As he himself notes,
the *"low price of a fast food hamburger does not reflect its real cost
. . . The profits of the fast food chains have been made possible by the
losses imposed on the rest of society."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 261] This
means that the idea that by using the market we can "reform" capitalism
is flawed simply because even "good" companies have to make a profit and
so will be tempted to cut costs, inflict them on third parties (such as
workers, consumers and the planet). The most obvious form of such
externalities is pollution. Such anti-social and anti-ecological
behaviour makes perfect business sense as prices fall when costs are
passed on to others in the form of externalities. Thus firms which
employ debt-slaves in sweatshops while polluting the atmosphere in a
third-world dictatorship will have lower costs and so prices than those
employing unionised workers under eco-friendly regulations.

The amazing thing is that being concerned about such issues is
considered as a flaw in economics. In fact, seeking the lowest price and
ignoring the social and ecological impact of a product is *"considered
virtuousness"* by the market and by economists for, as green economist
E. F. Schumacher, pointed out *"[i]f a buyer refused a good bargain
because he suspected that the cheapness of the goods in question stemmed
from exploitation or other despicable practices (except theft), he would
be open to criticism of behaving 'uneconomically' which is viewed as
nothing less than a fall from grace. Economists and others are wont to
treat such eccentric behaviour with derision if not indignation. The
religion of economics has its own code of ethics, and the First
Commandment is to behave 'economically.'"* [**Small is Beautiful**, p.
30] And, of course, such a consumer would face numerous competitors who
will happily take advantage of such activities.

Then there is the issue of how the market system hides much more
information than it gives (a factor we will return to in [section
I.1.2](secI1.html#seci12)). Under the price system, customers have no
way of knowing the ecological (or social) impact of the products they
buy. All they have is a price and that simply does not indicate how the
product was produced and what costs were internalised in the final price
and which were externalised. Such information, unsurprisingly, is
usually supplied **outside** the market by ecological activists, unions,
customer groups and so on. Then there is the misinformation provided by
the companies themselves in their adverts and PR campaigns. The
skilfully created media images of advertising can easily swamp the
efforts of these voluntary groups to inform the public of the facts of
the social and environmental costs of certain products. Besides, any
company has the threat of court action to silence their critics as the
cost in money, resources, energy and time to fight for free speech in
court is an effective means to keep the public ignorant about the dark
side of capitalism.

This works the other way too. Simply put, a company has no idea whether
you not buying a product is based on ethical consumption decisions or
whether it is due to simple dislike of the product. Unless there is an
organised consumer boycott, i.e. a collective campaign, then the company
really has no idea that it is being penalised for its anti-ecological
and/or anti-social actions. Equally, corporations are so interlinked
that it can make boycotts ineffective. For example, unless you happened
to read the business section on the day McDonalds bought a sizeable
share in Pret-a-Manger you would have no idea that going there instead
of McDonalds would be swelling the formers profits.

Ultimately, the price mechanism does not provide enough information for
the customer to make an informed decision about the impact of their
purchase and, by reducing prices, actively rewards the behaviour
Schlosser condemns. After all, what is now "organic" production was just
the normal means of doing it. The pressures of the market, the price
mechanism so often suggested as a tool for change, ensured the
industrialisation of farming which so many now rightly condemn. By
reducing costs, market demand increased for the cheaper products and
these drove the other, more ecologically and socially sound, practices
out of business.

Which feeds into the issue of effective demand and income limitations.
The most obvious problem is that the market is **not** a consumer
democracy as some people have more votes than others (in fact, the
world's richest people have more "votes" than the poorest billions,
combined!). Those with the most "votes" (i.e. money) will hardly be
interested in changing the economic system which placed them in that
position. Similarly, those with the least "votes" will be more willing
to buy ecologically destructive products simply to make ends meet rather
than any real desire to do so. In addition, one individual's decision
**not** to buy something will easily be swamped by others seeking the
best deal, i.e. the lowest prices, due to economic necessity or
ignorance. Money (quantity) counts in the market, not values (quality).

Then there is the matter of sourcing of secondary products. After all,
most products we consume are made up of a multitude of other goods and
it is difficult, if not impossible, to know where these component parts
come from. Thus we have no real way of knowing whether your latest
computer has parts produced in sweatshops in third-world countries nor
would a decision not to buy it be communicated that far back down the
market chain (in fact, the company would not even know that you were
even **thinking** about buying a product unless you used non-market
means to inform them and then they may simply dismiss an individual as a
crank).

So the notion that consumerism can be turned to pressurising companies
is deeply flawed. This is **not** to suggest that we become unconcerned
about how we spend our money. Far from it. Buying greener products
rather than the standard one does have an impact. It just means being
aware of the limitations of green consumerism, particularly as a means
of changing the world. Rather, we must look to changing how goods are
produced. This applies, of course, to shareholder democracy as well.
Buying shares in a firm rarely results in an majority at the annual
meetings nor, even if it did, does it allow an effective say in the
day-to-day decisions management makes.

Thus green consumerism is hindered by the nature of the market -- how
the market reduces everything to price and so hides the information
required to make truly informed decisions on what to consume. Moreover,
it is capable of being used to further ecological damage by the use of
PR to paint a false picture of the companies and their environmental
activities. In this way, the general public think things are improving
while the underlying problems remain (and, perhaps, get worse). Even
assuming companies are honest and do minimise their environmental damage
they cannot face the fundamental cause of the ecological crisis in the
"grow-or-die" principle of capitalism ("green" firms need to make
profits, accumulate capital and grow bigger), nor do they address the
pernicious role of advertising or the lack of public control over
production and investment under capitalism. Hence it is a totally
inadequate solution.

As green Sharon Beder notes, green marketing aims at *"increasing
consumption, not reducing it. Many firms [seek] to capitalise on new
markets created by rising environmental consciousness"* with such trends
prompting *"a surge of advertisements and labels claiming environmental
benefits. Green imagery was used to sell products, and caring for the
environment became a marketing strategy"* and was a *"way of redirecting
a willingness to spend less into a willingness to buy green products."*
This means that firms can *"expand their market share to include
consumers that want green products. Since manufacturers still make
environmentally damaging products and retailers still sell non-green
products on shelves next to green ones, it is evident that green
marketing is merely a way of expanding sales. If they were genuinely
concerned to protect the environment they would replace the unsound
products with sound ones, not just augment their existing lines."*
Moreover, green marketing *"does not necessarily mean green products,
but false and misleading claims can be hard for consumers to detect"*
while the *"most cynical marketers simply use environmental imagery to
conjure up the impression that a product is good for the environment
without making any real claims at all."* Ultimately, green consumerism
*"reduces people to consumers. Their power to influence society is
reduced to their purchasing power."* It *"does not deal with issues such
as economic growth on a finite planet, the power of transnational
corporations, and the way power is structured in our society."*
[**Global Spin**, pp. 176-80]

Andrew Watson sums up green consumerism very eloquently as follows:

> *"green consumerism, which is largely a cynical attempt to maintain
> profit margins, does not challenge capital's eco-cidal accumulation,
> but actually facilitates it by opening a new market. All products, no
> matter how 'green', cause some pollution, use some resources and
> energy, and cause some ecological disturbance. This would not matter
> in a society in which production was rationally planned, but in an
> exponentially expanding economy, production, however 'green', would
> eventually destroy the Earth's environment. Ozone-friendly aerosols,
> for example, still use other harmful chemicals; create pollution in
> their manufacture, use and disposal; and use large amounts of
> resources and energy. Of course, up to now, the green pretensions of
> most companies have been exposed largely as presenting an acceptably
> green image, with little or no substance. The market is presented as
> the saviour of the environment. Environmental concern is commodified
> and transformed into ideological support for capitalism. Instead of
> raising awareness of the causes of the ecological crisis, green
> consumerism mystifies them. The solution is presented as an individual
> act rather than as the collective action of individuals struggling for
> social change. The corporations laugh all the way to the bank."*
> [**From Green to Red**, pp. 9-10]

"Ethical" consumerism, like "ethical" investment, is still based on
profit making, the extraction of surplus value from others. This is
hardly "ethical," as it cannot challenge the inequality in exchange and
power that lies at the heart of capitalism nor the authoritarian social
relationships it creates. Therefore it cannot really undermine the
ecologically destructive nature of capitalism.

In addition, since capitalism is a world system, companies can produce
and sell their non-green and dangerous goods elsewhere. Many of the
products and practices banned or boycotted in developed countries are
sold and used in developing ones. For example, Agent Orange (used as to
defoliate forests during the Vietnam War by the US) is used as an
herbicide in the Third World, as is DDT. Agent Orange contains one of
the most toxic compounds known to humanity and was responsible for
thousands of deformed children in Vietnam. Ciba-Geigy continued to sell
Enterovioform (a drug which caused blindness and paralysis in at least
10,000 Japanese users of it) in those countries that permitted it to do
so. Many companies have moved to developing countries to escape the
stricter pollution and labour laws in the developed countries.

Neither does green consumerism question why it should be the ruling
elites within capitalism that decide what to produce and how to produce
it. Since these elites are driven by profit considerations, if it is
profitable to pollute, pollution will occur. Moreover, green consumerism
does not challenge the (essential) capitalist principle of consumption
for the sake of consumption, nor can it come to terms with the fact that
"demand" is created, to a large degree, by "suppliers," specifically by
advertising agencies that use a host of techniques to manipulate public
tastes, as well as using their financial clout to ensure that "negative"
(i.e. truthful) stories about companies' environmental records do not
surface in the mainstream media.

Because ethical consumerism is based **wholly** on market solutions to
the ecological crisis, it is incapable even of recognising a key
**root** cause of that crisis, namely the atomising nature of capitalism
and the social relationships it creates. Atomised individuals
("soloists") cannot change the world, and "voting" on the market hardly
reduces their atomisation. As Murray Bookchin argues, *"[t]ragically,
these millions [of "soloists"] have surrendered their social power,
indeed, their very personalities, to politicians and bureaucrats who
live in a nexus of obedience and command in which they are normally
expected to play subordinate roles. **Yet this is precisely the
immediate cause of the ecological crisis of our time** -- a cause that
has its historic roots in the market society that engulfs us."*
[**Toward an Ecological Society**, p. 81] This means that fighting
ecological destruction today must be a **social** movement rather than
one of individual consumption decisions or personalistic transformation.
These can go on without questioning the ecocidal drive of capitalism
which *"will insidiously simplify the biosphere (making due allowances
for 'wilderness' reserves and theme parks), steadily reduce the organic
to the inorganic and the complex to the simple, and convert soil into
sand -- all at the expense of the biosphere's integrity and viability.
The state will still be an ever-present means for keeping oppressed
people at bay and will 'manage' whatever crises emerge as best it can.
Ultimately, society will tend to become more and more authoritarian,
public life will atrophy."* [Bookchin, *"The Future of the Ecology
Movement,"* pp. 1-20, **Which Way for the Ecology Movement?**, p. 14]

All this is not to suggest that individual decisions on what to consume
are irrelevant, far from it. Nor are consumer boycotts a waste of time.
If organised into mass movements and linked to workplace struggle they
can be very effective. It is simply to point out that individual
actions, important as they are, are no solution to **social** problems.
Thus Bookchin:

> "The fact is that we are confronted by a thoroughly irrational social
> system, not simply by predatory individuals who can be won over to
> ecological ideas by moral arguments, psychotherapy, or even the
> challenges of a troubled public to their products and behaviour . . .
> One can only commend the individuals who by virtue of their
> consumption habits, recycling activities. and appeals for a new
> sensibility undertake public activities to stop ecological
> degradation. Each surely does his or her part. But it will require a
> much greater effort -- and organised, clearly conscious, and
> forward-looking political **movement** -- to meet the basic challenges
> posed by our aggressively **anti**-ecological society.
> "Yes, we as individuals should change our lifestyles as much as
> possible, but it is the utmost short-sightedness to believe that that
> is all or even primarily what we have to do. We need to restructure
> the entire society, even as we engage in lifestyle changes and
> single-issue struggles against pollution, nuclear power plants, the
> excessive use of fossil fuels, the destruction of soil, and so forth.
> We must have a coherent analysis of the deep-seated hierarchical
> relationships and systems of domination, as well as class
> relationships and economic exploitation, that degrade people as well
> as the environment." [*"The Ecological Crisis, Socialism, and the need
> to remake society,"* pp. 1-10, **Society and Nature**, vol. 2, no. 3,
> p. 4]

Using the capitalist market to combat the effects produced by that same
market is no alternative. Until capitalism and the state are dismantled,
solutions like ethical consumerism will be about as effective as
fighting a forest fire with a water pistol. Such solutions are doomed to
failure because they promote individual responses to social problems,
problems that by their very nature require collective action, and deal
only with the symptoms, rather than focusing on the cause of the problem
in the first place. Real change comes from collective struggle, not
individual decisions within the market place which cannot combat the
cancerous growth principle of the capitalist economy. As such, ethical
consumerism does not break from the logic of capitalism and so is doomed
to failure.
