E.3 Can private property rights protect the environment?
========================================================

Environmental issues have become increasingly important over the
decades. When Murray Bookchin wrote his first works on our ecological
problems in the 1950s, he was only one of a small band. Today, even
right-wing politicians have to give at least some lip-service to
environmental concerns while corporations are keen to present their
green credentials to the general public (even if they do not, in fact,
have any).

As such, there has been a significant change. This is better late than
never, considering that the warnings made by the likes of Bookchin in
the 1950s and 1960s have come true to a threateningly worrying degree.
Sadly, eco-anarchist solutions are still ignored but that is
unsurprising as they go to the heart of the ecological problem, namely
domination within humanity as the precondition for the domination of
nature and the workings of the capitalist economy. It is hardly likely
that those who practice and benefit from that oppression and
exploitation will admit that they are causing the problems! Hence the
need to appear green in order to keep a fundamentally anti-green system
going.

Of course, some right-wingers are totally opposed to ecological issues.
They seriously seem to forget without a viable ecology, there would be
no capitalism. Ayn Rand, for example, dismissed environmental concerns
as being anti-human and had little problem with factory chimneys
belching smoke into the atmosphere (her fondness for chimneys and
skyscrapers would have have made Freud reach for his notepad). As Bob
Black once noted, *"Rand remarked that she **worshipped** smokestacks.
For her . . . they not only stood for, they **were** the epitome of
human accomplishment. She must have meant it since she was something of
a human smokestack herself; she was a chain smoker, as were the other
rationals in her entourage. In the end she abolished her own breathing:
she died of lung cancer."* [*"Smokestack Lightning,"* **Friendly Fire**,
p. 62] The fate of this guru of capitalism is a forewarning for our
collective one if we ignore the environment and our impact on it.

The key to understanding why so many on the right are dismissive of
ecological concerns is simply that ecology cannot be squeezed into their
narrow individualistic property based politics. Ecology is about
interconnectiveness, about change and interaction, about the sources of
life and how we interact with them and they with us. Moreover, ecology
is rooted in the **quality** of life and goes not automatically view
quantity as the key factor. As such, the notion that more is better does
not strike the ecologist as, in itself, a good thing. The idea that
growth is good as such is the principle associated with cancer. Ecology
also destroys the individualistic premise of capitalist economics. It
exposes the myth that the market ensures everyone gets exactly what they
want -- for if you consume eco-friendly products but others do not then
you are affected by their decisions as the environmental impact affects
all. Equally, the notion that the solution to GM crops should letting
"the market" decide fails to take into account that such crops spread
into local eco-systems and contaminate whole areas (not to mention the
issue of corporate power enclosing another part of the commons). The
market "solution" in this case would result in everyone, to some degree,
consuming GM crops eventually. None of this can be fitted into the
capitalist ideology.

However, while vocal irrational anti-green perspectives lingers on in
some sections of the right (particularly those funded by the heaviest
polluters), other supporters of capitalism have considered the problems
of ecological destruction in some degree. Some of this is, of course,
simply greenwashing (i.e., using PR and advertising to present a green
image while conducting business as usual). Some of it is funding think
tanks which use green-sounding names, imagery and rhetoric to help
pursue a decidedly anti-ecological practice and agenda. Some of is, to
some degree, genuine. Al Gore's campaign to make the world aware of the
dangers of climate change is obviously sincere and important work
(although it is fair to point out the lack of green policies being
raised during his 2000 Presidential election campaign and the poverty of
his proposed solutions and means of change). Nicholas Stern's 2006
report on climate change produced for the UK government is another
example and it gives an insight into the mentality of such
environmentalists. The report did produce quite an impact (plus its
dismissal by the usual suspects). The key reason for that was,
undoubtedly, due to it placing a money sum on the dangers of
environmental disruption. Such is capitalism -- people and planet can go
to the dogs, but any threat to profits must be acted upon. As the
British PM at the time put it, any Climate Change Bill must be *"fully
compatible with the interests of businesses and consumers as well."*
Which is ironic, as it is the power of money which is causing the bulk
of the problems we face.

Which is what we will discuss here, namely whether private property can
be used to solve our environmental problems. Liberal environmentalists
base their case on capitalist markets aided with some form of state
intervention. Neo-liberal and right-"libertarian" environmentalists base
their case purely on capitalist markets and reject any role for the
state bar that of defining and enforcing private property rights. Both,
however, assume that capitalism will remain and tailor their policies
around it. Anarchists question that particularly assumption particularly
given, as we discussed in [section E.1](secE1.html), the fundamental
reason why capitalism cannot be green is its irrational "grow-or-die"
dynamic. However, there are other aspects of the system which contribute
to capitalism bringing ecological crisis sooner rather than later. These
flow from the nature of private property and the market competition it
produces (this discussion, we should stress, ignores such factors as
economic power which will be addressed in [section
E.3.2](secE3.html#sece32)).

The market itself causes ecological problems for two related reasons:
externalities and the price mechanism. It is difficult making informed
consumption decisions under capitalism because rather than provide
enough information to make informed decisions, the market hinders the
flow of relevant information and suppresses essential knowledge. This is
particularly the case with environmental information and knowledge.
Simply put, we have no way of knowing from a given price the ecological
impact of the products we buy. One such area of suppressed information
is that involving externalities. This is a commonly understood problem.
The market actively rewards those companies which inflict externalities
on society. This is the *"routine and regular harms caused to **others**
-- workers, consumers, communities, the environment."* These are termed
*"externalities"* in *"the coolly technical jargon of economics"* and
the capitalist company is an *"externalising machine"* and it is *"no
exaggeration to say that the corporation's built in compulsion to
externalise its costs is at the root of many of the world's social and
environmental ills."* [Joel Bakan, **The Corporation**, p. 60 and p. 61]

The logic is simple, by externalising (imposing) costs on others (be it
workers, customers or the planet) a firm can reduce its costs and make
higher profits. Thus firms have a vested interest in producing
externalities. To put it crudely, pollution pays while ecology costs.
Every pound a business spends on environmental protections is one less
in profits. As such, it makes economic sense to treat the environment
like a dump and externalise costs by pumping raw industrial effluent
into the atmosphere, rivers, and oceans. The social cost of so doing
weighs little against the personal profits that result from inflicting
diffuse losses onto the general public. Nor should we discount the
pressure of market forces in this process. In order to survive on the
market, firms may have to act in ways which, while profitable in the
short-run, are harmful in the long term. For example, a family-owned
farm may be forced to increase production using environmentally unsound
means simply in order to avoid bankruptcy.

As well as economic incentives, the creation of externalities flows from
the price mechanism itself. The first key issue, as green economist E.
F. Schumacher stressed, is that the market is based on *"total
quantification at the expense of qualitative differences; for private
enterprise is not concerned with what it produces but only what it gains
from production."* This means that the *"judgement of economics . . . is
an extremely **fragmentary** judgement; out of the large number of
aspects which in real life have to be seen and judged together before a
decision can be taken, economics supplies only one -- whether a thing
yields a profit **to those who undertake it** or not."* [**Small is
Beautiful**, p. 215 and p. 28] This leads to a simplistic decision
making perspective:

> *"Everything becomes crystal clear after you have reduced reality to
> one -- one only -- of its thousand aspects. You know what to do --
> whatever produces profits; you know what to avoid -- whatever reduces
> them or makes a loss. And there is at the same time a perfect
> measuring rod for the degree of success or failure. Let no-one befog
> the issue by asking whether a particular action is conducive to the
> wealth and well-being of society, whether it leads to moral,
> aesthetic, or cultural enrichment. Simply find out whether it pays."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p. 215]

This means that key factors in decision making are, at best, undermined
by the pressing need to make profits or, at worse, simply ignored as a
handicap. So *"in the market place, for practical reasons, innumerable
qualitative distinctions which are of vital importance for man and
society are suppressed; they are not allowed to surface. Thus the reign
of quantity celebrates its greatest triumphs in 'The Market.'"* This
feeds the drive to externalise costs, as it is *"based on a definition
of cost which excludes all 'free goods,' that is to say, the entire
God-given environment, except for those parts of it that have been
privately appropriated. This means that an activity can be economic
although it plays hell with the environment, and that a competing
activity, if at some cost it protects and conserves the environment,
will be uneconomic."* To summarise: *"it is inherent in the methodology
of economics to **ignore man's dependence on the natural world.**"*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 30 and p. 29]

Ultimately, should our decision-making be limited to a single criteria,
namely whether it makes someone a profit? Should our environment be
handed over to a system which bases itself on confusing efficient
resource allocation with maximising profits in an economy marked by
inequalities of wealth and, consequently, on unequal willingness and
ability to pay? In other words, biodiversity, eco-system stability,
clean water and air, and so forth only become legitimate social goals
when the market places a price on them sufficient for a capitalist to
make money from them. Such a system can only fail to achieve a green
society simply because ecological concerns cannot be reduced to one
criteria (*"The discipline of economics achieves its formidable
resolving power by transforming what might otherwise be considered
qualitative matters into quantitative issues with a single metric and,
as it were, a bottom line: profit or loss."* [James C. Scott, **Seeing
like a State**, p. 346]). This is particularly the case when even
economists admit that the market under-supplies public goods, of which a
clean and aesthetically pleasing environment is the classic example.
Markets may reflect, to some degree, individual consumer preferences
distorted by income distribution but they are simply incapable of
reflecting collective values (a clean environment and spectacular views
are inherently collective goods and cannot be enclosed). As a result,
capitalists will be unlikely to invest in such projects as they cannot
make everyone who uses them pay for the privilege.

Then there is the tendency for the market to undermine and destroy
practical and local knowledge on which truly ecological decisions need
to be based. Indigenous groups, for example, have accumulated an
enormous body of knowledge about local ecological conditions and species
which are ignored in economic terms or eliminated by competition with
those with economic power. Under markets, in other words, unarticulated
knowledge of soil conditions and bio-diversity which have considerable
value for long-term sustainability is usually lost when it meets
agribusiness.

Practical knowledge, i.e. local and tacit knowledge which James C. Scott
terms metis, is being destroyed and replaced *"by standardised formulas
legible from the centre"* and this *"is virtually inscribed in the
activities of both the state and large-scale bureaucratic capitalism."*
The *"logic animating the project . . . is one of control and
appropriation. Local knowledge, because it is dispersed and relatively
autonomous, is all but unappropriable. The reduction or, more utopian
still, the elimination of metis and the local control its entails are
preconditions, in the case of the state, of administrative order and
fiscal appropriation and, in the case of the large capitalism firm, of
worker discipline and profit."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 335-6] Green
socialist John O'Neill provides a similar analysis:

> *"far from fostering the existence of practical and local knowledge,
> the spread of markets often appears to do the opposite: the growth of
> global markets is associated with the disappearance of knowledge that
> is local and practical, and the growth of abstract codifiable
> information . . . the market as a mode of co-ordination appears to
> foster forms of abstract codifiable knowledge . . . The knowledge of
> weak and marginal actors in markets, such as peasant and marginalised
> indigenous communities, tends to be lost to those who hold market
> power. The epistemic value of knowledge claims bear no direct relation
> to their market value. Local and often unarticulated knowledge of soil
> conditions and crop varieties that have considerable value for
> long-term sustainability of agriculture has no value in markets and
> hence is always liable to loss when it comes into contact with
> oil-based agricultural technologies of those who do have market power.
> The undermining of local practical knowledge in market economies has
> also been exacerbated by the global nature of both markets and large
> corporate actors who require knowledge that is transferable across
> different cultures and contexts and hence abstract and codifiable . .
> . Finally, the demand for commensurability and calculability runs
> against the defence of local and practical knowledge. This is not just
> a theoretical problem but one with real institutional embodiments. The
> market encourages a spirit of calculability . . . That spirit is the
> starting point for the algorithmic account of practical reason which
> requires explicit common measures for rational choice and fails to
> acknowledge the existence of choice founded upon practical judgement.
> More generally it is not amicable to forms of knowledge that are
> practical, local and uncodifiable."* [**Markets, Deliberation and
> Environment**, pp. 192-3]

Thus the market tends to replace traditional forms of agriculture and
working practices (and the complex knowledge and expertises associated
with both) with standardised techniques which aim to extract as much
profit in the short-term as possible by concentrating power into the
hands of management and their appointed experts. That they cannot even
begin to comprehend the local conditions and practical knowledge and
skills required to effectively use the resources available in a
sustainable manner should go without saying. Unfortunately, the economic
clout of big business is such that it can defeat traditional forms of
knowledge in the short-term (the long-term effect of such exploitation
is usually considered someone else's problem).

So, given this analysis, it comes as no surprise to anarchists that
private property has not protected the environment. In fact, it is one
of the root causes of our ecological problems. Markets hide the
ecological and health information necessary for environmentally sound
decisions. Ultimately, environmental issues almost always involve value
judgements and the market stops the possibility of producing a public
dialogue in which these values can be discussed and enriched. Instead,
it replaces this process by an aggregation of existing preferences
(shaped by economic pressures and necessity) skewed in favour of this
generation's property owners. An individual's interest, like that of the
public as a whole, is not something which exists independently of the
decision-making processes used but rather is something which is shaped
by them. Atomistic processes focused on a simplistic criteria will
produce simplistic decisions which have collectively irrational results.
Collective decision making based on equal participation of all will
produce decisions which reflect **all** the concerns of **all** affected
in a process which will help produce empowered and educated individuals
along with informed decisions.

Some disagree. For these the reason why there is environmental damage is
not due to too much private property but because there is too little.
This perspective derives from neo-classical and related economic theory
and it argues that ecological harm occurs because environmental goods
and bads are unpriced. They come free, in other words. This suggests
that the best way to protect the environment is to privatise everything
and to create markets in all areas of life. This perspective, needless
to say, is entirely the opposite of the standard eco-anarchist one which
argues that our environmental problems have their root in market
mechanisms, private property and the behaviour they generate. As such,
applying market norms even more rigorously and into areas of life that
were previously protected from markets will tend to make ecological
problems worse, not better.

As would be expected, the pro-property perspective is part of the wider
turn to free(r) market capitalism since the 1970s. With the apparent
success of Thatcherism and Reaganism (at least for the people who count
under capitalism, i.e. the wealthy) and the fall of Stalinism in the
Eastern Block, the 1980s and 1990s saw a period of capitalist
triumphantism. This lead to an increase in market based solutions to
every conceivable social problem, regardless of how inappropriate and/or
insane the suggestions were. This applies to ecological issues as well.
The publication of **Free Market Environmentalism** by Terry L. Anderson
and Donald R. Leal in 1991 saw ideas previously associated with the
right-"libertarian" fringe become more mainstream and, significantly,
supported by corporate interests and the think-tanks and politicians
they fund.

Some see it as a deliberate plan to counteract a growing ecological
movement which aims to change social, political and economic structures
in order to get at the root cases of our environmental problems.
Activist Sara Diamond suggested that *"[s]ome farsighted corporations
are finding that the best 'bulwark' against 'anti-corporation'
environmentalism is the creation and promotion of an alternative model
called 'free market environmentalism.'"* [*"Free Market
Environmentalism,"* **Z Magazine**, December 1991] Whatever the case,
the net effect of this reliance on markets is to depoliticise
environmental debates, to transform issues which involve values and
affect many people into ones in which the property owner is given
priority and where the criteria for decision making becomes one of
profit and loss. It means, effectively, ending debates over **why**
ecological destruction happens and what we should do about it and
accepting the assumptions, institutions and social relationships of
capitalism as a given as well as privatising yet more of the world and
handing it over to capitalists. Little wonder it is being proposed as an
alternative by corporations concerned about their green image. At the
very least, it is fair to say that the corporations who punt free market
environmentalism as an alternative paradigm for environmental policy
making are not expecting to pay more by internalising their costs by so
doing.

As with market fundamentalism in general, private property based
environmentalism appears to offer solutions simply because it fails to
take into account the reality of any actual capitalist system. The
notion that all we have to do is let markets work ignores the fact that
any theoretical claim for the welfare superiority of free-market
outcomes falls when we look at any real capitalist market. Once we
introduce, say, economic power, imperfect competition, public goods,
externalities or asymmetric information then the market quickly becomes
a god with feet of clay. This is what we will explore in the rest of
this section while the [next section](secE4.html) will discuss a
specific example of how laissez-faire capitalism cannot be ecological as
proved by one of its most fervent ideologues. Overall, anarchists feel
we have a good case on why is unlikely that private property can protect
the environment.

E.3.1 Will privatising nature save it?
--------------------------------------

No, it will not. To see why, it is only necessary to look at the
arguments and assumptions of those who advocate such solutions to our
ecological problems.

The logic behind the notion of privatising the planet is simple. Many of
our environmental problems stem, as noted in the [last
section](secE3.html), from externalities. According to the "market
advocates" this is due to there being unowned resources for if someone
owned them, they would sue whoever or whatever was polluting them. By
means of private property and the courts, pollution would end.
Similarly, if an endangered species or eco-system were privatised then
the new owners would have an interest in protecting them if tourists,
say, were willing to pay to see them. Thus the solution to environmental
problems is simple. Privatise everything and allow people's natural
incentive to care for their own property take over.

Even on this basic level, there are obvious problems. Why assume that
**capitalist** property rights are the only ones, for example? However,
the crux of the problem is clear enough. This solution only works if we
assume that the "resources" in question make their owners a profit or if
they are willing and able to track down the polluters. Neither
assumption is robust enough to carry the weight that capitalism places
on our planet's environment. There is no automatic mechanism by which
capitalism will ensure that environmentally sound practices will
predominate. In fact, the opposite is far more likely.

At its most basic, the underlying rationale is flawed. It argues that it
is only by giving the environment a price can we compare its use for
different purposes. This allows the benefits from preserving a forest to
be compared to the benefits of cutting it down and building a shopping
centre over it. Yet by "benefits" it simply means economic benefits,
i.e. whether it is profitable for property owners to do so, rather than
ecologically sensible. This is an important difference. If more money
can be made in turning a lake into a toxic waste dump then, logically,
its owners will do so. Similarly, if timber prices are not rising at the
prevailing profit or interest rate, then a self-interested firm will
seek to increase its profits and cut-down its trees as fast as possible,
investing the returns elsewhere. They may even sell such cleared land to
other companies to develop. This undermines any claim that private
property rights and environmental protection go hand-in-hand.

As Glenn Albrecht argues, such a capitalist "solution" to environmental
problems is only *"likely to be effective in protecting species [or
ecosystems] which are commercially important only if the commercial
value of that species [or ecosystem] exceeds that of other potential
sources of income that could be generated from the same 'natural
capital' that the species inhabits If, for example, the conservation of
species for ecotourism generates income which is greater than that which
could be gained by using their habit for the growing of cash crops, then
the private property rights of the owners of the habitat will
effectively protect those species . . . However, this model becomes
progressively less plausible when we are confronted with rare but
commercially unimportant species [or ecosystems] versus very large
development proposals that are inconsistent with their continual
existence. The less charismatic the species, the more 'unattractive' the
ecosystem, the more likely it will be that the development proposal will
proceed. The 'rights' of developers will eventually win out over species
and ecosystems since . . . bio-diversity itself has no right to exist
and even if it did, the clash of rights between an endangered species
and multi-national capital would be a very uneven contest."* [*"Ethics,
Anarchy and Sustainable Development"*, pp. 95-118, **Anarchist
Studies**, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 104-5]

So the conservation of endangered species or eco-systems is not
automatically achieved using the market. This is especially the case
when there is little, or no, economic value in the species or eco-system
in question. The most obvious example is when there is only a limited
profit to be made from a piece of land by maintaining it as the habitat
of a rare species. If any alternative economic uses for that land yields
a greater profit then that land will be developed. Moreover, if a
species looses its economic value as a commodity then the property
owners will become indifferent to its survival. Prices change and so an
investment which made sense today may not look so good tomorrow. So if
the market price of a resource decreases then it becomes unlikely that
its ecological benefits will outweigh its economic ones. Overall,
regardless of the wider ecological importance of a specific eco-system
or species it is likely that their owner will prioritise short-term
profits over environmental concerns. It should go without saying that
threatened or endangered eco-systems and species will be lost under a
privatised regime as it relies on the willingness of profit-orientated
companies and individuals to take a loss in order to protect the
environment.

Overall, advocates of market based environmentalism need to present a
case that **all** plants, animals and eco-systems are valuable
commodities in the same way as, say, fish are. While a case for
market-based environmentalism can be made by arguing that fish have a
market price and, as such, owners of lakes, rivers and oceans would have
an incentive to keep their waters clean in order to sell fish on the
market, the same cannot be said of all species and habitats. Simply put,
not all creatures, plants and eco-systems with an ecological value will
have an economic one as well.

Moreover, markets can send mixed messages about the environmental
policies which should be pursued. This may lead to over investment in
some areas and then a slump. For example, rising demand for recycled
goods may inspire an investment boom which, in turn, may lead to
over-supply and then a crash, with plants closing as the price falls due
to increased supply. Recycling may then become economically unviable,
even though it remains ecologically essential. In addition, market
prices hardly provide an accurate signal regarding the "correct" level
of ecological demands in a society as they are constrained by income
levels and reflect the economic pressures people are under. Financial
security and income level play a key role, for in the market not all
votes are equal. A market based allocation of environmental goods and
bads does not reflect the obvious fact the poor may appear to value
environmental issues less than the wealthy in this scheme simply because
their preferences (as expressed in the market) are limited by lower
budgets.

Ultimately, market demand can change without the underlying demand for a
specific good changing. For example, since the 1970s the real wages of
most Americans have stagnated while inequality has soared. As a result,
fewer households can afford to go on holidays to wilderness areas or buy
more expensive ecologically friendly products. Does that imply that the
people involved now value the environment less simply because they now
find it harder to make ends meet? Equally, if falling living standards
force people to take jobs with dangerous environmental consequences does
than really provide an accurate picture of people's desires? It takes a
giant leap of faith (in the market) to assume that falling demand for a
specific environmental good implies that reducing environmental damage
has become less valuable to people. Economic necessity may compel people
to act against their best impulses, even strongly felt natural values
(an obvious example is that during recessions people may be more willing
to tolerate greenhouse gas emissions simply because they need the work).

Nor can it be claimed that all the relevant factors in ecological
decision making can take the commodity form, i.e. be given a price. This
means that market prices do not, in fact, actually reflect people's
environmental values. Many aspects of our environment simply cannot be
given a market price (how can you charge people to look at beautiful
scenery?). Then there is the issue of how to charge a price which
reflects the demand of people who wish to know that, say, the rainforest
or wilderness exists and is protected but who will never visit either?
Nor are future generations taken into account by a value that reflects
current willingness to pay and might not be consistent with long-term
welfare or even survival. And how do you factor in the impact a cleaner
environment has on protecting or extending human lives? Surely a healthy
environment is worth much more than simply lost earnings and the medical
bills and clean-up activities saved? At best, you could factor this in
by assuming that the wage premium of workers in dangerous occupations
reflects it but a human life is, surely, worth more than the wages
required to attract workers into dangerous working conditions. Wages are
**not** an objective measure of the level of environmental risks workers
are willing to tolerate as they are influenced by the overall state of
the economy, the balance of class power and a whole host of other
factors. Simply put, fear of unemployment and economic security will
ensure that workers tolerate jobs that expose them and their communities
to high levels of environmental dangers.

Economic necessity drives decisions in the so-called "free" market
(given a choice between clean air and water and having a job, many
people would choose the latter simply because they have to in order to
survive). These factors can only be ignored which means that
environmental values **cannot** be treated like commodities and market
prices **cannot** accurately reflect environmental values. The key thing
to remember is that the market does not meet demand, it meets
**effective** demand (i.e. demands backed up with money). Yet people
want endangered species and eco-systems protected even if there is no
effective demand for them on the market (nor could be). We will return
to this critical subject in the [next section](secE3.html#sece32).

Then there are the practicalities of privatising nature. How, for
example, do we "privatise" the oceans? How do we "privatise" whales and
sharks in order to conserve them? How do we know if a whaling ship kills
"your" whale? And what if "your" shark feeds on "my" fish? From whom do
we buy these resources in the first place? What courts must be set up to
assess and try crimes and define damages? Then there are the costs of
defining and enforcing private rights by means of the courts. This would
mean individual case-by-case adjudications which increase transaction
costs. Needless to say, such cases will be influenced by the resources
available to both sides. Moreover, the judiciary is almost always the
least accountable and representative branch of the state and so turning
environmental policy decisions over to them will hardly ensure that
public concerns are at the foremost of any decision (such a move would
also help undermine trial by jury as juries often tend to reward
sizeable damages against corporations in such cases, a factor
corporations are all too aware of).

This brings us to the problem of actually proving that the particles of
a specific firm has inflicted a specific harm on a particular person and
their property. Usually, there are multiple firms engaging in polluting
the atmosphere and it would be difficult, if not impossible, to legally
establish the liability of any particular firm. How to identify which
particular polluter caused the smog which damaged your lungs and garden?
Is it an individual company? A set of companies? All companies? Or is it
transportation? In which case, is it the specific car which finally
caused your cancer or a specific set of car uses? Or all car users? Or
is it the manufacturers for producing such dangerous products in the
first place?

Needless to say, even this possibility is limited to the current
generation. Pollution afflicts future generations as well and it is
impossible for their interests to be reflected in court for "future
harm" is not the question, only present harm counts. Nor can non-human
species or eco-systems sue for damage, only their owners can and, as
noted above, they may find it more profitable to tolerate (or even
encourage) pollution than sue. Given that non-owners cannot sue as they
are not directly harmed, the fate of the planet will rest in the hands
of the property-owning class and so the majority are effectively
dispossessed of any say over their environment beyond what their money
can buy. Transforming ecological concerns into money ensures a monopoly
by the wealthy few:

> "In other words, the environment is assumed to be something that can
> be 'valued,' in a similar way that everything else is assigned a value
> within the market economy.
> "However, apart from the fact that there is no way to put an
> 'objective' value on most of the elements that constitute the
> environment (since they affect a subjective par excellence factor,
> i.e. the quality of life), the solution suggested . . . implies the
> extension of the marketisation process to the environment itself. In
> other words, it implies the assignment of a market value to the
> environment . . . so that the effects of growth onto it are
> 'internalised' . . . The outcome of such a process is easily
> predictable: the environment will either be put under the control of
> the economic elites that control the market economy (in case an actual
> market value be assigned to it) or the state (in case an imputed value
> is only possible). In either case, not only the arrest of the
> ecological damage is -- at least -- doubtful, but the control over
> Nature by elites who aim to dominate it -- using 'green' prescriptions
> this time -- is perpetuated." [Takis Fotopoulous, *"Development or
> Democracy?"*, pp. 57-92, **Society and Nature**, No. 7, pp. 79-80]

Another key problem with using private property in regard to
environmental issues is that they are almost always reactive, almost
never proactive. Thus the pollution needs to have occurred before court
actions are taken as strict liability generally provides after-the-fact
compensation for injuries received. If someone does successfully sue for
damages, the money received can hardly replace an individual or species
or eco-system. At best, it could be argued that the threat of being sued
will stop environmentally damaging activities but there is little
evidence that this works. If a company concludes that the damages
incurred by court action is less than the potential profits to be made,
then they will tolerate the possibility of court action (particularly if
they feel that potential victims do not have the time or resources
available to sue). This kind of decision was most infamously done by
General Motors when it designed its Malibu car. The company estimated
that the cost of court awarded damages per car was less than ensuring
that the car did not explode during certain kinds of collusion and so
allowed people to die in fuel-fed fires rather than alter the design.
Unfortunately for GM, the jury was horrified (on appeal, the damages
were substantially reduced). [Joel Bakan, **The Corporation**, pp. 61-5]

So this means that companies seeking to maximise profits have an
incentive to cut safety costs on the assumption that the risk of so
doing will be sufficiently low to make it worthwhile and that any
profits generated will more than cover the costs of any trial and
damages imposed. As eco-anarchist David Watson noted in regards to the
Prudhoe Bay disaster, it *"should go without saying that Exxon and its
allies don't try their best to protect the environment or human health.
Capitalist institutions produce to accumulate power and wealth, not for
any social good. Predictably, in order to cut costs, Exxon steadily
dismantled what emergency safeguards it had throughout the 1980s,
pointing to environmental studies showing a major spill as so unlikely
that preparation was unnecessary. So when the inevitable came crashing
down, the response was complete impotence and negligence."* [**Against
the Megamachine**, p. 57] As such, it cannot be stressed too much that
the only reason companies act any different (if and when they do) is
because outside agitators -- people who understand and cared about the
planet and people more than they did about company profits -- eventually
forced them to.

So given all this, it is clear that privatising nature is no guarantee
that environmental problems will be reduced. In fact, it is more likely
to have the opposite effect. Even its own advocates suggest that their
solution may produce **more** pollution than the current system of state
regulation. Terry L. Anderson and Donald R. Leal put it this way:

> *"If markets produce 'too little' clean water because dischargers do
> not have to pay for its use, then political solutions are equally
> likely to produce 'too much' clean water because those who enjoy the
> benefits do not pay the cost . . . Just as pollution externalities can
> generate too much dirty air, political externalities can generate too
> much water storage, clear-cutting, wilderness, or water quality . . .
> Free market environmentalism emphasises the importance of market
> process in determining optimal amounts of resource use."* [**Free
> Market Environmentalism**, p. 23]

What kind of environmentalism considers the possibility of "too much"
clean air and water? This means, ironically, that from the perspective
of free-market "environmentalism" that certain ecological features may
be over-protected as a result of the influence of non-economic goals and
priorities. Given that this model is proposed by many corporate funded
think tanks, it is more than likely that their sponsors think there is
"too much" clean air and water, "too much" wilderness and "too much"
environmental goods. In other words, the "optimal" level of pollution is
currently too low as it doubtful that corporations are seeking to
increase their costs of production by internalising even more
externalities.

Equally, we can be sure that "too much" pollution *"is where the company
polluting the water has to pay too much to clean up the mess they make.
It involves a judgement that costs to the company are somehow synonymous
with costs to the community and therefore can be weighed against
benefits to the community."* Such measures *"grant the highest
decision-making power over environmental quality to those who currently
make production decisions. A market system gives power to those most
able to pay. Corporations and firms, rather than citizens or
environmentalists, will have the choice about whether to pollute (and
pay the charges or buy credits to do so)."* [Sharon Beder, **Global
Spin**, p. 104]

The surreal notion of "too much" clean environment does indicate another
key problem with this approach, namely its confusion of need and demand
with **effective** demand. The fact is that people may desire a clean
environment, but they may not be able to afford to pay for it on the
market. In a similar way, there can be "too much" food while people are
starving to death simply because people cannot afford to pay for it
(there is no effective demand for food, but an obvious pressing need).
Much the same can be said of environment goods. A lack of demand for a
resource today does **not** mean it is not valued by individuals nor
does it mean that it will not be valued in the future. However, in the
short-term focus produced by the market such goods will be long-gone,
replaced by more profitable investments.

The underlying assumption is that a clean environment is a luxury which
we must purchase from property owners rather than a right we have as
human beings. Even if we assume the flawed concept of self-ownership,
the principle upon which defenders of capitalism tend to justify their
system, the principle should be that our ownership rights in our bodies
excludes it being harmed by the actions of others. In other words, a
clean environment should be a basic right for all. Privatising the
environment goes directly against this basic ecological insight.

The state's environmental record **has** often been terrible,
particularly as its bureaucrats have been influenced by private interest
groups when formulating and implementing environmental policies. The
state is far more likely to be "captured" by capitalist interests than
by environmental groups or even the general community. Moreover, its
bureaucrats have all too often tended to weight the costs and benefits
of specific projects in such a way as to ensure that any really desired
ones will go ahead, regardless of what local people want or what the
environmental impact will really be. Such projects, needless to say,
will almost always have powerful economic interests behind them and will
seek to ensure that "development" which fosters economic growth is
pursued. This should be unsurprising. If we assume, as "market
advocates" do, that state officials seek to further their own interests
then classes with the most economic wealth are most likely to be able to
do that the best. That the state will reflect the interests of those
with most private property and marginalise the property-less should,
therefore, come as no surprise.

Yet the state is not immune to social pressure from the general public
or the reality of environmental degradation. This is proved, in its own
way, by the rise of corporate PR, lobbying and think-tanks into
multi-million pound industries. So while the supporters of the market
stress its ability to change in the face of consumer demand, their view
of the alternatives is extremely static and narrow. They fail,
unsurprisingly, to consider the possibility of alternative forms of
social organisation. Moreover, they also fail to mention that popular
struggles can influence the state by means of direct action. For them,
state officials will always pursue their own private interests,
irrespective of popular pressures and social struggles (or, for that
matter, the impact of corporate lobbying). While it is possible that the
state will favour specific interests and policies, it does not mean that
it cannot be forced to consider wider ones by the general public (until
such time as it can be abolished, of course).

As we discussed in [section D.1.5](secD1.html#secd15), the fact the
state can be pressured by the general public is precisely why certain of
its secondary functions have been under attack by corporations and the
wealthy (a task which their well-funded think-tanls provide the
rationales for). If all this is the case (and it is), then why expect
cutting out the middle-person by privatising nature to improve matters?
By its own logic, therefore, privatising nature is hardly going to
produce a better environment as it is unlikely that corporations would
fund policies which would result in more costs for themselves and less
access to valuable natural resources. As free market environmentalism is
premised on economic solutions to ecological problems and assumes that
economic agents will act in ways which maximise their own benefit, such
an obvious conclusion should come naturally to its advocates. For some
reason, it does not.

Ultimately, privatising nature rests on the ridiculous notion that a
clean environment is a privilege which we must buy rather than a right.
Under "free market environmentalism" private property is assumed to be
the fundamental right while there is no right to a clean and sustainable
environment. In other words, the interests of property owners are
considered the most important factor and the rest of us are left with
the possibility of asking them for certain environmental goods which
they may supply if they make a profit from so doing. This prioritisation
and categorisation is by no means obvious and uncontroversial. Surely
the right to a clean and liveable environment is more fundamental than
those associated with property? If we assume this then the reduction of
pollution, soil erosion, and so forth are not goods for which we must
pay but rather rights to which we are entitled. In other words,
protecting species and ecosystem as well as preventing avoidable deaths
and illnesses are fundamental issues which simply transcend the market.
Being asked to put a price on nature and people is, at best,
meaningless, or, at worse, degrading. It suggests that the person simply
does not understand why these things are important.

But why should we be surprised? After all, private property bases itself
on the notion that we must buy access to land and other resources
required for a fully human life. Why should a clean environment and a
healthy body be any different? Yet again, we see the derived rights
(namely private property) trumping the fundamental base right (namely
the right of self-ownership which should automatically exclude harm by
pollution). That this happens so consistently should not come as too
great a surprise, given that the theory was invented to justify the
appropriation of the fruits of the worker's labour by the property owner
(see [section B.4.2](secB4.html#secb42)). Why should we be surprised
that this is now being used to appropriate the rights of individuals to
a clean environment and turn it into yet another means of expropriating
them from their birthrights?

E.3.2 How does economic power contribute to the ecological crisis?
------------------------------------------------------------------

So far in this section we have discussed why markets fail to allocate
environmental resources. This is due to information blocks and costs,
lack of fully internalised prices (externalities) and the existence of
public goods. Individual choices are shaped by the information available
to them about the consequences of their actions, and the price mechanism
blocks essential aspects of this and so information is usually partial
at best within the market. Worse, it is usually distorted by advertising
and the media as well as corporate and government spin and PR. Local
knowledge is undermined by market power, leading to unsustainable
practices to reap maximum short term profits. Profits as the only
decision making criteria also leads to environmental destruction as
something which may be ecologically essential may not be economically
viable. All this means that the price of a good cannot indicate its
environmental impact and so that market failure is pervasive in the
environmental area. Moreover, capitalism is as unlikely to produce their
fair distribution of environmental goods any more than any other good or
resource due to differences in income and so demand (particularly as it
takes the existing distribution of wealth as the starting point). The
reality of our environmental problems provides ample evidence for this
analysis.

During this discussion we have touched upon another key issue, namely
how wealth can affect how environmental and other externalities are
produced and dealt with in a capitalist system. Here we extend our
critique by addressed an issue we have deliberately ignored until now,
namely the distribution and wealth and its resulting economic power. The
importance of this factor cannot be stressed too much, as "market
advocates" at best downplay it or, at worse, ignore it or deny it
exists. However, it plays the same role in environmental matters as it
does in, say, evaluating individual freedom within capitalism. Once we
factor in economic power the obvious conclusion is the market based
solutions to the environment will result in, as with freedom, people
selling it simply to survive under capitalism (as we discussed in
[section B.4](secB4.html), for example).

It could be argued that strictly enforcing property rights so that
polluters can be sued for any damages made will solve the problem of
externalities. If someone suffered pollution damage on their property
which they had not consented to then they could issue a lawsuit in order
to get the polluter to pay compensation for the damage they have done.
This could force polluters to internalise the costs of pollution and so
the threat of lawsuits can be used as an incentive to avoid polluting
others.

While this approach could be considered as **part** of any solution to
environmental problems under capitalism, the sad fact is it ignores the
realities of the capitalist economy. The key phrase here is "not
consented to" as it means that pollution would be fine if the others
agree to it (in return, say, for money). This has obvious implications
for the ability of capitalism to reduce pollution. For just as working
class people "consent" to hierarchy within the workplace in return for
access to the means of life, so to would they "consent" to pollution. In
other words, the notion that pollution can be stopped by means of
private property and lawsuits ignores the issue of class and economic
inequality. Once these are factored in, it soon becomes clear that
people may put up with externalities imposed upon them simply because of
economic necessity and the pressure big business can inflict.

The first area to discuss is inequalities in wealth and income. Not all
economic actors have equal resources. Corporations and the wealthy have
far greater resources at their disposal and can spend millions of pounds
in producing PR and advertising (propaganda), fighting court cases,
influencing the political process, funding "experts" and think-tanks,
and, if need be, fighting strikes and protests. Companies can use *"a
mix of cover-up, publicity campaigns and legal manoeuvres to continue
operations unimpeded."* They can go to court to try an *"block more
stringent pollution controls."* [David Watson, **Against the
Megamachine**, p. 56] Also while, in principle, the legal system offers
equal protection to all in reality, wealthy firms and individuals have
more resources than members of the general public. This means that they
can employ large numbers of lawyers and draw out litigation procedures
for years, if not decades.

This can be seen around us today. Unsurprisingly, the groups which bear
a disproportionate share of environmental burdens are the poorest ones.
Those at the bottom of the social hierarchy have less resources
available to fight for their rights. They may not be aware of their
rights in specific situations and not organised enough to resist. This,
of course, explains why companies spend so much time attacking unions
and other forms of collective organisation which change that situation.
Moreover as well as being less willing to sue, those on lower income may
be more willing to be bought-off due to their economic situation. After
all, tolerating pollution in return for some money is more tempting when
you are struggling to make ends meet.

Then there is the issue of effective demand. Simply put, allocation of
resources on the market is based on money and not need. If more money
can be made in, say, meeting the consumption demands of the west rather
than the needs of local people then the market will "efficiently"
allocate resources away from the latter to the former regardless of the
social and ecological impact. Take the example of Biofuels which have
been presented by some as a means of fuelling cars in a less
environmentally destructive way. Yet this brings people and cars into
direct competition over the most "efficient" (i.e. most profitable) use
of land. Unfortunately, effective demand is on the side of cars as their
owners usually live in the developed countries. This leads to a
situation where land is turned from producing food to producing
biofuels, the net effect of which is to reduce supply of food, increase
its price and so produce an increased likelihood of starvation. It also
gives more economic incentive to destroy rainforests and other fragile
eco-systems in order to produce more biofuel for the market.

Green socialist John O'Neill simply states the obvious:

> *"[The] treatment of efficiency as if it were logically independent of
> distribution is at best misleading, for the determination of
> efficiency already presupposes a given distribution of rights . . . [A
> specific outcome] is always relative to an initial starting point . .
> . If property rights are changed so also is what is efficient. Hence,
> the opposition between distributional and efficiency criteria is
> misleading. Existing costs and benefits themselves are the product of
> a given distribution of property rights. Since costs are not
> independent of rights they cannot guide the allocation of rights.
> Different initial distributions entail differences in whose
> preferences are to count. Environmental conflicts are often about who
> has rights to environment goods, and hence who is to bear the costs
> and who is to bear the benefits . . . Hence, environmental policy and
> resource decision-making cannot avoid making normative choices which
> include questions of resource distribution and the relationships
> between conflicting rights claims . . . The monetary value of a
> 'negative externality' depends on social institutions and
> distributional conflicts -- willing to pay measures, actual or
> hypothetical, consider preferences of the higher income groups [as]
> more important than those of lower ones. If the people damaged are
> poor, the monetary measure of the cost of damage will be lower -- 'the
> poor sell cheap.'"* [**Markets, Deliberation and Environment**, pp.
> 58-9]

Economic power also impacts on the types of contracts people make. It
does not take too much imagination to envision the possibility that
companies may make signing waivers that release it from liability a
condition for working there. This could mean, for example, a firm would
invest (or threaten to move production) only on condition that the local
community and its workers sign a form waiving the firm of any
responsibility for damages that may result from working there or from
its production process. In the face of economic necessity, the workers
may be desperate enough to take the jobs and sign the waivers. The same
would be the case for local communities, who tolerate the environmental
destruction they are subjected to simply to ensure that their economy
remains viable. This already happens, with some companies including a
clause in their contracts which states the employee cannot join a union.

Then there is the threat of legal action by companies. *"Every year,"*
records green Sharon Beder, *"thousands of Americans are sued for
speaking out against governments and corporations. Multi-million dollar
law suits are being filed against individual citizens and groups for
circulating petitions, writing to public officials, speaking at, or even
just attending, public meetings, organising a boycott and engaging in
peaceful demonstrations."* This trend has spread to other countries and
the intent is the same: to silence opposition and undermine campaigns.
This tactic is called a SLAPP (for ***"Strategic Lawsuits Against Public
Participation"***) and is a civil court action which does not seek to
win compensation but rather aims *"to harass, intimidate and distract
their opponents . . . They win the political battle, even when they lose
the court case, if their victims and those associated with them stop
speaking out against them."* This is an example of economic power at
work, for the cost to a firm is just part of doing business but could
bankrupt an individual or environmental organisation. In this way *"the
legal system best serves those who have large financial resources at
their disposal"* as such cases take *"an average of three years to be
settled, and even if the person sued wins, can cost tens of thousands of
dollars in legal fees. Emotional stress, disillusionment, diversion of
time and energy, and even divisions within families, communities and
groups can also result."* [**Global Spin**, pp. 63-7]

A SLAPP usually deters those already involved from continuing to freely
participate in debate and protest as well as deterring others from
joining in. The threat of a court case in the face of economic power
usually ensures that SLAPPS do not go to trial and so its objective of
scaring off potential opponents usually works quickly. The reason can be
seen from the one case in which a SLAPP backfired, namely the McLibel
trial. After successfully forcing apologies from major UK media outlets
like the BBC, Channel 4 and the Guardian by threatening legal action for
critical reporting of the company, McDonald's turned its attention to
the small eco-anarchist group London Greenpeace (which is not affiliated
with Greenpeace International). This group had produced a leaflet called
*"What's Wrong with McDonald's"* and the company sent spies to its
meetings to identify people to sue. Two of the anarchists refused to be
intimidated and called McDonald's bluff. Representing themselves in
court, the two unemployed activists started the longest trial in UK
history. After three years and a cost of around 10 million, the trial
judge found that some of the claims were untrue (significantly,
McDonald's had successfully petitioned the judge not to have a jury for
the case, arguing that the issues were too complex for the public to
understand). While the case was a public relations disaster for the
company, McDonald's keeps going as before using the working practices
exposed in the trial and remains one of the world's largest corporations
confident that few people would have the time and resources to fight
SLAPPs (although the corporation may now think twice before suing
anarchists!).

Furthermore, companies are known to gather lists of known
"trouble-makers" These "black lists" of people who could cause companies
"trouble" (i.e., by union organising or suing employers over "property
rights" issues) would often ensure employee "loyalty," particularly if
new jobs need references. Under wage labour, causing one's employer
"problems" can make one's current and future position difficult. Being
black-listed would mean no job, no wages, and little chance of being
re-employed. This would be the result of continually suing in defence of
one's property rights -- assuming, of course, that one had the time and
money necessary to sue in the first place. Hence working-class people
are a weak position to defend their rights under capitalism due to the
power of employers both within and without the workplace. All these are
strong incentives **not** to rock the boat, particularly if employees
have signed a contract ensuring that they will be fired if they discuss
company business with others (lawyers, unions, media, etc.).

Economic power producing terrible contracts does not affect just labour,
it also effects smaller capitalists as well. As we discussed in [section
C.4](secC4.html), rather than operating "efficiently" to allocate
resources within perfect competition any real capitalist market is
dominated by a small group of big companies who make increased profits
at the expense of their smaller rivals. This is achieved, in part,
because their size gives such firms significant influence in the market,
forcing smaller companies out of business or into making concessions to
get and maintain contracts.

The negative environmental impact of such a process should be obvious.
For example, economic power places immense pressures towards monoculture
in agriculture. In the UK the market is dominated by a few big
supermarkets. Their suppliers are expected to produce fruits and
vegetables which meet the requirements of the supermarkets in terms of
standardised products which are easy to transport and store. The
large-scale nature of the operations ensure that farmers across Britain
(indeed, the world) have to turn their farms into suppliers of these
standardised goods and so the natural diversity of nature is
systematically replaced by a few strains of specific fruits and
vegetables over which the consumer can pick. Monopolisation of markets
results in the monoculture of nature.

This process is at work in all capitalist nations. In American, for
example, the *"centralised purchasing decisions of the large restaurant
chains and their demand for standardised products have given a handful
of corporations an unprecedented degree of power over the nation's food
supply . . . obliterating regional differences, and spreading identical
stores throughout the country . . . The key to a successful franchise .
. . can be expressed in one world: 'uniformity.'"* This has resulted in
the industrialisation of food production, with the *"fast food chains
now stand[ing] atop a huge food-industrial complex that has gained
control of American agriculture . . . large multinationals . . .
dominate one commodity market after another . . . The fast food chain's
vast purchasing power and their demand for a uniform product have
encouraged fundamental changes in how cattle are raised, slaughter, and
processed into ground beef. These changes have made meatpacking . . .
into the most dangerous job in the United States . . . And the same meat
industry practices that endanger these workers have facilitated the
introduction of deadly pathogens . . . into America's hamburger meat."*
[Eric Schlosser, **Fast Food Nation**, p. 5 and pp. 8-9]

Award winning journalist Eric Schlosser has presented an excellent
insight in this centralised and concentrated food-industrial complex in
his book **Fast Food Nation**. Schlosser, of course, is not alone in
documenting the fundamentally anti-ecological nature of the capitalism
and how an alienated society has created an alienated means of feeding
itself. As a non-anarchist, he does fail to drawn the obvious conclusion
(namely abolish capitalism) but his book does present a good overview of
the nature of the processed at work and what drives them. Capitalism has
created a world where even the smell and taste of food is mass produced
as the industrialisation of agriculture and food processing has lead to
the product (it is hard to call it food) becoming bland and tasteless
and so chemicals are used to counteract the effects of producing it on
such a scale. It is standardised food for a standardised society. As he
memorably notes: *"Millions of . . . people at that very moment were
standing at the same counter, ordering the same food from the same menu,
food that tasted everywhere the same."* The Orwellian world of modern
corporate capitalism is seen in all its glory. A world in which the
industry group formed to combat Occupational Safety and Health
Administration regulation is called *"Alliance for Workplace Safety"*
and where the processed food's taste has to have the correct
*"mouthfeel."* Unsurprisingly, the executives of these companies talk
about *"the very essence of freedom"* and yet their corporation's
*"first commandant is that only production counts . . . The employee's
duty is to follow orders. Period."* In this irrational world, technology
will solve all our problems, even the ones it generates itself. For
example, faced with the serious health problems generated by the
industrialisation of meat processing, the meatpacking industry advocated
yet more technology to "solve" the problems caused by the existing
technology. Rather than focusing on the primary causes of meat
contamination, they proposed irradiating food. Of course the firms
involved want to replace the word *"irradiation"* with the phrase *"cold
pasteurisation"* due to the public being unhappy with the idea of their
food being subject to radiation.

All this is achievable due to the economic power of fewer and fewer
firms imposing costs onto their workers, their customers and,
ultimately, the planet.

The next obvious factor associated with economic power are the pressures
associated with capital markets and mobility. Investors and capitalists
are always seeking the maximum return and given a choice between lower
profits due to greater environmental regulation and higher profits due
to no such laws, the preferred option will hardly need explaining. After
all, the investor is usually concerned with the returns they get in
their investment, **not** in its physical condition nor in the overall
environmental state of the planet (which is someone else's concern).
This means that investors and companies interest is in moving their
capital to areas which return most money, not which have the best
environmental impact and legacy. Thus the mobility of capital has to be
taken into account. This is an important weapon in ensuring that the
agenda of business is untroubled by social concerns and environmental
issues. After all, if the owners and managers of capital consider that a
state's environmental laws too restrictive then it can simply shift
investments to states with a more favourable business climate. This
creates significant pressures on communities to minimise environmental
protection both in order to retain existing business and attract new
ones.

Let us assume that a company is polluting a local area. It is usually
the case that capitalist owners rarely live near the workplaces they
own, unlike workers and their families. This means that the decision
makers do not have to live with the consequences of their decisions. The
"free market" capitalist argument would be, again, that those affected
by the pollution would sue the company. We will assume that
concentrations of wealth have little or no effect on the social system
(which is a **highly** unlikely assumption, but never mind). Surely, if
local people did successfully sue, the company would be harmed
economically -- directly, in terms of the cost of the judgement,
indirectly in terms of having to implement new, eco-friendly processes.
Hence the company would be handicapped in competition, and this would
have obvious consequences for the local (and wider) economy.

This gives the company an incentive to simply move to an area that would
tolerate the pollution if it were sued or even threatened with a
lawsuit. Not only would existing capital move, but fresh capital would
not invest in an area where people stand up for their rights. This --
the natural result of economic power -- would be a "big stick" over the
heads of the local community. And when combined with the costs and
difficulties in taking a large company to court, it would make suing an
unlikely option for most people. That such a result would occur can be
inferred from history, where we see that multinational firms have moved
production to countries with little or no pollution laws and that court
cases take years, if not decades, to process.

This is the current situation on the international market, where there
is competition in terms of environment laws. Unsurprisingly, industry
tends to move to countries which tolerate high levels of pollution
(usually because of authoritarian governments which, like the
capitalists themselves, simply ignore the wishes of the general
population). Thus we have a market in pollution laws which,
unsurprisingly, supplies the ability to pollute to meet the demand for
it. This means that developing countries *"are nothing but a dumping
ground and pool of cheap labour for capitalist corporations. Obsolete
technology is shipped there along with the production of chemicals,
medicines and other products banned in the developed world. Labour is
cheap, there are few if any safety standards, and costs are cut. But the
formula of cost-benefit still stands: the costs are simply borne by
others, by the victims of Union Carbide, Dow, and Standard Oil."* [David
Watson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 44] This, it should be noted, makes perfect
economic sense. If an accident happened and the poor actually manage to
successfully sue the company, any payments will reflect their lost of
earnings (i.e., not very much).

As such, there are other strong economic reasons for doing this kind of
pollution exporting. You can estimate the value of production lost
because of ecological damage and the value of earnings lost through its
related health problems as well as health care costs. This makes it more
likely that polluting industries will move to low-income areas or
countries where the costs of pollution are correspondingly less
(particularly compared to the profits made in selling the products in
high-income areas). Rising incomes makes such goods as safety, health
and the environment more valuable as the value of life is, for working
people, based on their wages. Therefore, we would expect pollution to be
valued less when working class people are affected by it. In other
words, toxic dumps will tend to cluster around poorer areas as the costs
of paying for the harm done will be much less. The same logic underlies
the arguments of those who suggest that Third World countries should be
dumping grounds for toxic industrial wastes since life is cheap there

This was seen in early 1992 when a memo that went out under the name of
the then chief economist of the World Bank, Lawrence Summers, was leaked
to the press. Discussing the issue of *"dirty"* Industries, the memo
argued that the World Bank should *"be encouraging MORE migration of the
dirty industries"* to Less Developed Countries and provided three
reasons. Firstly, the *"measurements of the costs of health impairing
pollution depends on the foregone earnings from increased morbidity and
mortality"* and so *"pollution should be done in the country with the
lowest cost, which will be the country with the lowest wages."*
Secondly, *"that under-populated countries in Africa are vastly
UNDER-polluted, their air quality is probably vastly inefficiently low
compared to Los Angeles or Mexico City."* Thirdly, the *"demand for a
clean environment for aesthetic and health reasons is likely to have
very high income elasticity."* Concern over pollution related illness
would be higher in a country where more children survive to get them.
*"Also, much of the concern over industrial atmosphere discharge is
about visibility impairing particulates . . . Clearly trade in goods
that embody aesthetic pollution concerns could be welfare enhancing.
While production is mobile the consumption of pretty air is a
non-tradable."* The memo notes *"the economic logic behind dumping a
load of toxic waste in the lowest wage country is impeccable and we
should face up to that"* and ends by stating that the *"problem with the
arguments against all of these proposals for more pollution"* in the
third world *"could be turned around and used more or less effectively
against every Bank proposal for liberalisation."* [**The Economist**,
08/02/1992]

While Summers accepted the criticism for the memo, it was actually
written by Lant Pritchett, a prominent economist at the Bank. Summers
claimed he was being ironic and provocative. **The Economist**,
unsurprisingly, stated *"his economics was hard to answer"* while
criticising the language used. This was because clean growth may slower
than allowing pollution to occur and this would stop *"helping millions
of people in the third world to escape their poverty."* [15/02/1992] So
not only is poisoning the poor with pollution is economically correct,
it is in fact required by morality. Ignoring the false assumption that
growth, any kind of growth, always benefits the poor and the utter
contempt shown for both those poor themselves and our environment what
we have here is the cold logic that drives economic power to move
location to maintain its right to pollute our common environment.
Economically, it is perfectly logical but, in fact, totally insane (this
helps explain why making people "think like an economist" takes so many
years of indoctrination within university walls and why so few achieve
it).

Economic power works in other ways as well. A classic example of this at
work can be seen from the systematic destruction of public transport
systems in America from the 1930s onwards (see David St. Clair's **The
Motorization of American Cities** for a well-researched account of
this). These systems were deliberately bought by automotive (General
Motors), oil, and tire corporations in order to eliminate a less costly
(both economically **and** ecologically) competitor to the automobile.
This was done purely to maximise sales and profits for the companies
involved yet it transformed the way of life in scores of cities across
America. It is doubtful that if environmental concerns had been
considered important at the time that they would have stopped this from
happening. This means that individual consumption decisions will be made
within an market whose options can be limited simply by a large company
buying out and destroying alternatives.

Then there is the issue of economic power in the media. This is well
understood by corporations, who fund PR, think-tanks and "experts" to
counteract environmental activism and deny, for example, that humans are
contributing to global warming. Thus we have the strange position that
only Americans think that there is a debate on the causes of global
warming rather than a scientific consensus. The actions of corporate
funded "experts" and PR have ensured **that** particular outcome. As
Sharon Beder recounts in her book **Global Spin: The Corporate Assault
on Environmentalism**, a large amount of money is being spent on number
sophisticated techniques to change the way people think about the
environment, what causes the problems we face and what we can and should
do about it. Compared to the resources of environmental and green
organisations, it is unsurprising that this elaborate multi-billion
pound industry has poisoned public debate on such a key issue for the
future of humanity by propaganda and dis-information.

Having substantial resources available means that the media can be used
to further an anti-green agenda and dominate the debate (at least for a
while). Take, as an example, **The Skeptical Environmentalist**, a book
by Bjrn Lomborg (a political scientist and professor of statistics at
the University of Aarhus in Denmark). When it was published in 2001, it
caused a sensation with its claims that scientists and environmental
organisations were making, at best, exaggerated and, at worse, false
claims about the world's environmental problems. His conclusion was
panglossian in nature, namely that there was not that much to worry
about and we can continue as we are. That, of course, was music to the
ears of those actively destroying the environment as it reduces the
likelihood that any attempt will be made to stop them.

Unsurprisingly, the book was heavily promoted by the usual suspects and,
as a result received significant attention from the media. However, the
**extremely** critical reviews and critiques it subsequently produced
from expert scientists on the issues Lomborg discussed were less
prominently reviewed in the media, if at all. That critics of the book
argued that it was hardly an example of good science based on
objectivity, understanding of the underlying concepts, appropriate
statistical methods and careful peer review goes without saying. Sadly,
the fact that numerous experts in the fields Lomborg discussed showed
that his book was seriously flawed, misused data and statistics and
marred by flawed logic and hidden value judgements was not given
anything like the same coverage even though this information is far more
important in terms of shaping public perception. Such works and their
orchestrated media blitz provides those with a vested interest in the
status quo with arguments that they should be allowed to continue their
anti-environmental activities and agenda. Moreover, it takes up the
valuable time of those experts who have to debunk the claims rather than
do the research needed to understand the ecological problems we face and
propose possible solutions.

As well as spin and propaganda aimed at adults, companies are
increasingly funding children's education. This development implies
obvious limitations on the power of education to solve ecological
problems. Companies will hardly provide teaching materials or fund
schools which educate their pupils on the **real** causes of ecological
problems. Unsurprisingly, a 1998 study in the US by the Consumers Union
found that 80% of teaching material provided by companies was biased and
provided students with incomplete or slanted information that favoured
its sponsor's products and views [Schlosser, **Op. Cit.**, p. 55] The
more dependent a school is on corporate funds, the less likely it will
be to teach its students the necessity to question the motivations and
activities of business. That business will not fund education which it
perceives as anti-business should go without saying. As Sharon Beder
summarises, *"the infiltration of school curricula through banning some
texts and offering corporate-based curriculum material and lesson plans
in their place can conflict with educational objectives, and also with
the attainment of an undistorted understanding of environmental
problems."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 172-3]

This indicates the real problem of purely "educational" approaches to
solving the ecological crisis, namely that the ruling elite controls
education (either directly or indirectly). This is to be expected, as
any capitalist elite must control education because it is an essential
indoctrination tool needed to promote capitalist values and to train a
large population of future wage-slaves in the proper habits of obedience
to authority. Thus capitalists cannot afford to lose control of the
educational system. And this means that such schools will not teach
students what is really necessary to avoid ecological disaster: namely
the dismantling of capitalism itself. And we may add, alternative
schools (organised by libertarian unions and other associations) which
used libertarian education to produce anarchists would hardly be
favoured by companies and so be effectively black-listed - a real
deterrent to their spreading through society. Why would a capitalist
company employ a graduate of a school who would make trouble for them
once employed as their wage slave?

Finally, needless to say, the combined wealth of corporations and the
rich outweighs that of even the best funded environmental group or
organisation (or even all of them put together). This means that the
idea of such groups buying, say, rainforest is unlikely to succeed as
they simply do not have the resources needed -- they will be outbid by
those who wish to develop wilderness regions. This is particularly the
case once we accept the framework of economic self-interest assumed by
market theory. This implies that organisations aiming to increase the
income of individual's will be better funded than those whose aim is to
preserve the environment for future generations. As recent developments
show, companies can and do use that superior resources to wage a war for
hearts and minds in all aspects of society, staring in the schoolroom.
Luckily no amount of spin can nullify reality or the spirit of freedom
and so this propaganda war will continue as long as capitalism does.

In summary, market solutions to environmental problems under capitalism
will always suffer from the fact that real markets are marked by
economic inequalities and power.

E.3.3 Can capitalism's focus on short-term profitability deal with the ecological crisis?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No a word, no. This is another key problem associated with capitalism's
ability to deal with the ecological crisis it helps create. Due to the
nature of the market, firms are forced to focus on short-term
profitability rather than long-term survival. This makes sense. If a
company does not make money now, it will not be around later.

This, obviously, drives the creation of "externalities" discussed in
previous sections. Harmful environmental effects such as pollution,
global warming, ozone depletion, and destruction of wildlife habitat are
not counted as "costs of production" in standard methods of accounting
because they are borne by everyone in the society. This gives companies
a strong incentive to ignore such costs as competition forces firms to
cut as many costs as possible in order to boost short-term profits.

To give an obvious example, if a firm has to decide between installing a
piece of costly equipment which reduces its pollution and continuing as
it currently is, then it is more likely to do the latter. If the firm
**does** invest then its costs are increased and it will lose its
competitive edge compared to its rivals who do not make a similar
investment. The "rational" decision is, therefore, not to invest,
particularly if by externalising costs it can increase its profits or
market share by cutting prices. In other words, the market rewards the
polluters and this is a powerful incentive to maximise such activities.
The market, in other words, provides incentives to firms to produce
externalities as part their drive for short-term profitability. While
this is rational from the firm's position, it is collectively irrational
as the planet's ecology is harmed.

The short-term perspective can also be seen by the tendency of firms to
under-invest in developing risky new technologies. This is because basic
research which may take years, if not decades, to develop and most
companies are unwilling to take on that burden. Unsurprisingly, most
advanced capitalist countries see such work funded by the state (as we
noted in [section D.8](secD8.html), over 50% of total R&D funding has
been provided by the federal state in the USA). Moreover, the state has
provided markets for such products until such time as markets have
appeared for them in the commercial sector. Thus capitalism, by itself,
will tend to under-invest in long term projects:

> *"in a competitive system you do **short-term planning only** . . .
> Let's take corporate managers, where there's no real confusion about
> what they're doing. They are maximising profit and market share in the
> short term. In fact, if they were not to do that, they would no longer
> exist. Let's be concrete. Suppose that some automobile company, say
> General Motors, decides to devote their resources to planning for
> something that will be profitable ten years from now. Suppose that's
> where they divert their resources: they want to think in some
> long-term conception of market dominance. Their rivals are going to
> maximising profit and power in the short term, and they're going to
> take over the market, and General Motors won't be in business. That's
> true for the owners and also for the managers. The managers want to
> stay managers. They can fight off hostile take-over bids, they can
> keep from being replaced, as long as they contribute to short-term
> profitability. As a result, long-term considerations are rarely
> considered in competitive systems."* [Noam Chomsky, **Language and
> Politics**, p. 598]

This does not mean that firms will not look into future products nor do
research and development. Many do (particularly if helped by the state).
Nor does it imply that some industries do not have a longer-term
perspective. It simply shows that such activity is not the normal state
of affairs. Moreover, any such "long-term" perspective is rarely more
than a decade while an ecological perspective demands much more than
this. This also applies to agriculture, which is increasingly being
turned into agribusiness as small farmers are being driven out of
business. Short-termism means that progress in agriculture is whatever
increases the current yield of a crop even if means destroying the
sources of fertility in the long run in order to maintain current
fertility by adding more and more chemicals (which run off into rivers,
seep into the water table and end up in the food itself.

This kind of irrational short-term behaviour also afflicts capital
markets as well. The process works in the same way Chomsky highlights.
Suppose there are 3 companies, X, Y, and Z and suppose that company X
invests in the project of developing a non-polluting technology within
ten years. At the same time its competitors, Y and Z, will be putting
their resources into increasing profits and market share in the coming
days and months and over the next year. During that period, company X
will be unable to attract enough capital from investors to carry out its
plans, since investors will flock to the companies that are most
immediately profitable. This means that the default position under
capitalism is that the company (or country) with the lowest standards
enjoys a competitive advantage, and drags down the standards of other
companies (or countries). Sometimes, though, capital markets experience
irrational bubbles. During the dot.com boom of the 1990s, investors did
plough money into internet start-ups and losses were tolerated for a few
years in the expectation of high profits in the near future. When that
did not happen, the stock market crashed and investors turned away from
that market in droves. If something similar happened to
eco-technologies, the subsequent aftermath may mean that funding
essential for redressing our interaction with the environment would not
be forthcoming until the memories of the crash had disappeared in the
next bubble frenzy.

Besides, thanks to compound interest benefits far in the future have a
very small present value. If \$1 were left in a bank at 5% annual
interest, it would be worth more than \$2 million after 300 years. So if
it costs \$1 today to prevent ecological damage worth \$2 million in the
24th century then economic theory argues that our descendants would be
better off with us putting that \$1 in the bank. This would suggest that
basing our responsibility to future generations on economics may not be
the wisest course.

The supporter of capitalism may respond by arguing that business leaders
are as able to see long-term negative environmental effects as the rest
of us. But this is to misunderstand the nature of the objection. It is
not that business leaders **as individuals** are any less able to see
what's happening to the environment. It is that if they want to keep
their jobs they have to do what the system requires, which is to
concentrate on what is most profitable in the short term. Thus if the
president of company X has a mystical experience of oneness with nature
and starts diverting profits into pollution control while the presidents
of Y and Z continue with business as usual, the stockholders of company
X will get a new president who is willing to focus on short-term profits
like Y and Z. As Joel Bakan stresses, managers of corporations *"have a
legal duty to put shareholders' interests above all others . . .
Corporate social responsibility is thus illegal -- at least when it is
genuine."* Ones which *"choose social and environmental goals over
profits -- who try and act morally -- are, in fact, immoral"* as their
role in both the economy and economic ideology is to *"make much as much
money as possible for shareholders."* [**The Corporation**, pp. 36-7 and
p. 34]

In general, then, if one company tries to devote resources to develop
products or processes that are ecologically responsible, they will
simply be undercut by other companies which are not doing so (assuming
such products or processes are more expensive, as they generally are as
the costs are not inflicted on other people and the planet). While some
products may survive in small niche markets which reflect the fact that
many people are willing and able to pay more to protect their world, in
general they will not be competitive in the market and so the
ecologically damaging products will have the advantage. In other words,
capitalism has a built-in bias toward short-term gain, and this bias --
along with its inherent need for growth -- means the planet will
continue its free-fall toward ecological disaster so long as capitalism
exists.

This suggests that attempts to address ecological problems like
pollution and depletion of resources by calling for public education are
unlikely to work. While it is true that this will raise people's
awareness to the point of creating enough demand for
environment-friendly technologies and products that they will be
profitable to produce, it does not solve the problem that the costs
involved in doing such research now cannot be met by a possible future
demand. Moreover, the costs of such technology can initially be quite
high and so the effective demand for such products may not be
sufficient. For example, energy-saving light bulbs have been around for
some time but have been far more expensive that traditional ones. This
means that for those on lower-incomes who would, in theory, benefit most
from lower-energy bills cannot afford them. Thus their short-term income
constrains undermine long-term benefits.

Even if the research is completed, the market itself can stop products
being used. For example, the ability to produce reasonably inexpensive
solar photovoltaic power cells has existed for some time. The problem is
that they are currently very expensive and so there is a limited demand
for them. This means that no capitalist wants to risk investing in
factory large enough to take advantage of the economies of scale
possible. The net effect is that short-term considerations ensure that a
viable eco-technology has been margainalised.

This means that no amount of education can countermand the effects of
market forces and the short-term perspective they inflict on us all. If
faced with a tight budget and relatively expensive "ecological" products
and technology, consumers and companies may be forced to choose the
cheaper, ecologically unfriendly product to make ends meet or survive in
the market. Under capitalism, we may be free to choose, but the options
are usually lousy choices, and not the only ones potentially available
in theory (this is a key problem with green consumerism -- see [section
E.5](secE5.html)).

The short-termism of capitalism has produced, in effect, a system which
is *"a massive pyramid scheme that will collapse somewhere down the line
when all the major players have already retired from the game. Of course
when the last of these hustlers cash in their chips, there won't be any
place left to retire to."* [David Watson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 57]
