Section F - Is "anarcho"-capitalism a type of anarchism?
========================================================

Anyone who has followed political discussion on the net has probably
come across people calling themselves "libertarians" but arguing from a
right-wing, pro-capitalist perspective. For most people outside of North
America, this is weird as the term *"libertarian"* is almost always used
in conjunction with *"socialist"* or *"communist"* (particularly in
Europe and, it should be stressed, historically in America). In the US,
though, the Right has partially succeeded in appropriating the term
"libertarian" for itself. Even stranger is that a few of these
right-wingers have started calling themselves "anarchists" in what must
be one of the finest examples of an oxymoron in the English language:
"Anarcho-capitalist"!!!

Arguing with fools is seldom rewarded, but to let their foolishness to
go unchallenged risks allowing them to deceive those who are new to
anarchism. This is what this section of the FAQ is for, to show why the
claims of these "anarchist" capitalists are false. Anarchism has always
been anti-capitalist and any "anarchism" that claims otherwise cannot be
part of the anarchist tradition. It is important to stress that
anarchist opposition to the so-called capitalist "anarchists" do **not**
reflect some kind of debate within anarchism, as many of these types
like to pretend, but a debate between anarchism and its old enemy,
capitalism. In many ways this debate mirrors the one between Peter
Kropotkin and Herbert Spencer (an English capitalist minimal statist) at
the turn the 19th century and, as such, it is hardly new.

At that time, people like Spencer tended to call themselves "liberals"
while, as Bookchin noted, *"libertarian"* was *"a term created by
nineteenth-century European anarchists, not by contemporary American
right-wing proprietarians."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 57] David
Goodway concurs, stating that *"libertarian"* has been *"frequently
employed by anarchists"* as an alternative name for our politics for
over a century. However, the *"situation has been vastly complicated in
recent decades with the rise of . . . extreme right-wing laissez-faire
philosophy . . . and [its advocates] adoption of the words 'libertarian'
and 'libertarianism.' It has therefore now become necessary to
distinguish between their right libertarianism and the left
libertarianism of the anarchist tradition."* [**Anarchist Seeds Beneath
the Snow**, p. 4] This appropriation of the term "libertarian" by the
right not only has bred confusion, but also protest as anarchists have
tried to point out the obvious, namely that capitalism is marked by
**authoritarian** social relationships and so there are good reasons for
anarchism being a fundamentally anti-capitalist socio-political theory
and movement. That a minority of the right "libertarians" have also
tried to appropriate "anarchist" to describe their authoritarian
politics is something almost all anarchists reject and oppose.

That the vast majority of anarchists reject the notion of
"anarcho"-capitalism as a form of anarchism is an inconvenient fact for
its supporters. Rather than address this, they generally point to the
fact that some academics state that "anarcho"-capitalism is a form of
anarchism and include it in their accounts of our movement and ideas.
That some academics do this is true, but irrelevant. What counts is what
anarchists think anarchism is. To place the opinions of academics above
that of anarchists implies that anarchists know nothing about anarchism,
that we do not really understand the ideas we advocate but academics do!
Yet this is the implication. As such the near universal rejection of
"anarcho"-capitalism as a form of anarchism within anarchist circles is
significant. However, it could be argued that as a few anarchists
(usually individualist ones, but not always) **do** admit
"anarcho"-capitalism into our movement that this (very small) minority
shows that the majority are "sectarian." Again, this is not convincing
as some individuals in any movement will hold positions which the
majority reject and which are, sometimes, incompatible with the basic
principles of the movement (Proudhon's sexism and racism are obvious
examples). Equally, given that anarchists and "anarcho"-capitalists have
fundamentally ***different*** analyses and goals it is hardly
"sectarian" to point this out (being "sectarian" in politics means
prioritising differences and rivalries with politically close groups).

Some scholars do note the difference. For example, Jeremy Jennings, in
his excellent overview of anarchist theory and history, argues that it
is *"hard not to conclude that these ideas ["anarcho"-capitalism] --
with roots deep in classical liberalism -- are described as anarchist
only on the basis of a misunderstanding of what anarchism is."*
[*"Anarchism"*, **Contemporary Political Ideologies**, Roger Eatwell and
Anthony Wright (eds.), p. 142] Barbara Goodwin reaches a similar
conclusion, noting that the "anarcho"-capitalists' *"true place is in
the group of right-wing libertarians"* not in anarchism for *"[w]hile
condemning absolutely state coercion, they tacitly condone the economic
and interpersonal coercion which would prevail in a totally
**laissez-faire** society. Most anarchists share the egalitarian ideal
with socialists: anarcho-capitalists abhor equality and socialism
equally."* [**Using Political Ideas**, p. 138]

Sadly, these seem to be the minority in academic circles as most are
happy to discuss right-"libertarian" ideology as a subclass of anarchism
in spite of there being so little in common between the two. Their
inclusion does really seem to derive from the fact that
"anarcho"-capitalists **call** themselves anarchists and the academics
take this at face value. Yet, as one anarchist notes, having a
*"completely fluid definition of anarchism, allows for anyone and
anything to be described as such, no matter how authoritarian and
anti-social."* [Benjamin Franks, *"Mortal Combat"*, pp. 4-6, **A Touch
of Class**, no. 1, p. 5] Also, given that many academics approach
anarchism from what could be termed the "dictionary definition"
methodology rather than as a political movement approach there is a
tendency for "anarcho"-capitalist claims to be taken at face value. As
such, it is useful to stress that anarchism is a social movement with a
long history and while its adherents have held divergent views, it has
never been limited to simply opposition to the state (i.e. the
dictionary definition).

The "anarcho"-capitalist argument that it is a form of anarchism hinges
on using the dictionary definition of "anarchism" and/or "anarchy." They
try to define anarchism as being "opposition to government," and nothing
else. Of course, many (if not most) dictionaries "define" anarchy as
"chaos" or "disorder" but we never see "anarcho"-capitalists use those
particular definitions! Moreover, and this should go without saying,
dictionaries are hardly politically sophisticated and their definitions
rarely reflect the wide range of ideas associated with political
theories and their history. Thus the dictionary "definition" of
anarchism will tend to ignore its consistent views on authority,
exploitation, property and capitalism (ideas easily discovered if actual
anarchist texts are read). And for this strategy to work, a lot of
"inconvenient" history and ideas from all branches of anarchism must be
ignored. From individualists like Tucker to communists like Kropotkin
and considered anarchism as part of the wider socialist movement.
Therefore "anarcho"-capitalists are not anarchists in the same sense
that rain is not dry.

Significantly, the inventor of the term "anarcho"-capitalism, Murray
Rothbard had no impact on the anarchist movement even in North America.
His influence, unsurprisingly, was limited to the right, particularly in
so-called "libertarian" circles. The same can be said of
"anarcho"-capitalism in general. This can be seen from the way Rothbard
is mentioned in Paul Nursey-Bray's bibliography on anarchist thinkers.
This is an academic book, a reference for libraries. Rothbard is
featured, but the context is very suggestive. The book includes Rothbard
in a section titled *"On the Margins of Anarchist Theory."* His
introduction to the Rothbard section is worth quoting:

> *"Either the inclusion or the omission of Rothbard as an anarchist is
> likely, in one quarter or another, to be viewed as contentious. Here,
> his Anarcho-Capitalism is treated as marginal, since, while there are
> linkages with the tradition of individualist anarchism, there is a
> dislocation between the mutualism and communitarianism of that
> tradition and the free market theory, deriving from Ludwig von Mises
> and Friedrich von Hayek, that underpins Rothbard's political
> philosophy, and places him in the modern Libertarian tradition."*
> [**Anarchist Thinkers and Thought**, p. 133]

This is important, for while Rothbard (like other "anarcho"-capitalists)
appropriates **some** aspects of individualist anarchism he does so in a
highly selective manner and places what he does take into an utterly
different social environment and political tradition. So while there are
similarities between both systems, there are important differences as we
will discuss in detail in [section G](secGcon.html) along with the
anti-capitalist nature of individualist anarchism (i.e. those essential
bits which Rothbard and his followers ignore or dismiss). Needless to
say, Nursey-Bray does not include "anarcho"-capitalism in his discussion
of anarchist schools of thought in the bibliography's introduction.

Of course, we cannot stop the "anarcho"-capitalists using the words
"anarcho", "anarchism" and "anarchy" to describe their ideas. The
democracies of the west could not stop the Chinese Stalinist state
calling itself the People's Republic of China. Nor could the social
democrats stop the fascists in Germany calling themselves "National
Socialists". Nor could the Italian anarcho-syndicalists stop the
fascists using the expression "National Syndicalism". This does not mean
their names reflected their content -- China is a dictatorship, not a
democracy; the Nazi's were not socialists (capitalists made fortunes in
Nazi Germany because it crushed the labour movement); and the Italian
fascist state had nothing in common with anarcho-syndicalist ideas of
decentralised, "from the bottom up" unions and the abolition of the
state and capitalism.

It could be argued (and it has) that the previous use of a word does not
preclude new uses. Language changes and, as such, it is possible for a
**new** kind of "anarchism" to develop which has little, or no,
similarities with what was previously known as anarchism. Equally, it
could be said that new developments of anarchism have occurred in the
past which were significantly different from old versions (for example,
the rise of communist forms of anarchism in opposition to Proudhon's
anti-communist mutualism). Both arguments are unconvincing. The first
just makes a mockery of the concept of language and breeds confusion. If
people start calling black white, it does not make it so. Equally, to
call an ideology with little in common with a known and long established
socio-political theory and movement the same name simply results in
confusion. No one takes, say, fascists seriously when they call their
parties "democratic" nor would we take Trotskyists seriously if they
started to call themselves "libertarians" (as some have started to do).
The second argument fails to note that developments within anarchism
built upon what came before and did not change its fundamental
(socialistic) basis. Thus communist and collectivist anarchism are valid
forms of anarchism because they built upon the key insights of mutualism
rather than denying them.

A related defence of "anarcho"-capitalism as a form of anarchism is the
suggestion that the problem is one of terminology. This argument is
based on noting that "anarcho"-capitalists are against "actually
existing" capitalism and so *"we must distinguish between 'free-market
capitalism' . . . and 'state capitalism' . . . The two are as different
as day and night."* [Rothbard, **The Logic of Action II**, p. 185] It
would be churlish indeed to point out that the **real** difference is
that one exists while the other has existed only in Rothbard's head. Yet
point it out we must, for the simple fact is that not only do
"anarcho"-capitalists use the word anarchism in an unusual way (i.e. in
opposition to what has always been meant by the term), they also use the
word capitalism in a like manner (i.e., to refer to something that has
never existed). It should go without saying that using words like
"capitalism" and "anarchism" in ways radically different to traditional
uses cannot help but provoke confusion. Yet is it a case that
"anarcho"-capitalists have simply picked a bad name for their ideology?
Hardly, as its advocates will quickly rush to defend exploitation
(non-labour income) and capitalist property rights as well as the
authoritarian social structures produced with them. Moreover, as good
capitalist economists the notion of an economy without interest, rent
and profit is considered highly inefficient and so unlikely to develop.
As such, their ideology is rooted in a perspective and an economy marked
by wage labour, landlords, banking and stock markets and so hierarchy,
oppression and exploitation, i.e. a capitalist one.

So they have chosen their name well as it shows in clear light how far
they are from the anarchist tradition. As such, almost all anarchists
would agree with long-time anarchist activist Donald Rooum's comment
that *"self-styled 'anarcho-capitalists' (not to be confused with
anarchists of any persuasion) [simply] want the state abolished as a
regulator of capitalism, and government handed over to capitalists."*
They are *"wrongly self-styled 'anarchists'"* because they *"do not
oppose capitalist oppression"* while genuine anarchists are *"extreme
libertarian socialists."* [**What Is Anarchism?**, p. 7, pp. 12-13 and
p. 10] As we stress in [section F.1](secF1.html), "anarcho"-capitalists
do not oppose the hierarchies and exploitation associated with
capitalism (wage labour and landlordism) and, consequently, have no
claim to the term "anarchist." Just because someone uses a label it does
not mean that they support the ideas associated with that label and this
is the case with "anarcho"-capitalism -- its ideas are at odds with the
key ideas associated with all forms of traditional anarchism (even
individualist anarchism which is often claimed, usually by
"anarcho"-capitalists, as being a forefather of the ideology).

We are covering this topic in an anarchist FAQ for three reasons.
Firstly, the number of "libertarian" and "anarcho"-capitalists on the
net means that those seeking to find out about anarchism may conclude
that they are "anarchists" as well. Secondly, unfortunately, some
academics and writers have taken their claims of being anarchists at
face value and have included their ideology in general accounts of
anarchism (the better academic accounts do note that anarchists
generally reject the claim). These two reasons are obviously related and
hence the need to show the facts of the matter. The last reason is to
provide other anarchists with arguments and evidence to use against
"anarcho"-capitalism and its claims of being a new form of "anarchism."

So this section of the FAQ does not, as we noted above, represent some
kind of "debate" within anarchism. It reflects the attempt by anarchists
to reclaim the history and meaning of anarchism from those who are
attempting to steal its name. However, our discussion also serves two
other purposes. Firstly, critiquing right "libertarian" theories allows
us to explain anarchist ones at the same time and indicate why they are
better. Secondly, and more importantly, it shares many of the same
assumptions and aims of neo-liberalism. This was noted by Bob Black in
the early 1980s, when a *"wing of the Reaganist Right . . . obviously
appropriated, with suspect selectivity, such libertarian themes as
deregulation and voluntarism. Ideologues indignate that Reagan has
travestied their principles. Tough shit! I notice that it's **their**
principles, not mine, that he found suitable to travesty."* [*"The
Libertarian As Conservative"*, pp. 141-8, **The Abolition of Work and
Other Essays**, pp. 141-2] This was echoed by Noam Chomsky two decades
later when he stated that *"nobody takes [right-wing libertarianism]
seriously"* (as *"everybody knows that a society that worked by . . .
[its] principles would self-destruct in three seconds"*). The *"only
reason"* why some people in the ruling elite *"pretend to take it
seriously is because you can use it as a weapon"* in the class struggle
[**Understanding Power**, p. 200] As neo-liberalism is being used as the
ideological basis of the current attack on the working class, critiquing
"anarcho"-capitalism also allows us to build theoretical weapons to use
to resist this attack and aid our side in the class war.

The results of the onslaught of free(r) market capitalism along with
anarchist criticism of "anarcho"-capitalism has resulted in some
"anarcho"-capitalists trying to re-brand their ideology as "market
anarchism." This, from their perspective, has two advantages. Firstly,
it allows them to co-opt the likes of Tucker and Spooner (and,
sometimes, even Proudhon!) into their family tree as all these supported
markets (while systematically attacking capitalism). Secondly, it allows
them to distance their ideology from the grim reality of neo-liberalism
and the results of making capitalism more "free market." Simply put,
going on about the benefits of "free market" capitalism while freer
market capitalism is enriching the already wealthy and oppressing and
impoverishing the many is hard going. Using the term "market anarchism"
to avoid both the reality of anarchism's anti-capitalist core and the
reality of the freer market capitalism they have helped produce makes
sense in the marketplace of ideas (the term "blackwashing" seems
appropriate here). The fact is that however laudable its stated aims,
"anarcho"-capitalism is deeply flawed due to its simplistic nature and
is easy to abuse on behalf of the economic oligarchy that lurks behind
the rhetoric of economic textbooks in that "special case" so ignored by
economists, namely reality.

Anarchism has always been aware of the existence of "free market"
capitalism, particularly its extreme (minimal state) wing, and has
always rejected it. As we discuss in [section F.7](secF7.html),
anarchists from Proudhon onwards have rejected it (and, significantly,
vice versa). As academic Alan Carter notes, anarchist concern for
equality as a necessary precondition for genuine freedom *"is one very
good reason for not confusing anarchists with liberals or economic
'libertarians' -- in other words, for not lumping together everyone who
is in some way or another critical of the state. It is why calling the
likes of Nozick 'anarchists' is highly misleading."* [*"Some notes on
'Anarchism'"*, pp. 141-5, **Anarchist Studies**, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 143]
So anarchists have evaluated "free market" capitalism and rejected it as
non-anarchist since the birth of anarchism and so attempts by
"anarcho"-capitalism to say that their system is "anarchist" flies in
the face of this long history of anarchist analysis. That some academics
fall for their attempts to appropriate the anarchist label for their
ideology is down to a false premise: it *"is judged to be anarchism
largely because some anarcho-capitalists **say** they are 'anarchists'
and because they criticise the State."* [Peter Sabatini, **Social
Anarchism**, no. 23, p. 100]

More generally, we must stress that most (if not all) anarchists do not
want to live in a society **just like this one** but without state
coercion and (the initiation of) force. Anarchists do not confuse
"freedom" with the "right" to govern and exploit others nor with being
able to change masters. It is not enough to say we can start our own
(co-operative) business in such a society. We want the abolition of the
capitalist system of authoritarian relationships, not just a change of
bosses or the possibility of little islands of liberty within a sea of
capitalism (islands which are always in danger of being flooded and our
freedom destroyed). Thus, in this section of the FAQ, we analysis many
"anarcho"-capitalist claims on their own terms (for example, the
importance of equality in the market or why replacing the state with
private defence firms is simply changing the name of the state rather
than abolishing it) but that does not mean we desire a society nearly
identical to the current one. Far from it, we want to transform this
society into one more suited for developing and enriching individuality
and freedom.

Finally, we dedicate this section of the FAQ to those who have seen the
real face of "free market" capitalism at work: the working men and women
(anarchist or not) murdered in the jails and concentration camps or on
the streets by the hired assassins of capitalism.

For more discussion on this issue, see the appendix ["Anarchism and
'Anarcho'-capitalism"](append1.html)
