F.8 What role did the state take in the creation of capitalism?
===============================================================

If the "anarcho"-capitalist is to claim with any plausibility that
"real" capitalism is non-statist or that it can exist without a state,
it must be shown that capitalism evolved naturally, in opposition to
state intervention. In reality, the opposite is the case. Capitalism was
born from state intervention. In the words of Kropotkin, *"the State . .
. and capitalism . . . developed side by side, mutually supporting and
re-enforcing each other."* [**Anarchism**, p. 181]

Numerous writers have made this point. For example, in Karl Polanyi's
flawed masterpiece **The Great Transformation** we read that *"the road
to the free market was opened and kept open by an enormous increase in
continuous, centrally organised and controlled interventionism"* by the
state. [p. 140] This intervention took many forms -- for example, state
support during "mercantilism," which allowed the "manufactures" (i.e.
industry) to survive and develop, enclosures of common land, and so
forth. In addition, the slave trade, the invasion and brutal conquest of
the Americas and other "primitive" nations, and the looting of gold,
slaves, and raw materials from abroad also enriched the European
economy, giving the development of capitalism an added boost. Thus
Kropotkin:

> *"The history of the genesis of capital has already been told by
> socialists many times. They have described how it was born of war and
> pillage, of slavery and serfdom, of modern fraud and exploitation.
> They have shown how it is nourished by the blood of the worker, and
> how little by little it has conquered the whole world . . . Law . . .
> has followed the same phases as capital . . . they have advanced hand
> in hand, sustaining one another with the suffering of mankind."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p. 207]

This process is what Karl Marx termed ***"primitive accumulation"*** and
was marked by extensive state violence. Capitalism, as he memorably put
it, *"comes dripping from head to toe, from every pore, with blood and
dirt"* and the *"starting-point of the development that gave rise both
to the wage-labourer and to the capitalist was the enslavement of the
worker."* [**Capital**, vol. 1, p. 926 and p. 875] Or, if Kropotkin and
Marx seem too committed to be fair, we have John Stuart Mill's summary
that the *"social arrangements of modern Europe commenced from a
distribution of property which was the result, not of just partition, or
acquisition by industry, but of conquest and violence."* [**Principles
of Political Economy**, p. 15]

The same can be said of all countries. As such, when supporters of
"libertarian" capitalism say they are against the "initiation of force,"
they mean only **new** initiations of force: for the system they support
was born from numerous initiations of force in the past (moreover, it
also requires state intervention to keep it going -- [section
D.1](secD1.html) addresses this point in some detail). Indeed, many
thinkers have argued that it was precisely this state support and
coercion (particularly the separation of people from the land) that
played the **key** role in allowing capitalism to develop rather than
the theory that *"previous savings"* did so. As left-wing German thinker
Franz Oppenheimer (whom Murray Rothbard selectively quoted) argued,
*"the concept of a 'primitive accumulation,' or an original store of
wealth, in land and in movable property, brought about by means of
purely economic forces"* while *"seem[ing] quite plausible"* is in fact
*"utterly mistaken; it is a 'fairly tale,' or it is a class theory used
to justify the privileges of the upper classes."* [**The State**, pp.
5-6] As Individualist anarchist Kevin Carson summarised as part of his
excellent overview of this historic process:

> *"Capitalism has never been established by means of the free market.
> It has always been established by a revolution from above, imposed by
> a ruling class with its origins in the Old Regime . . . by a
> pre-capitalist ruling class that had been transformed in a capitalist
> manner. In England, it was the landed aristocracy; in France, Napoleon
> III's bureaucracy; in Germany, the Junkers; in Japan, the Meiji. In
> America, the closest approach to a 'natural' bourgeois evolution,
> industrialisation was carried out by a mercantilist aristocracy of
> Federalist shipping magnates and landlords."* [*"Primitive
> Accumulation and the Rise of Capitalism,"* **Studies in Mutualist
> Political Economy**]

This, the actual history of capitalism, will be discussed in the
following sections. So it is ironic to hear right-"libertarians" sing
the praises of a capitalism that never existed and urge its adoption by
all nations, in spite of the historical evidence suggesting that only
state intervention made capitalist economies viable -- even in that
Mecca of "free enterprise," the United States. As Noam Chomsky argues,
*"who but a lunatic could have opposed the development of a textile
industry in New England in the early nineteenth century, when British
textile production was so much more efficient that half the New England
industrial sector would have gone bankrupt without very high protective
tariffs, thus terminating industrial development in the United States?
Or the high tariffs that radically undermined economic efficiency to
allow the United States to develop steel and other manufacturing
capacities? Or the gross distortions of the market that created modern
electronics?"* [**World Orders, Old and New**, p. 168] Such state
interference in the economy is often denounced and dismissed by
right-"libertarians" as mercantilism. However, to claim that
"mercantilism" is not capitalism makes little sense. Without
mercantilism, "proper" capitalism would never have developed, and any
attempt to divorce a social system from its roots is ahistoric and makes
a mockery of critical thought (particularly as "proper" capitalism turns
to mercantilism regularly).

Similarly, it is somewhat ironic when "anarcho"-capitalists and other
right "libertarians" claim that they support the freedom of individuals
to choose how to live. After all, the working class was not given
**that** particular choice when capitalism was developing. Instead,
their right to choose their own way of life was constantly violated and
denied -- and justified by the leading capitalist economists of the
time. To achieve this, state violence had one overall aim, to dispossess
the labouring people from access to the means of life (particularly the
land) and make them dependent on landlords and capitalists to earn a
living. The state coercion *"which creates the capital-relation can be
nothing other than the process which divorces the worker from the
ownership of the conditions of his own labour; it is a process which
operates two transformations, whereby the social means of subsistence
and production are turned into capital, and the immediate producers are
turned into wage-labourers. So-called primitive accumulation, therefore,
is nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer
from the means of production."* [Marx, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 874-5] So to
claim that **now** (after capitalism has been created) we get the chance
to try and live as we like is insulting in the extreme. The available
options we have are not independent of the society we live in and are
decisively shaped by the past. To claim we are "free" to live as we like
(within the laws of capitalism, of course) is basically to argue that we
are able (in theory) to "buy" the freedom that every individual is due
from those who have stolen it from us in the first place. It ignores the
centuries of state violence required to produce the "free" worker who
makes a "voluntary" agreement which is compelled by the social
conditions that this created.

The history of state coercion and intervention is inseparable from the
history of capitalism: it is contradictory to celebrate the latter while
claiming to condemn the former. In practice capitalism has **always**
meant intervention in markets to aid business and the rich. That is,
what has been called by supporters of capitalism "laissez-faire" was
nothing of the kind and represented the political-economic program of a
specific fraction of the capitalist class rather than a set of
principles of "hands off the market." As individualist anarchist Kevin
Carson summaries, *"what is nostalgically called 'laissez-faire' was in
fact a system of continuing state intervention to subsidise
accumulation, guarantee privilege, and maintain work discipline."*
[**The Iron Fist behind the Invisible Hand**] Moreover, there is the
apparent unwillingness by such "free market" advocates (i.e. supporters
of "free market" capitalism) to distinguish between historically and
currently unfree capitalism and the other truly free market economy that
they claim to desire. It is common to hear "anarcho"-capitalists point
to the state-based capitalist system as vindication of their views (and
even more surreal to see them point to **pre**-capitalist systems as
examples of their ideology). It should be obvious that they cannot have
it both ways.

In other words, Rothbard and other "anarcho"-capitalists treat
capitalism as if it were the natural order of things rather than being
the product of centuries of capitalist capture and use of state power to
further their own interests. The fact that past uses of state power have
allowed capitalist norms and assumptions to become the default system by
their codification in property law and justified by bourgeois economic
does not make it natural. The role of the state in the construction of a
capitalist economy cannot be ignored or downplayed as government has
always been an instrument in creating and developing such a system. As
one critic of right-"libertarian" ideas put it, Rothbard *"completely
overlooks the role of the state in building and maintaining a capitalist
economy in the West. Privileged to live in the twentieth century, long
after the battles to establish capitalism have been fought and won,
Rothbard sees the state solely as a burden on the market and a vehicle
for imposing the still greater burden of socialism. He manifests a kind
of historical nearsightedness that allows him to collapse many centuries
of human experience into one long night of tyranny that ended only with
the invention of the free market and its 'spontaneous' triumph over the
past. It is pointless to argue, as Rothbard seems ready to do, that
capitalism would have succeeded without the bourgeois state; the fact is
that all capitalist nations have relied on the machinery of government
to create and preserve the political and legal environments required by
their economic system."* That, of course, has not stopped him
*"critis[ing] others for being unhistorical."* [Stephen L. Newman,
**Liberalism at Wit's End**, pp. 77-8 and p. 79]

Thus we have a key contradiction within "anarcho"-capitalism. While they
bemoan state intervention in the market, their underlying assumption is
that it had no real effect on how society has evolved over the
centuries. By a remarkable coincidence, the net effect of all this state
intervention was to produce a capitalist economy identical in all
features as one which would have been produced if society had been left
alone to evolve naturally. It does seem strange that state violence
would happen to produce the same economic system as that produced by
right-"libertarians" and Austrian economists logically deducing concepts
from a few basic axioms and assumptions. Even more of a coincidence,
these conclusions also happen to be almost exactly the same as what
those who have benefited from previous state coercion want to hear --
namely, the private property is good, trade unions and strikes are bad,
that the state should not interfere with the power of the bosses and
should not even think about helping the working class (employed or
unemployed). As such, while their advice and rhetoric may have changed,
the social role of economists has not. State action was required to
dispossess the direct producers from the means of life (particularly the
land) and to reduce the real wage of workers so that they have to
provide regular work in a obedient manner. In this, it and the
capitalists received much advice from the earliest economists as Marxist
economic historian Michael Perelman documents in great detail. As he
summarises, *"classical political economy was concerned with promoting
primitive accumulation in order to foster capitalist development, even
though the logic of primitive accumulation was in direct conflict with
the classical political economists' purported adherence to the values of
laissez-faire."* [**The Invention of Capitalism**, p. 12] The turn to
"laissez-faire" was possible because direct state power could be mostly
replaced by economic power to ensure the dependency of the working
class.

Needless to say, some right-"libertarians" recognise that the state
played **some** role in economic life in the rise and development of
capitalism. So they contrast "bad" business people (who took state aid)
and "good" ones (who did not). Thus Rothbard's comment that Marxists
have *"made no particular distinction between 'bourgeoisie' who made use
of the state, and bourgeoisie who acted on the free market."* [**The
Ethics of Liberty**, p. 72] But such an argument is nonsense as it
ignores the fact that the "free market" is a network (and defined by the
state by the property rights it enforces). This means that state
intervention in one part of the economy will have ramifications in other
parts, particularly if the state action in question is the expropriation
and/or protection of productive resources (land and workplaces) or the
skewing of the labour market in favour of the bosses. In other words,
the individualistic perspective of "anarcho"-capitalism blinds its
proponents to the obvious collective nature of working class
exploitation and oppression which flows from the collective and
interconnected nature of production and investment in any real economy.
State action supported by sectors of the capitalist class has, to use
economic jargon, positive externalities for the rest. They, in general,
benefit from it ***as a class*** just as working class people suffers
from it collectively as it limits their available choices to those
desired by their economic and political masters (usually the same
people). As such, the right-"libertarian" fails to understand the
**class** basis of state intervention.

For example, the owners of the American steel and other companies who
grew rich and their companies big behind protectionist walls were
obviously "bad" bourgeoisie. But were the bourgeoisie who supplied the
steel companies with coal, machinery, food, "defence" and so on not also
benefiting from state action? And the suppliers of the luxury goods to
the wealthy steel company owners, did they not benefit from state
action? Or the suppliers of commodities to the workers that laboured in
the steel factories that the tariffs made possible, did they not
benefit? And the suppliers to these suppliers? And the suppliers to
these suppliers? Did not the users of technology first introduced into
industry by companies protected by state orders also not benefit? Did
not the capitalists who had a large pool of landless working class
people to select from benefit from the "land monopoly" even though they
may not have, unlike other capitalists, directly advocated it? It
increased the pool of wage labour for **all** capitalists and increased
their bargaining position/power in the labour market at the expense of
the working class. In other words, such a policy helped maintain
capitalist market power, irrespective of whether individual capitalists
encouraged politicians to vote to create/maintain it. And, similarly,
**all** American capitalists benefited from the changes in common law to
recognise and protect capitalist private property and rights that the
state enforced during the 19th century (see [section
B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25)).

Rothbard, in other words, ignores class theft and the accumulative
effect of stealing both productive property and the products of the
workers who use it. He considered the *"moral indignation"* of socialism
arose from the argument *"that the capitalists have stolen the rightful
property of the workers, and therefore that existing titles to
accumulated capital are unjust."* He argued that given *"this
hypothesis, the remainder of the impetus for both Marxism and
anarchosyndicalism follow quite logically."* However, Rothbard's
"solution" to the problem of past force seems to be (essentially) a
justification of existing property titles and not a serious attempt to
understand or correct past initiations of force that have shaped society
into a capitalist one and still shape it today. This is because he is
simply concerned with returning property which has been obviously stolen
and can be returned to those who have been directly dispossessed or
their descendants (for example, giving land back to peasants or tenant
farmers). If this cannot be done then the *"title to that property,
belongs properly, justly and ethically to its current possessors."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 52 and p. 57] At best, he allows nationalised property
and any corporation which has the bulk of its income coming from the
state to be "homesteaded" by their workers (which, according to
Rothbard's arguments for the end of Stalinism, means they will get
shares in the company). The end result of his theory is to leave things
pretty much as they are. This is because he could not understand that
the exploitation of the working class was/is collective in nature and,
as such, is simply impossible to redress it in his individualistic term
of reference.

To take an obvious example, if the profits of slavery in the Southern
states of America were used to invest in factories in the Northern
states (as they were), does giving the land to the freed slaves in 1865
**really** signify the end of the injustice that situation produced?
Surely the products of the slaves work were stolen property just as much
as the land was and, as a result, so is any investment made from it?
After all, investment elsewhere was based on the profits extracted from
slave labour and *"much of the profits earned in the northern states
were derived from the surplus originating on the southern plantations."*
[Perelman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 246] In terms of the wage workers in the
North, they have been indirectly exploited by the existence of slavery
as the investment this allowed reduced their bargaining power on the
market as it reduced their ability to set up business for themselves by
increasing the fixed costs of so doing. And what of the investment
generated by the exploitation of these wage workers? As Mark Leier
points out, the capitalists and landlords *"may have purchased the land
and machinery, but this money represented nothing more than the
expropriated labour of others."* [**Bakunin**, p. 111] If the land
should be returned to those who worked it as Rothbard suggests, why not
the industrial empires that were created on the backs of the generations
of slaves who worked it? And what of the profits made from the
generations of wage slaves who worked on these investments? And what of
the investments which these profits allowed? Surely if the land should
be given to those who worked it then so must any investments it
generated? And assuming that those currently employed can rightly seize
their workplaces, what about those previously employed and **their**
descendants? Why should they be excluded from the riches their ancestors
helped create?

To talk in terms of individuals misses all this and the net result is to
ensure that the results of centuries of coercion and theft are
undisturbed. This is because it is the working class **as a whole** who
have been expropriated and whose labour has been exploited. The actual
individuals involved and their descendants would be impossible to
identify nor would it be possible to track down how the stolen fruits of
their labour were invested. In this way, the class theft of our planet
and liberty as well as the products of generations of working class
people will continue safely.

Needless to say, some governments interfere in the economy more than
others. Corporations do not invest in or buy from suppliers based in
authoritarian regimes by accident. They do not just happen to be here,
passively benefiting from statism and authoritarianism. Rather they
choose **between** states to locate in based precisely on the cheapness
of the labour supply. In other words, they prefer to locate in
dictatorships and authoritarian regimes in Central America and Southeast
Asia **because** those regimes interfere in the labour market the most
-- while, of course, talking about the very "free market" and "economic
liberty" those regimes deny to their subjects. For Rothbard, this seems
to be just a coincidence or a correlation rather than systematic for the
collusion between state and business is the fault, not of capitalism,
but simply of particular capitalists. The system, in other words, is
pure; only individuals are corrupt. But, for anarchists, the origins of
the modern capitalist system lies not in the individual qualities of
capitalists as such but in the dynamic and evolution of capitalism
itself -- a complex interaction of class interest, class struggle,
social defence against the destructive actions of the market, individual
qualities and so forth. In other words, Rothbard's claims are flawed --
they fail to understand capitalism as a **system**, its dynamic nature
and the authoritarian social relationships it produces and the need for
state intervention these produce and require.

So, when the right suggests that "we" be "left alone," what they mean by
"we" comes into clear focus when we consider how capitalism developed.
Artisans and peasants were only "left alone" to starve (sometimes not
even that, as the workhouse was invented to bring vagabonds to the joy
of work), and the working classes of industrial capitalism were only
"left alone" outside work and for only as long as they respected the
rules of their "betters." As Marx memorably put it, the *"newly freed
men became sellers of themselves only after they had been robbed of all
their own means of production, and all the guarantees of existence
afforded by the old feudal arrangements. And this history, the history
of their expropriation, is written in the annals of mankind in letters
of blood and fire."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 875] As for the other side of the
class divide, they desired to be "left alone" to exercise their power
over others as we will see. That modern "capitalism" is, in effect, a
kind of "corporate mercantilism," with states providing the conditions
that allow corporations to flourish (e.g. tax breaks, subsidies,
bailouts, anti-labour laws, etc.) says more about the statist roots of
capitalism than the ideologically correct definition of capitalism used
by its supporters.

In fact, if we look at the role of the state in creating capitalism we
could be tempted to rename "anarcho"-capitalism "marxian-capitalism".
This is because, given the historical evidence, a political theory can
be developed by which the "dictatorship of the bourgeoisie" is created
and that this capitalist state "withers away" into "anarchy". That this
means replacing the economic and social ideas of Marxism and their
replacement by their direct opposite should not mean that we should
reject the idea (after all, that is what "anarcho"-capitalism has done
to Individualist Anarchism!). But we doubt that many
"anarcho"-capitalists will accept such a name change (even though this
would reflect their politics far better; after all they do not object to
past initiations of force, just current ones and many do seem to think
that the modern state **will** wither away due to market forces).

This is suggested by the fact that Rothbard did not advocate change from
below as the means of creating "anarchy." He helped found the so-called
Libertarian Party in 1971 which, like Marxists, stands for political
office. With the fall of Stalinism in 1989, Rothbard faced whole
economies which could be "homesteaded" and he argued that
*"desocialisation"* (i.e., de-nationalisation as, like Leninists, he
confused socialisation with nationalisation) *"necessarily involves the
action of that government surrendering its property to its private
subjects . . . In a deep sense, getting rid of the socialist state
requires that state to perform one final, swift, glorious act of
self-immolation, after which it vanishes from the scene."* (compare to
Engels' comment that *"the taking possession of the means of production
in the name of society"* is the state's *"last independent act as a
state."* [**Selected Works**, p. 424]). He considered the *"capital
goods built by the State"* as being *"philosophically unowned"* yet
failed to note whose labour was exploited and taxed to build them in the
first place (needless to say, he rejected the ideas of shares to all as
this would be *"egalitarian handouts . . . to undeserving citizens,"*
presumably the ill, the unemployed, retirees, mothers, children, and
future generations). [**The Logic of Action II**, p. 213, p. 212 and p.
209]

Industrial plants would be transferred to workers currently employed
there, but not by their own direct action and direct expropriation.
Rather, the state would do so. This is understandable as, left to
themselves, the workers may not act quite as he desired. Thus we see him
advocating the transfer of industry from the state bureaucracy to
workers by means of *"private, negotiable shares"* as ownership was
*"not to be granted to collectives or co-operatives or workers or
peasants holistically, which would only bring back the ills of socialism
in a decentralised and chaotic syndicalist form."* His "homesteading"
was not to be done by the workers themselves rather it was a case of
*"granting shares to workers"* by the state. He also notes that it
should be a *"priority"* for the government *"to return all stolen,
confiscated property to its original owners, or to their heirs."* This
would involve *"finding original landowners"* -- i.e., the landlord
class whose wealth was based on exploiting the serfs and peasants.
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 210 and pp. 211-2] Thus expropriated peasants would
have their land returned but not, apparently, any peasants working land
which had been taken from their feudal and aristocratic overlords by the
state. Thus those who had just been freed from Stalinist rule would have
been subjected to "libertarian" rule to ensure that the transition was
done in the economically correct way. As it was, the neo-classical
economists who did oversee the transition ensured that ownership and
control transferred directly to a new ruling class rather than waste
time issuing "shares" which would eventually end up in a few hands due
to market forces (the actual way it was done could be considered a
modern form of "primitive accumulation" as it ensured that capital goods
did not end up in the hands of the workers).

But this is beside the point. The fact remains that state action was
required to create and maintain capitalism. Without state support it is
doubtful that capitalism would have developed at all. So the only
"capitalism" that has existed is a product of state support and
intervention, and it has been characterised by markets that are
considerably less than free. Thus, serious supporters of truly free
markets (like the American Individualist Anarchists) have not been
satisfied with "capitalism" -- have, in fact, quite rightly and
explicitly opposed it. Their vision of a free society has always been at
odds with the standard capitalist one, a fact which
"anarcho"-capitalists bemoan and dismiss as "mistakes" and/or the
product of "bad economics." Apparently the net effect of all this state
coercion has been, essentially, null. It has **not**, as the critics of
capitalism have argued, fundamentally shaped the development of the
economy as capitalism would have developed naturally by itself. Thus an
economy marked by inequalities of wealth and power, where the bulk of
the population are landless and resourceless and where interest, rent
and profits are extracted from the labour of working people would have
developed anyway regardless of the state coercion which marked the rise
of capitalism and the need for a subservient and dependent working class
by the landlords and capitalists which drove these policies simply
accelerated the process towards "economic liberty." However, it is more
than mere coincidence that capitalism and state coercion are so
intertwined both in history and in current practice.

In summary, like other apologists for capitalism, right-wing
"libertarians" advocate that system without acknowledging the means that
were necessary to create it. They tend to equate it with any market
system, failing to understand that it is a specific kind of market
system where labour itself is a commodity. It is ironic, of course, that
most defenders of capitalism stress the importance of markets (which
have pre-dated capitalism) while downplaying the importance of wage
labour (which defines it) along with the violence which created it. Yet
as both anarchists and Marxists have stressed, money and commodities do
not define capitalism any more than private ownership of the means of
production. So it is important to remember that from a socialist
perspective capitalism is **not** identical to the market. As we
stressed in [section C.2](secC2.html), both anarchists and Marxists
argue that where people produce for themselves, is not capitalist
production, i.e. when a worker sells commodities this is not capitalist
production. Thus the supporters of capitalism fail to understand that a
great deal of state coercion was required to transform pre-capitalist
societies of artisans and peasant farmers selling the produce of their
labour into a capitalist society of wage workers selling themselves to
bosses, bankers and landlords.

Lastly, it should be stressed that this process of primitive
accumulation is not limited to private capitalism. State capitalism has
also had recourse to such techniques. Stalin's forced collectivisation
of the peasantry and the brutal industrialisation involved in five-year
plans in the 1930s are the most obvious example). What took centuries in
Britain was condensed into decades in the Soviet Union and other state
capitalist regimes, with a corresponding impact on its human toil.
However, we will not discuss these acts of state coercion here as we are
concerned primarily with the actions required to create the conditions
required for private capitalism.

Needless to say, this section cannot hope to go into all the forms of
state intervention across the globe which were used to create or impose
capitalism onto an unwilling population. All we can do is provide a
glimpse into the brutal history of capitalism and provide enough
references for those interested to pursue the issue further. The first
starting point should be Part VIII (*"So-Called Primitive
Accumulation"*) of volume 1 of Marx's **Capital**. This classic account
of the origins of capitalism should be supplemented by more recent
accounts, but its basic analysis is correct. Marxist writers have
expanded on Marx's analysis, with Maurice Dobb's **Studies in the
Development of Capitalism** and David McNally's **Against the Market**
are worth consulting, as is Michael Perelman's **The Invention of
Capitalism**. Kropotkin's **Mutual Aid** has a short summary of state
action in destroying communal institutions and common ownership of land,
as does his **The State: It's Historic Role**. Rudolf Rocker's
**Nationalism and Culture** is also essential reading. Individualist
Anarchist Kevin Carson's **Studies in Mutualist Political Economy**
provides an excellent summary (see part 2, *"Capitalism and the State:
Past, Present and Future"*) as does his essay **The Iron Fist behind the
Invisible Hand**.

F.8.1 What social forces lay behind the rise of capitalism?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Capitalist society is a relatively recent development. For Marx, while
markets have existed for millennium *"the capitalist era dates from the
sixteenth century."* [**Capital**, vol. 1, p. 876] As Murray Bookchin
pointed out, for a *"long era, perhaps spanning more than five
centuries,"* capitalism *"coexisted with feudal and simple commodity
relationships"* in Europe. He argues that this period *"simply cannot be
treated as 'transitional' without reading back the present into the
past."* [**From Urbanisation to Cities**, p. 179] In other words,
capitalism was not a inevitable outcome of "history" or social
evolution.

Bookchin went on to note that capitalism existed *"with growing
significance in the mixed economy of the West from the fourteenth
century up to the seventeenth"* but that it *"literally exploded into
being in Europe, particularly England, during the eighteenth and
especially nineteenth centuries."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 181] The question
arises, what lay behind this *"growing significance"*? Did capitalism
*"explode"* due to its inherently more efficient nature or where there
other, non-economic, forces at work? As we will show, it was most
definitely the second -- capitalism was born not from economic forces
but from the political actions of the social elites which its usury
enriched. Unlike artisan (simple commodity) production, wage labour
generates inequalities and wealth for the few and so will be selected,
protected and encouraged by those who control the state in their own
economic and social interests.

The development of capitalism in Europe was favoured by two social
elites, the rising capitalist class within the degenerating medieval
cities and the absolutist state. The medieval city was *"thoroughly
changed by the gradual increase in the power of commercial capital, due
primarily to foreign trade . . . By this the inner unity of the commune
was loosened, giving place to a growing caste system and leading
necessarily to a progressive inequality of social interests. The
privileged minorities pressed ever more definitely towards a
centralisation of the political forces of the community. . .
Mercantilism in the perishing city republics led logically to a demand
for larger economic units [i.e. to nationalise the market]; and by this
the desire for stronger political forms was greatly strengthened . . .
Thus the city gradually became a small state, paving the way for the
coming national state."* [Rudolf Rocker, **Nationalism and Culture**, p.
94] Kropotkin stressed that in this destruction of communal
self-organisation the state not only served the interests of the rising
capitalist class but also its own. Just as the landlord and capitalist
seeks a workforce and labour market made up of atomised and isolated
individuals, so does the state seek to eliminate all potential rivals to
its power and so opposes *"all coalitions and all private societies,
whatever their aim."* [**The State: It's Historic role**, p. 53]

The rising economic power of the proto-capitalists conflicted with that
of the feudal lords, which meant that the former required help to
consolidate their position. That aid came in the form of the monarchical
state which, in turn, needed support against the feudal lords. With the
force of absolutism behind it, capital could start the process of
increasing its power and influence by expanding the "market" through
state action. This use of state coercion was required because, as
Bookchin noted, *"[i]n every pre-capitalist society, countervailing
forces . . . existed to restrict the market economy. No less
significantly, many pre-capitalist societies raised what they thought
were insuperable obstacles to the penetration of the State into social
life."* He noted the *"power of village communities to resist the
invasion of trade and despotic political forms into society's abiding
communal substrate."* State violence was required to break this
resistance and, unsurprisingly the *"one class to benefit most from the
rising nation-state was the European bourgeoisie . . . This structure .
. . provided the basis for the next great system of labour mobilisation:
the factory."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, pp. 207-8 and p. 336] The
absolutist state, noted Rocker, *"was dependent upon the help of these
new economic forces, and vice versa* and so it *"at first furthered the
plans of commercial capital"* as its coffers were filled by the
expansion of commerce. Its armies and fleets *"contributed to the
expansion of industrial production because they demanded a number of
things for whose large-scale production the shops of small tradesmen
were no longer adapted. Thus gradually arose the so-called manufactures,
the forerunners of the later large industries."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
117-8] As such, it is impossible to underestimate the role of state
power in creating the preconditions for both agricultural and industrial
capitalism.

Some of the most important state actions from the standpoint of early
industry were the so-called Enclosure Acts, by which the "commons" --
the free farmland shared communally by the peasants in most rural
villages -- was "enclosed" or incorporated into the estates of various
landlords as private property (see [section F.8.3](secF8.html#secf83)).
This ensured a pool of landless workers who had no option but to sell
their labour to landlords and capitalists. Indeed, the widespread
independence caused by the possession of the majority of households of
land caused the rising class of capitalists to complain, as one put it,
*"that men who should work as wage-labourers cling to the soil, and in
the naughtiness of their hearts prefer independence as squatters to
employment by a master."* [quoted by Allan Engler, **The Apostles of
Greed**, p. 12] Once in service to a master, the state was always on
hand to repress any signs of *"naughtiness"* and *"independence"* (such
as strikes, riots, unions and the like). For example, Seventeenth
century France saw a *"number of decrees . . . which forbade workers to
change their employment or which prohibited assemblies of workers or
strikes on pain of corporal punishment or even death. (Even the
Theological Faculty of the University of Paris saw fit to pronounce
solemnly against the sin of workers' organisation)."* [Maurice Dobb,
**Studies in Capitalism Development**, p. 160]

In addition, other forms of state aid ensured that capitalist firms got
a head start, so ensuring their dominance over other forms of work (such
as co-operatives). A major way of creating a pool of resources that
could be used for investment was the use of mercantilist policies which
used protectionist measures to enrich capitalists and landlords at the
expense of consumers and their workers. For example, one of most common
complaints of early capitalists was that workers could not turn up to
work regularly. Once they had worked a few days, they disappeared as
they had earned enough money to live on. With higher prices for food,
caused by protectionist measures, workers had to work longer and harder
and so became accustomed to factory labour. In addition, mercantilism
allowed native industry to develop by barring foreign competition and so
allowed industrialists to reap excess profits which they could then use
to increase their investments. In the words of Marxist economic
historian Maurice Dobb:

> *"In short, the Mercantile System was a system of State-regulated
> exploitation through trade which played a highly important rule in the
> adolescence of capitalist industry: it was essentially the economic
> policy of an age of primitive accumulation."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 209]

As Rocker summarises, *"when absolutism had victoriously overcome all
opposition to national unification, by its furthering of mercantilism
and economic monopoly it gave the whole social evolution a direction
which could only lead to capitalism."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 116-7]

Mercantilist policies took many forms, including the state providing
capital to new industries, exempting them from guild rules and taxes,
establishing monopolies over local, foreign and colonial markets, and
granting titles and pensions to successful capitalists. In terms of
foreign trade, the state assisted home-grown capitalists by imposing
tariffs, quotas, and prohibitions on imports. They also prohibited the
export of tools and technology as well as the emigration of skilled
workers to stop competition (this applied to any colonies a specific
state may have had). Other policies were applied as required by the
needs of specific states. For example, the English state imposed a
series of Navigation Acts which forced traders to use English ships to
visit its ports and colonies (this destroyed the commerce of Holland,
its chief rival). Nor should the impact of war be minimised, with the
demand for weapons and transportation (including ships) injecting
government spending into the economy. Unsurprisingly, given this
favouring of domestic industry at the expense of its rivals and the
subject working class population the mercantilist period was one of
generally rapid growth, particularly in England.

As we discussed in [section C.10](secC10.html), some kind of
mercantilism has always been required for a country to industrialise.
Over all, as economist Paul Ormerod puts it, the *"advice to follow pure
free-market polices seems . . . to be contrary to the lessons of
virtually the whole of economic history since the Industrial Revolution
. . . every country which has moved into . . . strong sustained growth .
. . has done so in outright violation of pure, free-market principles."*
These interventions include the use of *"tariff barriers"* to protect
infant industries, *"government subsidies"* and *"active state
intervention in the economy."* He summarises: *"The model of
entrepreneurial activity in the product market, with judicious state
support plus repression in the labour market, seems to be a good model
of economic development."* [**The Death of Economics**, p. 63]

Thus the social forces at work creating capitalism was a combination of
capitalist activity and state action. But without the support of the
state, it is doubtful that capitalist activity would have been enough to
generate the initial accumulation required to start the economic ball
rolling. Hence the necessity of Mercantilism in Europe and its modified
cousin of state aid, tariffs and "homestead acts" in America.

F.8.2 What was the social context of the statement "laissez-faire?"
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The honeymoon of interests between the early capitalists and autocratic
kings did not last long. *"This selfsame monarchy, which for weighty
reasons sought to further the aims of commercial capital and was. . .
itself aided in its development by capital, grew at last into a
crippling obstacle to any further development of European industry."*
[Rudolf Rocker, **Nationalism and Culture**, p. 117]

This is the social context of the expression *"laissez-faire"* -- a
system which has outgrown the supports that protected it in its early
stages. Just as children eventually rebel against the protection and
rules of their parents, so the capitalists rebelled against the
over-bearing support of the absolutist state. Mercantilist policies
favoured some industries and harmed the growth of others. The rules and
regulations imposed upon those it did favour reduced the flexibility of
capitalists to changing environments. As Rocker argues, *"no matter how
the absolutist state strove, in its own interest, to meet the demands of
commerce, it still put on industry countless fetters which became
gradually more and more oppressive . . . [it] became an unbearable
burden . . . which paralysed all economic and social life."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 119] All in all, mercantilism became more of a hindrance than
a help and so had to be replaced. With the growth of economic and social
power by the capitalist class, this replacement was made easier. As
Errico Malatesta notes:

> *"The development of production, the vast expansion of commerce, the
> immeasurable power assumed by money . . . have guaranteed this
> supremacy [of economic power over political power] to the capitalist
> class which, no longer content with enjoying the support of the
> government, demanded that government arise from its own ranks. A
> government which owed its origin to the right of conquest . . . though
> subject by existing circumstances to the capitalist class, went on
> maintaining a proud and contemptuous attitude towards its now wealthy
> former slaves, and had pretensions to independence of domination. That
> government was indeed the defender, the property owners' gendarme, but
> the kind of gendarmes who think they are somebody, and behave in an
> arrogant manner towards the people they have to escort and defend,
> when they don't rob or kill them at the next street corner; and the
> capitalist class got rid of it . . . and replac[ed] it by a government
> of its own choosing, at all times under its control and specifically
> organised to defend that class against any possible demands by the
> disinherited."* [**Anarchy**, pp. 22-3]

Malatesta here indicates the true meaning of *"leave us alone,"* or
*"laissez-faire."* The **absolutist** state (not "the state" per se)
began to interfere with capitalists' profit-making activities and
authority, so they determined that it had to go -- which the rising
capitalist class did when they utilised such popular movements as the
English, French and American revolutions. In such circumstances, when
the state is not fully controlled by the capitalist class, then it makes
perfect sense to oppose state intervention no matter how useful it may
have been in the past -- a state run by aristocratic and feudal
landlords does not produce class legislation in quite the right form.
That changes when members of the capitalist class hold state power and
when the landlords start acting more like rural capitalists and,
unsurprisingly, laissez-faire was quickly modified and then abandoned
once capitalists could rely on a ***capitalist*** state to support and
protect its economic power within society.

When capitalism had been rid of unwanted interference by the hostile use
of state power by non-capitalist classes then laissez-faire had its
utility (just as it has its utility today when attacking social
welfare). Once this had been accomplished then state intervention in
society was encouraged and applauded by capitalists. *"It is ironic that
the main protagonists of the State, in its political and administrative
authority, were the middle-class Utilitarians, on the other side of
whose Statist banner were inscribed the doctrines of economic Laissez
Faire."* [E.P. Thompson, **The Making of the English Working Class**, p.
90] Capitalists simply wanted **capitalist** states to replace
monarchical states, so that heads of government would follow state
economic policies regarded by capitalists as beneficial to their class
as a whole. And as development economist Lance Taylor argues:

> *"In the long run, there are no laissez-faire transitions to modern
> economic growth. The state has always intervened to create a
> capitalist class, and then it has to regulate the capitalist class,
> and then the state has to worry about being taken over by the
> capitalist class, but the state has always been there."* [quoted by
> Noam Chomsky, **Year 501**, p. 104]

In order to attack mercantilism, the early capitalists had to ignore the
successful impact of its policies in developing industry and a "store of
wealth" for future economic activity. As William Lazonick points out,
*"the political purpose of [Adam Smith's] the **Wealth of Nations** was
to attack the mercantilist institutions that the British economy had
built up over the previous two hundred years. Yet in proposing
institutional change, Smith lacked a dynamic historical analysis. In his
attack on these institutions, Smith might have asked why the extent of
the world market available to Britain in the late eighteenth century was
**so uniquely under British control.** If Smith had asked this 'big
question,' he might have been forced to grant credit for Britain's
extent of the world market to the very mercantilist institutions he was
attacking."* Moreover, he *"might have recognised the integral relation
between economic and political power in the rise of Britain to
international dominance."* Overall, *"[w]hat the British advocates of
laissez-faire neglected to talk about was the role that a system of
national power had played in creating conditions for Britain to embark
on its dynamic development path . . . They did not bother to ask how
Britain had attained th[e] position [of 'workshop of the world'], while
they conveniently ignored the on going system of national power -- the
British Empire -- that . . . continued to support Britain's position."*
[**Business Organisation and the Myth of the Market Economy**, p. 2, p.
3 and p.5]

Similar comments are applicable to American supporters of laissez faire
who fail to notice that the "traditional" American support for
world-wide free trade is quite a recent phenomenon. It started only at
the end of the Second World War (although, of course, **within** America
military Keynesian policies were utilised). While American industry was
developing, the state and capitalist class had no time for laissez-faire
(see [section F.8.5](secF8.html#secf85) for details). After it had grown
strong, the United States began preaching laissez-faire to the rest of
the world -- and began to kid itself about its own history, believing
its slogans about laissez-faire as the secret of its success. Yet like
all other successful industrialisers, the state could aid capitalists
directly and indirectly (via tariffs, land policy, repression of the
labour movement, infrastructure subsidy and so on) and it would "leave
them alone" to oppress and exploit workers, exploit consumers, build
their industrial empires and so forth.

Takis Fotopoules indicates that the social forces at work in "freeing"
the market did not represent a "natural" evolution towards freedom:

> *"Contrary to what liberals and Marxists assert, marketisation of the
> economy was not just an evolutionary process, following the expansion
> of trade under mercantilism . . . modern [i.e. capitalist] markets did
> not evolve out of local markets and/or markets for foreign goods . . .
> the nation-state, which was just emerging at the end of the Middle
> Ages, played a crucial role creating the conditions for the
> 'nationalisation' of the market . . . and . . . by freeing the market
> from effective social control."* [*"The Nation-state and the Market"*,
> pp. 37-80 **Society and Nature**, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 44-45]

The "freeing" of the market means freeing those who "own" most of the
market (i.e. the wealthy elite) from *"effective social control,"* but
the rest of society was not as lucky. Kropotkin makes a similar point:
*"While giving the capitalist any degree of free scope to amass his
wealth at the expense of the helpless labourers, the government has
**nowhere** and **never** . . . afforded the labourers the opportunity
'to do as they pleased'."* [**Anarchism**, p. 182]

So, the expression "laissez-faire" dates from the period when
capitalists were objecting to the restrictions that helped create them
in the first place. It has little to do with freedom as such and far
more to do with the needs of capitalist power and profits. It should
also be remembered that at this time the state was run by the rich and
for the rich. Elections, where they took place, involved the wealthiest
of male property owners. This meant there were two aspects in the call
for laissez-faire. On the one hand, by the elite to eliminate
regulations and interventions they found burdensome and felt unnecessary
as their social position was secure by their economic power
(mercantilism evolved into capitalism proper when market power was
usually sufficient to produce dependency and obedience as the working
class had been successfully dispossessed from the land and the means of
production). On the other, serious social reformers (like Adam Smith)
who recognised that the costs of such elite inspired state regulations
generally fell on working class people. The moral authority of the
latter was used to bolster the desire of the former to maximise their
wealth by imposing costs of others (workers, customers, society and the
planet's eco-system) with the state waiting in the wings to support them
as and when required.

Unsurprising, working class people recognised the hypocrisy of this
arrangement (even if most modern-day right-"libertarians" do not and
provide their services justifying the actions and desires of repressive
and exploitative oligarchs seeking monopolistic positions). They turned
to political and social activism seeking to change a system which saw
economic and political power reinforce each other. Some (like the
Chartists and Marxists) argued for political reforms to generalise
democracy into genuine one person, one vote. In this way, political
liberty would be used to end the worse excesses of so-called "economic
liberty" (i.e., capitalist privilege and power). Others (like
mutualists) aimed at economic reforms which ensure that the capitalist
class would be abolished by means of genuine economic freedom. Finally,
most other anarchists argued that revolutionary change was required as
the state and capitalism were so intertwined that both had to be ended
at the same time. However, the struggle against state power always came
from the general population. As Murray Bookchin argued, it is an error
to depict this *"revolutionary era and its democratic aspirations as
'bourgeois,' an imagery that makes capitalism a system more committed to
freedom, or even ordinary civil liberties, than it was historically."*
[**From Urbanisation to Cities**, p. 180f] While the capitalist class
may have benefited from such popular movements as the English, American
and French revolutions but these revolutions were not led, never mind
started or fought, by the bourgeoisie.

Not much as changed as capitalists are today seeking maximum freedom
from the state to ensure maximum authority over their wage slaves and
society. The one essential form of support the "Libertarian" right wants
the state (or "defence" firms) to provide capitalism is the enforcement
of property rights -- the right of property owners to "do as they like"
on their own property, which can have obvious and extensive social
impacts. What "libertarian" capitalists object to is attempts by others
-- workers, society as a whole, the state, etc. -- to interfere with the
authority of bosses. That this is just the defence of privilege and
power (and **not** freedom) has been discussed in [section
B](secBcon.html) and elsewhere in [section F](secFcon.html), so we will
not repeat ourselves here. Samuel Johnson once observed that *"we hear
the loudest **yelps** for liberty among the drivers of Negroes."*
[quoted by Noam Chomsky, **Year 501**, p. 141] Our modern "libertarian"
capitalist drivers of wage-slaves are yelping for exactly the same kind
of "liberty."

F.8.3 What other forms did state intervention in creating capitalism take?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beyond being a paymaster for new forms of production and social
relations as well as defending the owners' power, the state intervened
economically in other ways as well. As we noted in [section
B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25), the state played a key role in transforming
the law codes of society in a capitalistic fashion, ignoring custom and
common law when it was convenient to do so. Similarly, the use of
tariffs and the granting of monopolies to companies played an important
role in accumulating capital at the expense of working people, as did
the breaking of unions and strikes by force.

However, one of the most blatant of these acts was the enclosure of
common land. In Britain, by means of the Enclosure Acts, land that had
been freely used by poor peasants was claimed by large landlords as
private property. As socialist historian E.P. Thompson summarised, *"the
social violence of enclosure consisted . . . in the drastic, total
imposition upon the village of capitalist property-definitions."* [**The
Making of the English Working Class**, pp. 237-8] Property rights, which
favoured the rich, replaced the use rights and free agreement that had
governed peasants use of the commons. Unlike use rights, which rest in
the individual, property rights require state intervention to create and
maintain. *"Parliament and law imposed capitalist definitions to
exclusive property in land,"* Thompson notes. This process involved
ignoring the wishes of those who used the commons and repressing those
who objected. Parliament was, of course, run by and for the rich who
then simply *"observed the rules which they themselves had made."*
[**Customs in Common**, p. 163]

Unsurprisingly, many landowners would become rich through the enclosure
of the commons, heaths and downland while many ordinary people had a
centuries old right taken away. Land enclosure was a gigantic swindle on
the part of large landowners. In the words of one English folk poem
written in 1764 as a protest against enclosure:

*They hang the man, and flog the woman,\
 That steals the goose from off the common;\
 But let the greater villain loose,\
 That steals the common from the goose.\
*

It should be remembered that the process of enclosure was not limited to
just the period of the industrial revolution. As Colin Ward notes, *"in
Tudor times, a wave of enclosures by land-owners who sought to profit
from the high price of wool had deprived the commoners of their
livelihood and obliged them to seek work elsewhere or become vagrants or
squatters on the wastes on the edges of villages."* [**Cotters and
Squatters**, p. 30] This first wave increased the size of the rural
proletariat who sold their labour to landlords. Nor should we forget
that this imposition of capitalist property rights did not imply that it
was illegal. As Michael Perelman notes,*"[f]ormally, this dispossession
was perfectly legal. After all, the peasants did not have property
rights in the narrow sense. They only had traditional rights. As markets
evolved, first land-hungry gentry and later the bourgeoisie used the
state to create a legal structure to abrogate these traditional
rights."* [**The Invention of Capitalism**, pp. 13-4]

While technically legal as the landlords made the law, the impact of
this stealing of the land should not be under estimated. Without land,
you cannot live and have to sell your liberty to others. This places
those with capital at an advantage, which will tend to increase, rather
than decrease, the inequalities in society (and so place the landless
workers at an increasing disadvantage over time). This process can be
seen from early stages of capitalism. With the enclosure of the land an
agricultural workforce was created which had to travel where the work
was. This influx of landless ex-peasants into the towns ensured that the
traditional guild system crumbled and was transformed into capitalistic
industry with bosses and wage slaves rather than master craftsmen and
their journeymen. Hence the enclosure of land played a key role, for
*"it is clear that economic inequalities are unlikely to create a
division of society into an employing master class and a subject
wage-earning class, unless access to the means of production, including
land, is by some means or another barred to a substantial section of the
community."* [Maurice Dobb, **Studies in Capitalist Development**, p.
253]

The importance of access to land is summarised by this limerick by the
followers of Henry George (a 19th century writer who argued for a
*"single tax"* and the nationalisation of land). The Georgites got their
basic argument on the importance of land down these few, excellent,
lines:

*A college economist planned\
 To live without access to land\
 He would have succeeded\
 But found that he needed\
 Food, shelter and somewhere to stand.\
*

Thus anarchists concern over the *"land monopoly"* of which the
Enclosure Acts were but one part. The land monopoly, to use Tucker's
words, *"consists in the enforcement by government of land titles which
do not rest upon personal occupancy and cultivation."* [**The Anarchist
Reader**, p. 150] So it should be remembered that common land did
**not** include the large holdings of members of the feudal aristocracy
and other landlords. This helped to artificially limit available land
and produce a rural proletariat just as much as enclosures.

It is important to remember that wage labour first developed on the land
and it was the protection of land titles of landlords and nobility,
combined with enclosure, that meant people could not just work their own
land. The pressing economic circumstances created by enclosing the land
and enforcing property rights to large estates ensured that capitalists
did not have to point a gun at people's heads to get them to work long
hours in authoritarian, dehumanising conditions. In such circumstances,
when the majority are dispossessed and face the threat of starvation,
poverty, homelessness and so on, "initiation of force" is **not
required.** But guns **were** required to enforce the system of private
property that created the labour market in the first place, to enclosure
common land and protect the estates of the nobility and wealthy.

By decreasing the availability of land for rural people, the enclosures
destroyed working-class independence. Through these Acts, innumerable
peasants were excluded from access to their former means of livelihood,
forcing them to seek work from landlords or to migrate to the cities to
seek work in the newly emerging factories of the budding industrial
capitalists who were thus provided with a ready source of cheap labour.
The capitalists, of course, did not describe the results this way, but
attempted to obfuscate the issue with their usual rhetoric about
civilisation and progress. Thus John Bellers, a 17th-century supporter
of enclosures, claimed that commons were *"a hindrance to Industry, and
. . . Nurseries of Idleness and Insolence."* The *"forests and great
Commons make the Poor that are upon them too much like the
**indians.**"* [quoted by Thompson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 165] Elsewhere
Thompson argues that the commons *"were now seen as a dangerous centre
of indiscipline . . . Ideology was added to self-interest. It became a
matter of public-spirited policy for gentlemen to remove cottagers from
the commons, reduce his labourers to dependence."* [**The Making of the
English Working Class**, pp. 242-3] David McNally confirms this, arguing
*"it was precisely these elements of material and spiritual independence
that many of the most outspoken advocates of enclosure sought to
destroy."* Eighteenth-century proponents of enclosure *"were remarkably
forthright in this respect. Common rights and access to common lands,
they argued, allowed a degree of social and economic independence, and
thereby produced a lazy, dissolute mass of rural poor who eschewed
honest labour and church attendance . . . Denying such people common
lands and common rights would force them to conform to the harsh
discipline imposed by the market in labour."* [**Against the Market**,
p. 19]

The commons gave working-class people a degree of independence which
allowed them to be "insolent" to their betters. This had to be stopped,
as it undermined to the very roots of authority relationships within
society. The commons **increased** freedom for ordinary people and made
them less willing to follow orders and accept wage labour. The reference
to "Indians" is important, as the independence and freedom of Native
Americans is well documented. The common feature of both cultures was
communal ownership of the means of production and free access to it
(usufruct). This is discussed further in section I.7 ([Won't Libertarian
Socialism destroy individuality?](secI7.html)). As Bookchin stressed,
the factory *"was not born from a need to integrate labour with modern
machinery,"* rather it was to regulate labour and make it regular. For
the *"irregularity, or 'naturalness,' in the rhythm and intensity of
traditional systems of work contributed more towards the bourgeoisie's
craze for social control and its savagely anti-naturalistic outlook than
did the prices or earnings demanded by its employees. More than any
single technical factor, this irregularity led to the rationalisation of
labour under a single ensemble of rule, to a discipline of work and
regulation of time that yielded the modern factory . . . the initial
goal of the factory was to dominate labour and destroy the worker's
independence from capital."* [**The Ecology of Freedom** p. 406]

Hence the pressing need to break the workers' ties with the land and so
the *"loss of this independence included the loss of the worker's
contact with food cultivation . . . To live in a cottage . . . often
meant to cultivate a family garden, possibly to pasture a cow, to
prepare one's own bread, and to have the skills for keeping a home in
good repair. To utterly erase these skills and means of a livelihood
from the worker's life became an industrial imperative."* Thus the
worker's *"complete dependence on the factory and on an industrial
labour market was a compelling precondition for the triumph of
industrial society . . . The need to destroy whatever independent means
of life the worker could garner . . . all involved the issue of reducing
the proletariat to a condition of total powerlessness in the face of
capital. And with that powerlessness came a supineness, a loss of
character and community, and a decline in moral fibre."* [Bookchin,
**Op. Cit.,**, pp. 406-7] Unsurprisingly, there was a positive
association between enclosure and migration out of villages and a
*"definite correlation . . . between the extent of enclosure and
reliance on poor rates . . . parliamentary enclosure resulted in
out-migration and a higher level of pauperisation."* Moreover, *"the
standard of living was generally much higher in those areas where
labourer managed to combine industrial work with farming . . . Access to
commons meant that labourers could graze animals, gather wood, stones
and gravel, dig coal, hunt and fish. These rights often made the
difference between subsistence and abject poverty."* [David McNally,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 14 and p. 18] Game laws also ensured that the peasantry
and servants could not legally hunt for food as from the time of Richard
II (1389) to 1831, no person could kill game unless qualified by estate
or social standing.

The enclosure of the commons (in whatever form it took -- see [section
F.8.5](secF8.html#secf85) for the US equivalent) solved both problems --
the high cost of labour, and the freedom and dignity of the worker. The
enclosures perfectly illustrate the principle that capitalism requires a
state to ensure that the majority of people do not have free access to
any means of livelihood and so must sell themselves to capitalists in
order to survive. There is no doubt that if the state had "left alone"
the European peasantry, allowing them to continue their collective
farming practices ("collective farming" because, as Kropotkin shows, the
peasants not only shared the land but much of the farm labour as well),
capitalism could not have taken hold (see **Mutual Aid** for more on the
European enclosures [pp. 184-189]). As Kropotkin notes, *"[i]nstances of
commoners themselves dividing their lands were rare, everywhere the
State coerced them to enforce the division, or simply favoured the
private appropriation of their lands"* by the nobles and wealthy. Thus
*"to speak of the natural death of the village community [or the
commons] in virtue of economical law is as grim a joke as to speak of
the natural death of soldiers slaughtered on a battlefield."* [**Mutual
Aid**, p. 188 and p. 189]

Once a labour market **was** created by means of enclosure and the land
monopoly, the state did **not** passively let it work. When market
conditions favoured the working class, the state took heed of the calls
of landlords and capitalists and intervened to restore the "natural"
order. The state actively used the law to lower wages and ban unions of
workers for centuries. In Britain, for example, after the Black Death
there was a "servant" shortage. Rather than allow the market to work its
magic, the landlords turned to the state and the result was ***"the
Statute of Labourers"*** of 1351:

> *"Whereas late against the malice of servants, which were idle, and
> not willing to serve after the pestilence, without taking excessive
> wages, it was ordained by our lord the king . . . that such manner of
> servants . . . should be bound to serve, receiving salary and wages,
> accustomed in places where they ought to serve in the twentieth year
> of the reign of the king that now is, or five or six years before; and
> that the same servants refusing to serve in such manner should be
> punished by imprisonment of their bodies . . . now forasmuch as it is
> given the king to understand in this present parliament, by the
> petition of the commonalty, that the said servants having no regard to
> the said ordinance, . . to the great damage of the great men, and
> impoverishing of all the said commonalty, whereof the said commonalty
> prayeth remedy: wherefore in the said parliament, by the assent of the
> said prelates, earls, barons, and other great men, and of the same
> commonalty there assembled, to refrain the malice of the said
> servants, be ordained and established the things underwritten."*

Thus state action was required because labourers had increased
bargaining power and commanded higher wages which, in turn, led to
inflation throughout the economy. In other words, an early version of
the NAIRU (see [section C.9](secC9.html)). In one form or another this
statute remained in force right through to the 19th century (later
versions made it illegal for employees to "conspire" to fix wages, i.e.,
to organise to demand wage increases). Such measures were particularly
sought when the labour market occasionally favoured the working class.
For example, *"[a]fter the Restoration [of the English Monarchy],"*
noted Dobb, *"when labour-scarcity had again become a serious complaint
and the propertied class had been soundly frightened by the
insubordination of the Commonwealth years, the clamour for legislative
interference to keep wages low, to drive the poor into employment and to
extend the system of workhouses and 'houses of correction' and the
farming out of paupers once more reached a crescendo."* The same
occurred on Continental Europe. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 234]

So, time and again employers called on the state to provide force to
suppress the working class, artificially lower wages and bolster their
economic power and authority. While such legislation was often difficult
to enforce and often ineffectual in that real wages did, over time,
increase, the threat and use of state coercion would ensure that they
did not increase as fast as they may otherwise have done. Similarly, the
use of courts and troops to break unions and strikes helped the process
of capital accumulation immensely. Then there were the various laws used
to control the free movement of workers. *"For centuries,"* notes Colin
Ward, *"the lives of the poor majority in rural England were dominated
by the Poor law and its ramifications, like the Settlement Act of 1697
which debarred strangers from entering a parish unless they had a
Settlement Certificate in which their home parish agreed to take them
back if they became in need of poor relief. Like the Workhouse, it was a
hated institution that lasted into the 20th century."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
31]

As Kropotkin stressed, *"it was the State which undertook to settle . .
. griefs"* between workers and bosses *"so as to guarantee a
'convenient' livelihood"* (convenient for the masters, of course). It
also acted *"severely to prohibit all combinations . . . under the
menace of severe punishments . . . Both in the town and in the village
the State reigned over loose aggregations of individuals, and was ready
to prevent by the most stringent measures the reconstitution of any sort
of separate unions among them."* Workers who formed unions *"were
prosecuted wholesale under the Master and Servant Act -- workers being
summarily arrested and condemned upon a mere complaint of misbehaviour
lodged by the master. Strikes were suppressed in an autocratic way . . .
to say nothing of the military suppression of strike riots . . . To
practice mutual support under such circumstances was anything but an
easy task . . . After a long fight, which lasted over a hundred years,
the right of combing together was conquered."* [**Mutual Aid**, p. 210
and p. 211] It took until 1813 until the laws regulating wages were
repealed while the laws against combinations remained until 1825
(although that did not stop the Tolpuddle Martyrs being convicted of
"administering an illegal oath" and deported to Tasmania in 1834). Fifty
years later, the provisions of the statues of labourers which made it a
civil action if the boss broke his contract but a criminal action if the
worker broke it were repealed. Trade unions were given legal recognition
in 1871 while, at the same time, another law limited what the workers
could do in a strike or lockout. The British ideals of free trade never
included freedom to organise.

(Luckily, by then, economists were at hand to explain to the workers
that organising to demand higher wages was against their own
self-interest. By a strange coincidence, all those laws against unions
had actually **helped** the working class by enforcing the necessary
conditions for perfect competition in labour market! What are the
chances of that? Of course, while considered undesirable from the
perspective of mainstream economists -- and, by strange co-incidence,
the bosses -- unions are generally not banned these days but rather
heavily regulated. The freedom loving, deregulating Thatcherites passed
six Employment Acts between 1980 and 1993 restricting industrial action
by requiring pre-strike ballots, outlawing secondary action, restricting
picketing and giving employers the right to seek injunctions where there
is doubt about the legality of action -- in the workers' interest, of
course as, for some reason, politicians, bosses and economists have
always known what best for trade unionists rather than the trade
unionists themselves. And if they objected, well, that was what the
state was for.)

So to anyone remotely familiar with working class history the notion
that there could be an economic theory which ignores power relations
between bosses and workers is a particularly self-serving joke. Economic
relations always have a power element, even if only to protect the
property and power of the wealthy -- the Invisible Hand always counts on
a very visible Iron Fist when required. As Kropotkin memorably put it,
the rise of capitalism has always seen the State *"tighten the screw for
the worker"* and *"impos[ing] industrial serfdom."* So what the
bourgeoisie *"swept away as harmful to industry"* was anything
considered as *"useless and harmful"* but that class *"was at pains not
to sweep away was the power of the State over industry, over the factory
serf."* Nor should the role of public schooling be overlooked, within
which *"the spirit of voluntary servitude was always cleverly cultivated
in the minds of the young, and still is, in order to perpetuate the
subjection of the individual to the State."* [**The State: Its Historic
Role**, pp. 52-3 and p. 55] Such education also ensured that children
become used to the obedience and boredom required for wage slavery.

Like the more recent case of fascist Chile, "free market" capitalism was
imposed on the majority of society by an elite using the authoritarian
state. This was recognised by Adam Smith when he opposed state
intervention in **The Wealth of Nations**. In Smith's day, the
government was openly and unashamedly an instrument of wealth owners.
Less than 10 per cent of British men (and no women) had the right to
vote. When Smith opposed state interference, he was opposing the
imposition of wealth owners' interests on everybody else (and, of
course, how "liberal", never mind "libertarian", is a political system
in which the many follow the rules and laws set-down in the so-called
interests of all by the few? As history shows, any minority given, or
who take, such power **will** abuse it in their own interests). Today,
the situation is reversed, with neo-liberals and right-"libertarians"
opposing state interference in the economy (e.g. regulation of Big
Business) so as to prevent the public from having even a minor impact on
the power or interests of the elite. The fact that "free market"
capitalism always requires introduction by an authoritarian state should
make all honest "Libertarians" ask: How "free" is the "free market"?

F.8.4 Aren't the enclosures a socialist myth?
---------------------------------------------

The short answer is no, they are not. While a lot of historical analysis
has been spent in trying to deny the extent and impact of the
enclosures, the simple fact is (in the words of noted historian E.P.
Thompson) enclosure *"was a plain enough case of class robbery, played
according to the fair rules of property and law laid down by a
parliament of property-owners and lawyers."* [**The Making of the
English Working Class**, pp. 237-8]

The enclosures were one of the ways that the *"land monopoly"* was
created. The land monopoly referred to feudal and capitalist property
rights and ownership of land by (among others) the Individualist
Anarchists. Instead of an *"occupancy and use"* regime advocated by
anarchists, the land monopoly allowed a few to bar the many from the
land -- so creating a class of people with nothing to sell but their
labour. While this monopoly is less important these days in developed
nations (few people know how to farm) it was essential as a means of
consolidating capitalism. Given the choice, most people preferred to
become independent farmers rather than wage workers (see [next
section](secF8.html#secf85)). As such, the *"land monopoly"* involves
more than simply enclosing common land but also enforcing the claims of
landlords to areas of land greater than they can work by their own
labour.

Needless to say, the titles of landlords and the state are generally
ignored by supporters of capitalism who tend to concentrate on the
enclosure movement in order to downplay its importance. Little wonder,
for it is something of an embarrassment for them to acknowledge that the
creation of capitalism was somewhat less than "immaculate" -- after all,
capitalism is portrayed as an almost ideal society of freedom. To find
out that an idol has feet of clay and that we are still living with the
impact of its origins is something pro-capitalists must deny. So **are**
the enclosures a socialist myth? Most claims that it is flow from the
work of the historian J.D. Chambers' famous essay *"Enclosures and the
Labour Supply in the Industrial Revolution."* [**Economic History
Review**, 2nd series, no. 5, August 1953] In this essay, Chambers
attempts to refute Karl Marx's account of the enclosures and the role it
played in what Marx called *"primitive accumulation."*

We cannot be expected to provide an extensive account of the debate that
has raged over this issue (Colin Ward notes that *"a later series of
scholars have provided locally detailed evidence that reinforces"* the
traditional socialist analysis of enclosure and its impact. [**Cotters
and Squatters**, p. 143]). All we can do is provide a summary of the
work of William Lazonick who presented an excellent reply to those who
claim that the enclosures were an unimportant historical event (see his
*"Karl Marx and Enclosures in England."* [**Review of Radical Political
Economy**, no. 6, pp. 1-32]). Here, we draw upon his subsequent
summarisation of his critique provided in his books **Competitive
Advantage on the Shop Floor** and **Business Organisation and the Myth
of the Market Economy**.

There are three main claims against the socialist account of the
enclosures. We will cover each in turn.

Firstly, it is often claimed that the enclosures drove the uprooted
cottager and small peasant into industry. However, this was never
claimed. As Lazonick stresses while some economic historians *"have
attributed to Marx the notion that, in one fell swoop, the enclosure
movement drove the peasants off the soil and into the factories. Marx
did not put forth such a simplistic view of the rise of a wage-labour
force . . . Despite gaps and omission in Marx's historical analysis, his
basic arguments concerning the creation of a landless proletariat are
both important and valid. The transformations of social relations of
production and the emergence of a wage-labour force in the agricultural
sector were the critical preconditions for the Industrial Revolution."*
[**Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**, pp. 12-3]

It is correct, as the critics of Marx stress, that the agricultural
revolution associated with the enclosures **increased** the demand for
farm labour as claimed by Chambers and others. And this is the whole
point -- enclosures created a pool of dispossessed labourers who had to
sell their time/liberty to survive and whether this was to a landlord or
an industrialist is irrelevant (as Marx himself stressed). As such, the
account by Chambers, ironically, *"confirms the broad outlines of Marx's
arguments"* as it implicitly acknowledges that *"over the long run the
massive reallocation of access to land that enclosures entailed resulted
in the separation of the mass of agricultural producers from the means
of production."* So the *"critical transformation was not the level of
agricultural employment before and after enclosure but the changes in
employment relations caused by the reorganisation of landholdings and
the reallocation of access to land."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 29, pp. 29-30
and p. 30] Thus the key feature of the enclosures was that it created a
supply for farm labour, a supply that had no choice but to work for
another. Once freed from the land, these workers could later move to the
towns in search for better work:

> *"Critical to the Marxian thesis of the origins of the industrial
> labour force is the transformation of the social relations of
> agriculture and the creation, in the first instance, of an
> agricultural wage-labour force that might eventually, perhaps through
> market incentives, be drawn into the industrial labour force."*
> [**Business Organisation and the Myth of the Market Economy**, p. 273]

In summary, when the critics argue that enclosures increased the demand
for farm labour they are not refuting Marx but confirming his analysis.
This is because the enclosures had resulted in a transformation in
employment relations in agriculture with the peasants and farmers turned
into wage workers for landlords (i.e., rural capitalists). For if wage
labour is the defining characteristic of capitalism then it matters
little if the boss is a farmer or an industrialist. This means that the
*"critics, it turns out, have not differed substantially with Marx on
the facts of agricultural transformation. But by ignoring the historical
and theoretical significance of the resultant changes in the social
relations of **agricultural** production, the critics have missed Marx's
main point."* [**Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**, p. 30]

Secondly, it is argued that the number of small farm owners increased,
or at least did not greatly decline, and so the enclosure movement was
unimportant. Again, this misses the point. Small farm owners can still
employ wage workers (i.e. become capitalist farmers as opposed to
"yeomen" -- an independent peasant proprietor). As Lazonick notes,
*"[i]t is true that after 1750 some petty proprietors continued to
occupy and work their own land. But in a world of capitalist
agriculture, the yeomanry no longer played an important role in
determining the course of capitalist agriculture. As a social class that
could influence the evolution of British economy society, the yeomanry
had disappeared."* Moreover, Chambers himself acknowledged that for the
poor without legal rights in land, then enclosure injured them. For
*"the majority of the agricultural population . . . had only customary
rights. To argue that these people were not treated unfairly because
they did not possess legally enforceable property rights is irrelevant
to the fact that they were dispossessed by enclosures. Again, Marx's
critics have failed to address the issue of the transformation of access
to the means of production as a precondition for the Industrial
Revolution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 32 and p. 31]

Thirdly, it is often claimed that it was population growth, rather than
enclosures, that caused the supply of wage workers. So was population
growth more important than enclosures? Given that enclosure impacted on
the individuals and social customs of the time, it is impossible to
separate the growth in population from the social context in which it
happened. As such, the population argument ignores the question of
whether the changes in society caused by enclosures and the rise of
capitalism have an impact on the observed trends towards earlier
marriage and larger families after 1750. Lazonick argues that *"[t]here
is reason to believe that they did."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 33] Overall,
Lazonick notes that *"[i]t can even be argued that the changed social
relations of agriculture altered the constraints on early marriage and
incentives to childbearing that contributed to the growth in population.
The key point is that transformations in social relations in production
can influence, and have influenced, the quantity of wage labour supplied
on both agricultural and industrial labour markets. To argue that
population growth created the industrial labour supply is to ignore
these momentous social transformations"* associated with the rise of
capitalism. [**Business Organisation and the Myth of the Market
Economy**, p. 273]

In other words, there is good reason to think that the enclosures, far
from being some kind of socialist myth, in fact played a key role in the
development of capitalism. As Lazonick notes, *"Chambers misunderstood"*
the *"argument concerning the 'institutional creation' of a
proletarianised (i.e. landless) workforce. Indeed, Chamber's own
evidence and logic tend to support the Marxian [and anarchist!]
argument, when it is properly understood."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 273]

Lastly, it must be stressed that this process of dispossession happened
over hundreds of years. It was not a case of simply driving peasants off
their land and into factories. In fact, the first acts of expropriation
took place in agriculture and created a rural proletariat which had to
sell their labour/liberty to landlords and it was the second wave of
enclosures, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, that was closely
connected with the process of industrialisation. The enclosure movement,
moreover, was imposed in an uneven way, affecting different areas at
different times, depending on the power of peasant resistance and the
nature of the crops being grown (and other objective conditions). Nor
was it a case of an instant transformation -- for a long period this
rural proletariat was not totally dependent on wages, still having some
access to the land and wastes for fuel and food. So while rural wage
workers did exist throughout the period from 1350 to the 1600s,
capitalism was not fully established in Britain yet as such people
comprised only a small proportion of the labouring classes. The acts of
enclosure were just one part of a long process by which a proletariat
was created.

F.8.5 What about the lack of enclosures in the Americas?
--------------------------------------------------------

The enclosure movement was but one part of a wide-reaching process of
state intervention in creating capitalism. Moreover, it is just one way
of creating the *"land monopoly"* which ensured the creation of a
working class. The circumstances facing the ruling class in the Americas
were distinctly different than in the Old World and so the "land
monopoly" took a different form there. In the Americas, enclosures were
unimportant as customary land rights did not really exist (at least once
the Native Americans were eliminated by violence). Here the problem was
that (after the original users of the land were eliminated) there were
vast tracts of land available for people to use. Other forms of state
intervention were similar to that applied under mercantilism in Europe
(such as tariffs, government spending, use of unfree labour and state
repression of workers and their organisations and so on). All had one
aim, to enrich and power the masters and dispossess the actual producers
of the means of life (land and means of production).

Unsurprisingly, due to the abundance of land, there was a movement
towards independent farming in the early years of the American colonies
and subsequent Republic and this pushed up the price of remaining labour
on the market by reducing the supply. Capitalists found it difficult to
find workers willing to work for them at wages low enough to provide
them with sufficient profits. It was due to the difficulty in finding
cheap enough labour that capitalists in America turned to slavery. All
things being equal, wage labour **is** more productive than slavery but
in early America all things were **not** equal. Having access to cheap
(indeed, free) land meant that working people had a choice, and few
desired to become wage slaves and so because of this, capitalists turned
to slavery in the South and the "land monopoly" in the North.

This was because, in the words of Maurice Dobb, it *"became clear to
those who wished to reproduce capitalist relations of production in the
new country that the foundation-stone of their endeavour must be the
restriction of land-ownership to a minority and the exclusion of the
majority from any share in [productive] property."* [**Studies in
Capitalist Development**, pp. 221-2] As one radical historian puts it,
*"[w]hen land is 'free' or 'cheap'. as it was in different regions of
the United States before the 1830s, there was no compulsion for farmers
to introduce labour-saving technology. As a result, 'independent
household production' . . . hindered the development of capitalism . . .
[by] allowing large portions of the population to escape wage labour."*
[Charlie Post, *"The 'Agricultural Revolution' in the United States"*,
pp. 216-228, **Science and Society**, vol. 61, no. 2, p. 221]

It was precisely this option (i.e. of independent production) that had
to be destroyed in order for capitalist industry to develop. The state
had to violate the holy laws of "supply and demand" by controlling the
access to land in order to ensure the normal workings of "supply and
demand" in the labour market (i.e. that the bargaining position favoured
employer over employee). Once this situation became the typical one
(i.e., when the option of self-employment was effectively eliminated) a
more (protectionist based) "laissez-faire" approach could be adopted,
with state action used indirectly to favour the capitalists and
landlords (and readily available to protect private property from the
actions of the dispossessed).

So how was this transformation of land ownership achieved?

Instead of allowing settlers to appropriate their own farms as was often
the case before the 1830s, the state stepped in once the army had
cleared out (usually by genocide) the original users. Its first major
role was to enforce legal rights of property on unused land. Land stolen
from the Native Americans was sold at auction to the highest bidders,
namely speculators, who then sold it on to farmers. This process started
right *"after the revolution, [when] huge sections of land were bought
up by rich speculators"* and their claims supported by the law. [Howard
Zinn, **A People's History of the United States**, p. 125] Thus land
which should have been free was sold to land-hungry farmers and the few
enriched themselves at the expense of the many. Not only did this
increase inequality within society, it also encouraged the development
of wage labour -- having to pay for land would have ensured that many
immigrants remained on the East Coast until they had enough money. Thus
a pool of people with little option but to sell their labour was
increased due to state protection of unoccupied land. That the land
usually ended up in the hands of farmers did not (could not) countermand
the shift in class forces that this policy created.

This was also the essential role of the various "Homesteading Acts" and,
in general, the *"Federal land law in the 19th century provided for the
sale of most of the public domain at public auction to the higher bidder
. . . Actual settlers were forced to buy land from speculators, at
prices considerably above the federal minimal price."* (which few people
could afford anyway). [Charlie Post, **Op. Cit.**, p. 222] This is
confirmed by Howard Zinn who notes that 1862 Homestead Act *"gave 160
acres of western land, unoccupied and publicly owned, to anyone who
would cultivate it for five years . . . Few ordinary people had the
\$200 necessary to do this; speculators moved in and bought up much of
the land. Homestead land added up to 50 million acres. But during the
Civil War, over 100 million acres were given by Congress and the
President to various railroads, free of charge."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 233]
Little wonder the Individualist Anarchists supported an *"occupancy and
use"* system of land ownership as a key way of stopping capitalist and
landlord usury as well as the development of capitalism itself.

This change in the appropriation of land had significant effects on
agriculture and the desirability of taking up farming for immigrants. As
Post notes, *"[w]hen the social conditions for obtaining and maintaining
possession of land change, as they did in the Midwest between 1830 and
1840, pursuing the goal of preserving [family ownership and control] . .
. produced very different results. In order to pay growing mortgages,
debts and taxes, family farmers were compelled to specialise production
toward cash crops and to market more and more of their output."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 221-2]

So, in order to pay for land which was formerly free, farmers got
themselves into debt and increasingly turned to the market to pay it
off. Thus, the *"Federal land system, by transforming land into a
commodity and stimulating land speculation, made the Midwestern farmers
dependent upon markets for the continual possession of their farms."*
Once on the market, farmers had to invest in new machinery and this also
got them into debt. In the face of a bad harvest or market glut, they
could not repay their loans and their farms had to be sold to so do so.
By 1880, 25% of all farms were rented by tenants, and the numbers kept
rising. In addition, the *"transformation of social property relations
in northern agriculture set the stage for the 'agricultural revolution'
of the 1840s and 1850s . . . [R]ising debts and taxes forced Midwestern
family farmers to compete as commodity producers in order to maintain
their land-holding . . . The transformation . . . was the central
precondition for the development of industrial capitalism in the United
States."* [Charlie Post, **Op. Cit.**, p. 223 and p. 226]

It should be noted that feudal land owning was enforced in many areas of
the colonies and the early Republic. Landlords had their holdings
protected by the state and their demands for rent had the full backing
of the state. This lead to numerous anti-rent conflicts. [Howard Zinn,
**A People's History of the United States**, p. 84 and pp. 206-11] Such
struggles helped end such arrangements, with landlords being
"encouraged" to allow the farmers to buy the land which was rightfully
theirs. The wealth appropriated from the farmers in the form of rent and
the price of the land could then be invested in industry so transforming
feudal relations on the land into capitalist relations in industry (and,
eventually, back on the land when the farmers succumbed to the pressures
of the capitalist market and debt forced them to sell).

This means that Murray Rothbard's comment that *"once the land was
purchased by the settler, the injustice disappeared"* is nonsense -- the
injustice was transmitted to other parts of society and this, the wider
legacy of the original injustice, lived on and helped transform society
towards capitalism. In addition, his comment about *"the establishment
in North America of a truly libertarian land system"* would be one the
Individualist Anarchists of the period would have seriously disagreed
with! [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 73] Rothbard, at times, seems to be
vaguely aware of the importance of land as the basis of freedom in early
America. For example, he notes in passing that *"the abundance of
fertile virgin land in a vast territory enabled individualism to come to
full flower in many areas."* [**Conceived in Liberty**, vol. 2, p. 186]
Yet he did not ponder the transformation in social relationships which
would result when that land was gone. In fact, he was blas about it.
*"If latecomers are worse off,"* he opined, *"well then that is their
proper assumption of risk in this free and uncertain world. There is no
longer a vast frontier in the United States, and there is no point
crying over the fact."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 240]
Unsurprisingly we also find Murray Rothbard commenting that Native
Americans *"lived under a collectivistic regime that, for land
allocation, was scarcely more just than the English governmental land
grab."* [**Conceived in Liberty**, vol. 1, p. 187] That such a regime
made for **increased** individual liberty and that it was precisely the
independence from the landlord and bosses this produced which made
enclosure and state land grabs such appealing prospects for the ruling
class was lost on him.

Unlike capitalist economists, politicians and bosses at the time,
Rothbard seemed unaware that this *"vast frontier"* (like the commons)
was viewed as a major problem for maintaining labour discipline and
appropriate state action was taken to reduce it by restricting free
access to the land in order to ensure that workers were dependent on
wage labour. Many early economists recognised this and advocated such
action. Edward Wakefield was typical when he complained that *"where
land is cheap and all are free, where every one who so pleases can
easily obtain a piece of land for himself, not only is labour dear, as
respects the labourer's share of the product, but the difficulty is to
obtain combined labour at any price."* This resulted in a situation were
few *"can accumulate great masses of wealth"* as workers *"cease . . .
to be labourers for hire; they . . . become independent landowners, if
not competitors with their former masters in the labour market."*
Unsurprisingly, Wakefield urged state action to reduce this option and
ensure that labour become cheap as workers had little choice but to seek
a master. One key way was for the state to seize the land and then sell
it to the population. This would ensure that *"no labourer would be able
to procure land until he had worked for money"* and this *"would produce
capital for the employment of more labourers."* [quoted by Marx, **Op.
Cit.,**, p. 935, p. 936 and p. 939] Which is precisely what did occur.

At the same time that it excluded the working class from virgin land,
the state granted large tracts of land to the privileged classes: to
land speculators, logging and mining companies, planters, railroads, and
so on. In addition to seizing the land and distributing it in such a way
as to benefit capitalist industry, the *"government played its part in
helping the bankers and hurting the farmers; it kept the amount of money
-- based in the gold supply -- steady while the population rose, so
there was less and less money in circulation. The farmer had to pay off
his debts in dollars that were harder to get. The bankers, getting loans
back, were getting dollars worth more than when they loaned them out --
a kind of interest on top of interest. That was why so much of the talk
of farmers' movements in those days had to do with putting more money in
circulation."* [Zinn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 278] This was the case with the
Individualist Anarchists at the same time, we must add.

Overall, therefore, state action ensured the transformation of America
from a society of independent workers to a capitalist one. By creating
and enforcing the "land monopoly" (of which state ownership of
unoccupied land and its enforcement of landlord rights were the most
important) the state ensured that the balance of class forces tipped in
favour of the capitalist class. By removing the option of farming your
own land, the US government created its own form of enclosure and the
creation of a landless workforce with little option but to sell its
liberty on the "free market". They was nothing "natural" about it.
Little wonder the Individualist Anarchist J.K. Ingalls attacked the
"land monopoly" with the following words:

> *"The earth, with its vast resources of mineral wealth, its
> spontaneous productions and its fertile soil, the free gift of God and
> the common patrimony of mankind, has for long centuries been held in
> the grasp of one set of oppressors by right of conquest or right of
> discovery; and it is now held by another, through the right of
> purchase from them. All of man's natural possessions . . . have been
> claimed as property; nor has man himself escaped the insatiate jaws of
> greed. The invasion of his rights and possessions has resulted . . .
> in clothing property with a power to accumulate an income."* [quoted
> by James Martin, **Men Against the State**, p. 142]

Marx, correctly, argued that *"the capitalist mode of production and
accumulation, and therefore capitalist private property, have for their
fundamental condition the annihilation of that private property which
rests on the labour of the individual himself; in other words, the
expropriation of the worker."* [**Capital**, Vol. 1, p. 940] He noted
that to achieve this, the state is used:

> *"How then can the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colonies be healed?
> . . . Let the Government set an artificial price on the virgin soil, a
> price independent of the law of supply and demand, a price that
> compels the immigrant to work a long time for wages before he can earn
> enough money to buy land, and turn himself into an independent
> farmer."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 938]

Moreover, tariffs were introduced with *"the objective of manufacturing
capitalists artificially"* for the *"system of protection was an
artificial means of manufacturing manufacturers, or expropriating
independent workers, of capitalising the national means of production
and subsistence, and of forcibly cutting short the transition . . . to
the modern mode of production,"* to capitalism [**Op. Cit.**, p. 932 and
pp. 921-2]

So mercantilism, state aid in capitalist development, was also seen in
the United States of America. As Edward Herman points out, the *"level
of government involvement in business in the United States from the late
eighteenth century to the present has followed a U-shaped pattern: There
was extensive government intervention in the pre-Civil War period (major
subsidies, joint ventures with active government participation and
direct government production), then a quasi-laissez faire period between
the Civil War and the end of the nineteenth century [a period marked by
"the aggressive use of tariff protection" and state supported railway
construction, a key factor in capitalist expansion in the USA], followed
by a gradual upswing of government intervention in the twentieth
century, which accelerated after 1930."* [**Corporate Control, Corporate
Power**, p. 162]

Such intervention ensured that income was transferred from workers to
capitalists. Under state protection, America industrialised by forcing
the consumer to enrich the capitalists and increase their capital stock.
*"According to one study, if the tariff had been removed in the 1830s
'about half the industrial sector of New England would have been
bankrupted' . . . the tariff became a near-permanent political
institution representing government assistance to manufacturing. It kept
price levels from being driven down by foreign competition and thereby
shifted the distribution of income in favour of owners of industrial
property to the disadvantage of workers and customers."* This protection
was essential, for the *"end of the European wars in 1814 . . . reopened
the United States to a flood of British imports that drove many American
competitors out of business. Large portions of the newly expanded
manufacturing base were wiped out, bringing a decade of
near-stagnation."* Unsurprisingly, the *"era of protectionism began in
1816, with northern agitation for higher tariffs."* [Richard B. Du Boff,
**Accumulation and Power**, p. 56, p. 14 and p. 55] Combined with ready
repression of the labour movement and government "homesteading" acts
(see [section F.8.5](secF8.html#secf85)), tariffs were the American
equivalent of mercantilism (which, after all, was above all else a
policy of protectionism, i.e. the use of government to stimulate the
growth of native industry). Only once America was at the top of the
economic pile did it renounce state intervention (just as Britain did,
we must note).

This is **not** to suggest that government aid was limited to tariffs.
The state played a key role in the development of industry and
manufacturing. As John Zerzan notes, the *"role of the State is
tellingly reflected by the fact that the 'armoury system' now rivals the
older 'American system of manufactures' term as the more accurate to
describe the new system of production methods"* developed in the early
1800s. [**Elements of Refusal**, p. 100] By the middle of the nineteenth
century *"a distinctive 'American system of manufactures' had emerged .
. . The lead in technological innovation [during the US Industrial
Revolution] came in armaments where assured government orders justified
high fixed-cost investments in special-pursue machinery and managerial
personnel. Indeed, some of the pioneering effects occurred in
government-owned armouries."* Other forms of state aid were used, for
example the textile industry *"still required tariffs to protect [it]
from . . . British competition."* [William Lazonick, **Competitive
Advantage on the Shop Floor**, p. 218 and p. 219] The government also
*"actively furthered this process [of 'commercial revolution'] with
public works in transportation and communication."* In addition to this
"physical" aid, *"state government provided critical help, with devices
like the chartered corporation"* [Richard B. Du Boff, **Op. Cit.**, p.
15] As we noted in [section B.2.5](secB2.html#secb25), there were
changes in the legal system which favoured capitalist interests over the
rest of society.

Nineteenth-century America also went in heavily for industrial planning
-- occasionally under that name but more often in the name of national
defence. The military was the excuse for what is today termed rebuilding
infrastructure, picking winners, promoting research, and co-ordinating
industrial growth (as it still is, we should add). As Richard B. Du Boff
points out, the "anti-state" backlash of the 1840s onwards in America
was highly selective, as the general opinion was that *"[h]enceforth, if
governments wished to subsidise private business operations, there would
be no objection. But if public power were to be used to control business
actions or if the public sector were to undertake economic initiatives
on its own, it would run up against the determined opposition of private
capital."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 26]

State intervention was not limited to simply reducing the amount of
available land or enforcing a high tariff. *"Given the independent
spirit of workers in the colonies, capital understood that great profits
required the use of unfree labour."* [Michael Perelman, **The Invention
of Capitalism**, p. 246] It was also applied in the labour market as
well. Most obviously, it enforced the property rights of slave owners
(until the civil war, produced when the pro-free trade policies of the
South clashed with the pro-tariff desires of the capitalist North). The
evil and horrors of slavery are well documented, as is its key role in
building capitalism in America and elsewhere so we will concentrate on
other forms of obviously unfree labour. Convict labour in Australia, for
example, played an important role in the early days of colonisation
while in America indentured servants played a similar role.

Indentured service was a system whereby workers had to labour for a
specific number of years usually in return for passage to America with
the law requiring the return of runaway servants. In theory, of course,
the person was only selling their labour. In practice, indentured
servants were basically slaves and the courts enforced the laws that
made it so. The treatment of servants was harsh and often as brutal as
that inflicted on slaves. Half the servants died in the first two years
and unsurprisingly, runaways were frequent. The courts realised this was
a problem and started to demand that everyone have identification and
travel papers.

It should also be noted that the practice of indentured servants also
shows how state intervention in one country can impact on others. This
is because people were willing to endure indentured service in the
colonies because of how bad their situation was at home. Thus the
effects of primitive accumulation in Britain impacted on the development
of America as most indentured servants were recruited from the growing
number of unemployed people in urban areas there. Dispossessed from
their land and unable to find work in the cities, many became indentured
servants in order to take passage to the Americas. In fact, between one
half to two thirds of all immigrants to Colonial America arrived as
indentured servants and, at times, three-quarters of the population of
some colonies were under contracts of indenture. That this allowed the
employing class to overcome their problems in hiring "help" should go
without saying, as should its impact on American inequality and the
ability of capitalists and landlords to enrich themselves on their
servants labour and to invest it profitably.

As well as allowing unfree labour, the American state intervened to
ensure that the freedom of wage workers was limited in similar ways as
we indicated in [section F.8.3](secF8.html#secf83). *"The changes in
social relations of production in artisan trades that took place in the
thirty years after 1790,"* notes one historian, *"and the . . . trade
unionism to which . . . it gave rise, both replicated in important
respects the experience of workers in the artisan trades in Britain over
a rather longer period . . . The juridical responses they provoked
likewise reproduced English practice. Beginning in 1806, American courts
consciously seized upon English common law precedent to combat
journeymen's associations."* Capitalists in this era tried to *"secure
profit . . . through the exercise of disciplinary power over their
employees."* To achieve this *"employers made a bid for legal aid"* and
it is here *"that the key to law's role in the process of creating an
industrial economy in America lies."* As in the UK, the state invented
laws and issues proclamations against workers' combinations, calling
them conspiracies and prosecuting them as such. Trade unionists argued
that laws which declared unions as illegal combinations should be
repealed as against the Constitution of the USA while *"the specific
cause of trademens protestations of their right to organise was,
unsurprisingly, the willingness of local authorities to renew their
resort to conspiracy indictments to countermand the growing power of the
union movement."* Using criminal conspiracy to counter combinations
among employees was commonplace, with the law viewing a *"collective
quitting of employment [as] a criminal interference"* and combinations
to raise the rate of labour *"indictable at common law."* [Christopher
L. Tomlins, **Law, Labor, and Ideology in the Early American Republic**,
p. 113, p. 295, p. 159 and p. 213] By the end of the nineteenth century,
state repression for conspiracy was replaced by state repression for
acting like a trust while actual trusts were ignored and so laws,
ostensibly passed (with the help of the unions themselves) to limit the
power of capital, were turned against labour (this should be
unsurprising as it was a capitalist state which passed them). [Howard
Zinn, **A People's History of the United States**, p. 254]

Another key means to limit the freedom of workers was denying departing
workers their wages for the part of the contract they had completed.
This *"underscored the judiciary's tendency to articulate their
approval"* of the hierarchical master/servant relationship in terms of
its *"social utility: It was a necessary and desirable feature of the
social organisation of work . . . that the employer's authority be
reinforced in this way."* Appeals courts held that *"an employment
contract was an entire contract, and therefore that no obligation to pay
wages existed until the employee had completed the agreed term."* Law
suits *"by employers seeking damages for an employee's departure prior
to the expiry of an agreed term or for other forms of breach of contract
constituted one form of legally sanctioned economic discipline of some
importance in shaping the employment relations of the nineteenth
century."* Thus the boss could fire the worker without paying their
wages while if the worker left the boss he would expect a similar
outcome. This was because the courts had decided that the *"employer was
entitled not only to receipt of the services contracted for in their
entirety prior to payment but also to the obedience of the employee in
the process of rendering them."* [Tomlins, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 278-9, p.
274, p. 272 and pp. 279-80] The ability of workers to seek
self-employment on the farm or workplace or even better conditions and
wages were simply abolished by employers turning to the state.

So, in summary, the state could remedy the shortage of cheap wage labour
by controlling access to the land, repressing trade unions as
conspiracies or trusts and ensuring that workers had to obey their
bosses for the full term of their contract (while the bosses could fire
them at will). Combine this with the extensive use of tariffs, state
funding of industry and infrastructure among many other forms of state
aid to capitalists and we have a situation were capitalism was imposed
on a pre-capitalist nation at the behest of the wealthy elite by the
state, as was the case with all other countries.

F.8.6 How did working people view the rise of capitalism?
---------------------------------------------------------

The best example of how hated capitalism was can be seen by the rise and
spread of the labour and socialist movements, in all their many forms,
across the world. It is no coincidence that the development of
capitalism also saw the rise of socialist theories. Nor was it a
coincidence that the rising workers movement was subjected to extensive
state repression, with unions, strikes and other protests being
systematically repressed. Only once capital was firmly entrenched in its
market position could economic power come to replace political force
(although, of course, that always remained ready in the background to
defend capitalist property and power).

The rise of unions, socialism and other reform movements and their
repression was a feature of **all** capitalist countries. While America
is sometime portrayed as an exception to this, in reality that country
was also marked by numerous popular movements which challenged the rise
of capitalism and the transformation of social relationships within the
economy from artisanal self-management to capitalist wage slavery. As in
other countries, the state was always quick to support the capitalist
class against their rebellious wage slaves, using first conspiracy and
then anti-trust laws against working class people and their
organisations. So, in order to fully understand how different capitalism
was from previous economic systems, we will consider early capitalism in
the US, which for many right-"libertarians" is **the** example of the
"capitalism-equals-freedom" argument.

Early America was pervaded by artisan production -- individual ownership
of the means of production. Unlike capitalism, this system is **not**
marked by the separation of the worker from the means of life. Most
people did not have to work for another, and so did not. As Jeremy
Brecher notes, in 1831 the *"great majority of Americans were farmers
working their own land, primarily for their own needs. Most of the rest
were self-employed artisans, merchants, traders, and professionals.
Other classes -- employees and industrialists in the North, slaves and
planters in the South -- were relatively small. The great majority of
Americans were independent and free from anybody's command."*
[**Strike!**, p. xxi] So the availability of land ensured that in
America, slavery and indentured servants were the only means by which
capitalists could get people to work for them. This was because slaves
and servants were not able to leave their masters and become
self-employed farmers or artisans. As noted in the [last
section](secF8.html#secf85) this material base was, ironically,
acknowledged by Rothbard but the implications for freedom when it
disappeared was not. While he did not ponder what would happen when that
supply of land ended and whether the libertarian aspects of early
American society would survive, contemporary politicians, bosses, and
economists did. Unsurprisingly, they turned to the state to ensure that
capitalism grew on the grave of artisan and farmer property.

Toward the middle of the 19th century the economy began to change.
Capitalism began to be imported into American society as the
infrastructure was improved by state aid and tariff walls were
constructed which allowed home-grown manufacturing companies to develop.
Soon, due to (state-supported) capitalist competition, artisan
production was replaced by wage labour. Thus "evolved" modern
capitalism. Many workers understood, resented, and opposed their
increasing subjugation to their employers, which could not be reconciled
with the principles of freedom and economic independence that had marked
American life and had sunk deeply into mass consciousness during the
days of the early economy. In 1854, for example, a group of skilled
piano makers hoped that *"the day is far distant when they [wage
earners] will so far forget what is due to manhood as to glory in a
system forced upon them by their necessity and in opposition to their
feelings of independence and self-respect. May the piano trade be spared
such exhibitions of the degrading power of the day [wage] system."*
[quoted by Brecher and Costello, **Common Sense for Hard Times**, p. 26]

Clearly the working class did not consider working for a daily wage, in
contrast to working for themselves and selling their own product, to be
a step forward for liberty or individual dignity. The difference between
selling the product of one's labour and selling one's labour (i.e.
oneself) was seen and condemned (*"[w]hen the producer . . . sold his
product, he retained himself. But when he came to sell his labour, he
sold himself . . . the extension [of wage labour] to the skilled worker
was regarded by him as a symbol of a deeper change."* [Norman Ware,
**The Industrial Worker, 1840-1860**, p. xiv]). Indeed, one group of
workers argued that they were *"slaves in the strictest sense of the
word"* as they had *"to toil from the rising of the sun to the going
down of the same for our masters -- aye, masters, and for our daily
bread."* [quoted by Ware, **Op. Cit.**, p. 42] Another group argued that
*"the factory system contains in itself the elements of slavery, we
think no sound reasoning can deny, and everyday continues to add power
to its incorporate sovereignty, while the sovereignty of the working
people decreases in the same degree."* [quoted by Brecher and Costello,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 29] For working class people, free labour meant
something radically different than that subscribed to by employers and
economists. For workers, free labour meant economic independence through
the ownership of productive equipment or land. For bosses, it meant
workers being free of any alternative to consenting to authoritarian
organisations within their workplaces -- if that required state
intervention (and it did), then so be it.

The courts, of course, did their part in ensuring that the law reflected
and bolstered the power of the boss rather than the worker. *"Acting
piecemeal,"* summarises Tomlins, *"the law courts and law writers of the
early republic built their approach to the employment relationship on
the back of English master/servant law. In the process, they vested in
the generality of nineteenth-century employers a controlling authority
over the employees founded upon the pre-industrial master's claim to
property in his servant's personal services."* Courts were *"having
recourse to master/servant's language of power and control"* as the
*"preferred strategy for dealing with the employment relation"* and so
advertised their conclusion that *"employment relations were properly to
be conceived of as generically hierarchical."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 231 and
p. 225] As we noted in [last section](secF8.html#secf85) the courts,
judges and jurists acted to outlaw unions as conspiracies and force
workers to work the full length of their contracts. In addition, they
also reduced employer liability in industrial accidents (which, of
course, helped lower the costs of investment as well as operating
costs).

Artisans and farmers correctly saw this as a process of downward
mobility toward wage labour and almost as soon as there were wage
workers, there were strikes, machine breaking, riots, unions and many
other forms of resistance. John Zerzan's argument that there was a
*"relentless assault on the worker's historical rights to free time,
self-education, craftsmanship, and play was at the heart of the rise of
the factory system"* is extremely accurate. [**Elements of Refusal**, p.
105] And it was an assault that workers resisted with all their might.
In response to being subjected to the wage labour, workers rebelled and
tried to organise themselves to fight the powers that be and to replace
the system with a co-operative one. As the printer's union argued, its
members *"regard such an organisation [a union] not only as an agent of
immediate relief, but also as an essential to the ultimate destruction
of those unnatural relations at present subsisting between the interests
of the employing and the employed classes . . . when labour determines
to sell itself no longer to speculators, but to become its own employer,
to own and enjoy itself and the fruit thereof, the necessity for scales
of prices will have passed away and labour will be forever rescued from
the control of the capitalist."* [quoted by Brecher and Costello, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 27-28]

Little wonder, then, why wage labourers considered capitalism as a
modified form of slavery and why the term *"wage slavery"* became so
popular in the labour and anarchist movements. It was just reflecting
the feelings of those who experienced the wages system at first hand and
who created the labour and socialist movements in response. As labour
historian Norman Ware notes, the *"term 'wage slave' had a much better
standing in the forties [of the 19th century] than it has today. It was
not then regarded as an empty shibboleth of the soap-box orator. This
would suggest that it has suffered only the normal degradation of
language, has become a **cliche**, not that it is a grossly misleading
characterisation."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. xvf] It is no coincidence that, in
America, the first manufacturing complex in Lowell was designed to
symbolise its goals and its hierarchical structure nor that its design
was emulated by many of the penitentiaries, insane asylums, orphanages
and reformatories of the period. [Bookchin, **The Ecology of Freedom**,
p. 392]

These responses of workers to the experience of wage labour is important
as they show that capitalism is by no means "natural." The fact is the
first generation of workers tried to avoid wage labour is at all
possible -- they hated the restrictions of freedom it imposed upon them.
Unlike the bourgeoisie, who positively eulogised the discipline they
imposed on others. As one put it with respect to one corporation in
Lowell, New England, the factories at Lowell were *"a new world, in its
police it is **imperium in imperio**. It has been said that an absolute
despotism, justly administered . . . would be a perfect government . . .
For at the same time that it is an absolute despotism, it is a most
perfect democracy. Any of its subjects can depart from it at pleasure .
. . Thus all the philosophy of mind which enter vitally into government
by the people . . . is combined with a set of rule which the operatives
have no voice in forming or administering, yet of a nature not merely
perfectly just, but human, benevolent, patriarchal in a high degree."*
Those actually subjected to this *"benevolent"* dictatorship had a
somewhat different perspective. Workers, in contrast, were perfectly
aware that wage labour was wage slavery -- that they were decidedly
**unfree** during working hours and subjected to the will of another.
The workers therefore attacked capitalism precisely because it was
despotism (*"monarchical principles on democratic soil"*) and thought
they *"who work in the mills ought to own them."* Unsurprisingly, when
workers did revolt against the benevolent despots, the workers noted how
the bosses responded by marking *"every person with intelligence and
independence . . . He is a suspected individual and must be either got
rid of or broken in. Hundreds of honest labourers have been dismissed
from employment . . . because they have been suspected of knowing their
rights and daring to assert them."* [quoted by Ware, **Op. Cit.**, p.
78, p. 79 and p. 110]

While most working class people now are accustomed to wage labour (while
often hating their job) the actual process of resistance to the
development of capitalism indicates well its inherently authoritarian
nature and that people were not inclined to accept it as "economic
freedom." Only once other options were closed off and capitalists given
an edge in the "free" market by state action did people accept and
become accustomed to wage labour. As E. P. Thompson notes, for British
workers at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th centuries, the
*"gap in status between a 'servant,' a hired wage-labourer subject to
the orders and discipline of the master, and an artisan, who might 'come
and go' as he pleased, was wide enough for men to shed blood rather than
allow themselves to be pushed from one side to the other. And, in the
value system of the community, those who resisted degradation were in
the right."* [**The Making of the English Working Class**, p. 599]

Opposition to wage labour and factory fascism was/is widespread and
seems to occur wherever it is encountered. *"Research has shown"*,
summarises William Lazonick, *"that the 'free-born Englishman' of the
eighteenth century -- even those who, by force of circumstance, had to
submit to agricultural wage labour -- tenaciously resisted entry into
the capitalist workshop."* [**Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor**,
p. 37] British workers shared the dislike of wage labour of their
American cousins. A *"Member of the Builders' Union"* in the 1830s
argued that the trade unions *"will not only strike for less work, and
more wages, but will ultimately **abolish wages**, become their own
masters and work for each other; labour and capital will no longer be
separate but will be indissolubly joined together in the hands of
workmen and work-women."* [quoted by E. P. Thompson, **Op. Cit.**, p.
912] This perspective inspired the **Grand National Consolidated Trades
Union** of 1834 which had the *"two-fold purpose of syndicalist unions
-- the protection of the workers under the existing system and the
formation of the nuclei of the future society"* when the unions *"take
over the whole industry of the country."* [Geoffrey Ostergaard, **The
Tradition of Workers' Control**, p. 133] As Thompson noted, *"industrial
syndicalism"* was a major theme of this time in the labour movement.
*"When Marx was still in his teens,"* he noted, British trade unionists
had *"developed, stage by stage, a theory of syndicalism"* in which the
*"unions themselves could solve the problem of political power"* along
with wage slavery. This vision was lost *"in the terrible defeats of
1834 and 1835."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 912 and p. 913] In France, the
mutualists of Lyons had come to the same conclusions, seeking *"the
formation of a series of co-operative associations"* which would
*"return to the workers control of their industry."* Proudhon would take
up this theme, as would the anarchist movement he helped create. [K.
Steven Vincent, **Pierre-Jospeh Proudhon and the Rise of French
Republican Socialism**, pp. 162-3] Similar movements and ideas developed
elsewhere, as capitalism was imposed (subsequent developments were
obviously influenced by the socialist ideas which had arisen earlier and
so were more obviously shaped by anarchist and Marxist ideas).

This is unsurprising, the workers then, who had not been swallowed up
whole by the industrial revolution, could make critical comparisons
between the factory system and what preceded it. *"Today, we are so
accustomed to this method of production [capitalism] and its
concomitant, the wage system, that it requires quite an effort of
imagination to appreciate the significance of the change in terms of the
lives of ordinary workers . . . the worker became **alienated** . . .
from the means of production and the products of his labour . . . In
these circumstances, it is not surprising that the new socialist
theories proposed an alternative to the capitalist system which would
avoid this alienation."* While wage slavery may seem "natural" today,
the first generation of wage labourers saw the transformation of the
social relationships they experienced in work, from a situation in which
they controlled their own work (and so themselves) to one in which
**others** controlled them, and they did not like it. However, while
many modern workers instinctively hate wage labour and having bosses,
without the awareness of some other method of working, many put up with
it as "inevitable." The first generation of wage labourers had the
awareness of something else (although a flawed and limited something
else as it existed in a hierarchical and class system) and this gave
then a deep insight into the nature of capitalism and produced a deeply
radical response to it and its authoritarian structures. Anarchism (like
other forms of socialism) was born of the demand for liberty and
resistance to authority which capitalism had provoked in its wage
slaves. With our support for workers' self-management of production,
*"as in so many others, the anarchists remain guardians of the
libertarian aspirations which moved the first rebels against the slavery
inherent in the capitalist mode of production."* [Ostergaard, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 27 and p. 90]

State action was required produce and protect the momentous changes in
social relations which are central to the capitalist system. However,
once capital **has** separated the working class from the means of life,
then it no longer had to rely as much on state coercion. With the choice
now between wage slavery or starving, then the appearance of voluntary
choice could be maintained as economic power was/is usually effective
enough to ensure that state violence could be used as a last resort.
Coercive practices are still possible, of course, but market forces are
usually sufficient as the market is usually skewed against the working
class. However, the role of the state remains a key to understanding
capitalism as a system rather than just specific periods of it. This is
because, as we stressed in [section D.1](secD1.html), state action is
not associated only with the past, with the transformation from
feudalism to capitalism. It happens today and it will continue to happen
as long as capitalism continues.

Far from being a "natural" development, then, capitalism was imposed on
a society by state action, by and on behalf of ruling elites. Those
working class people alive at the time viewed it as *"unnatural
relations"* and organised to overcome it. It is from such movements that
all the many forms of socialism sprang, including anarchism. This is the
case with the European anarchism associated with Proudhon, Bakunin and
Kropotkin as well as the American individualist anarchism of Warren and
Tucker. The links between anarchism and working class rebellion against
the autocracy of capital and the state is reflected not only in our
theory and history, but also in our anarchist symbols. The Black Flag,
for example, was first raised by rebel artisans in France and its
association with labour insurrection was the reason why anarchists took
it up as our symbol (see the appendix on ["The Symbols of
Anarchy"](append2.html)). So given both the history of capitalism and
anarchism, it becomes obvious any the latter has always opposed the
former. It is why anarchists today still seek to encourage the desire
and hope for political **and** economic freedom rather than the changing
of masters we have under capitalism. Anarchism will continue as long as
these feelings and hopes still exist and they will remain until such
time as we organise and abolish capitalism and the state.
