F.2 What do "anarcho"-capitalists mean by freedom?
==================================================

For "anarcho"-capitalists, the concept of freedom is limited to the idea
of *"freedom from."* For them, freedom means simply freedom from the
*"initiation of force,"* or the *"non-aggression against anyone's person
and property."* [Murray Rothbard, **For a New Liberty**, p. 23] The
notion that real freedom must combine both freedom *"to"* **and**
freedom *"from"* is missing in their ideology, as is the social context
of the so-called freedom they defend.

Before continuing, it is useful to quote Alan Haworth when he notes that
*"[i]n fact, it is surprising how **little** close attention the concept
of freedom receives from libertarian writers. Once again **Anarchy,
State, and Utopia** is a case in point. The word 'freedom' doesn't even
appear in the index. The word 'liberty' appears, but only to refer the
reader to the 'Wilt Chamberlain' passage. In a supposedly 'libertarian'
work, this is more than surprising. It is truly remarkable."*
[**Anti-Libertarianism**, p. 95] Why this is the case can be seen from
how the right-"libertarian" defines freedom.

In right-"libertarian" and "anarcho"-capitalist ideology, freedom is
considered to be a product of property. As Murray Rothbard puts it,
*"the libertarian defines the concept of 'freedom' or 'liberty'. . .[as
a] condition in which a person's ownership rights in his body and his
legitimate material property rights are not invaded, are not aggressed
against. . . . Freedom and unrestricted property rights go hand in
hand."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.41]

This definition has some problems, however. In such a society, one
cannot (legitimately) do anything with or on another's property if the
owner prohibits it. This means that an individual's only **guaranteed**
freedom is determined by the amount of property that he or she owns.
This has the consequence that someone with no property has no guaranteed
freedom at all (beyond, of course, the freedom not to be murdered or
otherwise harmed by the deliberate acts of others). In other words, a
distribution of property is a distribution of freedom, as the
right-"libertarians" themselves define it. It strikes anarchists as
strange that an ideology that claims to be committed to promoting
freedom entails the conclusion that some people should be more free than
others. Yet this is the logical implication of their view, which raises
a serious doubt as to whether "anarcho"-capitalists are actually
interested in freedom at all.

Looking at Rothbard's definition of "liberty" quoted above, we can see
that freedom is actually no longer considered to be a fundamental,
independent concept. Instead, freedom is a derivative of something more
fundamental, namely the *"legitimate rights"* of an individual, which
are identified as property rights. In other words, given that
"anarcho"-capitalists and right-"libertarians" in general consider the
right to property as "absolute," it follows that freedom and property
become one and the same. This suggests an alternative name for the right
Libertarian, namely ***"Propertarian."*** And, needless to say, if we do
not accept the right-libertarians' view of what constitutes "legitimate
rights," then their claim to be defenders of liberty is weak.

Another important implication of this "liberty as property" concept is
that it produces a strangely alienated concept of freedom. Liberty, as
we noted, is no longer considered absolute, but a derivative of property
-- which has the important consequence that you can "sell" your liberty
and still be considered free by the ideology. This concept of liberty is
usually termed "self-ownership." But, to state the obvious, I do not
"own" myself, as if were an object somehow separable from my
subjectivity -- I **am** myself (see [section
B.4.2](secB4.html#secb42)). However, the concept of "self-ownership" is
handy for justifying various forms of domination and oppression -- for
by agreeing (usually under the force of circumstances, we must note) to
certain contracts, an individual can "sell" (or rent out) themselves to
others (for example, when workers sell their labour power to capitalists
on the "free market"). In effect, "self-ownership" becomes the means of
justifying treating people as objects -- ironically, the very thing the
concept was created to stop! As anarchist L. Susan Brown notes, *"[a]t
the moment an individual 'sells' labour power to another, he/she loses
self-determination and instead is treated as a subjectless instrument
for the fulfilment of another's will."* [**The Politics of
Individualism**, p. 4]

Given that workers are paid to obey, you really have to wonder which
planet Murray Rothbard was on when he argued that a person's *"labour
service is alienable, but his **will** is not"* and that he *"cannot
alienate his **will**, more particularly his control over his own mind
and body."* He contrasts private property and self-ownership by arguing
that *"[a]ll physical property owned by a person is alienable . . . I
can give away or sell to another person my shoes, my house, my car, my
money, etc. But there are certain vital things which, in natural fact
and in the nature of man, are **in**alienable . . . [his] will and
control over his own person are inalienable."* [**The Ethics of
Liberty**, p. 40, p. 135 and pp. 134-5] Yet *"labour services"* are
unlike the private possessions Rothbard lists as being alienable. As we
argued in [section B.1](secB1.html) a person's *"labour services"* and
*"will"* cannot be divided -- if you sell your labour services, you also
have to give control of your body and mind to another person. If a
worker does not obey the commands of her employer, she is fired. That
Rothbard denied this indicates a total lack of common-sense. Perhaps
Rothbard would have argued that as the worker can quit at any time she
does not really alienate their will (this seems to be his case against
slave contracts -- see [section F.2.2](secF2.html#secf22)). But this
ignores the fact that between the signing and breaking of the contract
and during work hours (and perhaps outside work hours, if the boss has
mandatory drug testing or will fire workers who attend union or
anarchist meetings or those who have an "unnatural" sexuality and so on)
the worker **does** alienate his will and body. In the words of Rudolf
Rocker, *"under the realities of the capitalist economic form . . .
there can . . . be no talk of a 'right over one's own person,' for that
ends when one is compelled to submit to the economic dictation of
another if he does not want to starve."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p.
10]

Ironically, the rights of property (which are said to flow from an
individual's self-ownership of themselves) becomes the means, under
capitalism, by which self-ownership of non-property owners is denied.
The foundational right (self-ownership) becomes denied by the derivative
right (ownership of things). *"To treat others and oneself as
property,"* argues L. Susan Brown, *"objectifies the human individual,
denies the unity of subject and object and is a negation of individual
will . . . [and] destroys the very freedom one sought in the first
place. The liberal belief in property, both real and in the person,
leads not to freedom but to relationships of domination and
subordination."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 3] Under capitalism, a lack of
property can be just as oppressive as a lack of legal rights because of
the relationships of domination and subjection this situation creates.
That people "consent" to this hierarchy misses the point. As Alexander
Berkman put it:

> "The law says your employer does not steal anything from you, because
> it is done with your consent. You have agreed to work for your boss
> for certain pay, he to have all that you produce . . .
>
> "But did you really consent?
>
> "When the highway man holds his gun to your head, you turn your
> valuables over to him. You 'consent' all right, but you do so because
> you cannot help yourself, because you are **compelled** by his gun.
>
> "Are you not **compelled** to work for an employer? Your need compels
> you just as the highwayman's gun. You must live . . . You can't work
> for yourself . . . The factories, machinery, and tools belong to the
> employing class, so you **must** hire yourself out to that class in
> order to work and live. Whatever you work at, whoever your employer
> may be, it always comes to the same: you must work **for him**. You
> can't help yourself. You are **compelled**." [**What is Anarchism?**,
> p. 11]

Due to this class monopoly over the means of life, workers (usually) are
at a disadvantage in terms of bargaining power -- there are more workers
than jobs (see [section C.9](secC9.html)). Within capitalism there is no
equality between owners and the dispossessed, and so property is a
source of **power.** To claim that this power should be "left alone" or
is "fair" is *"to the anarchists. . . preposterous. Once a State has
been established, and most of the country's capital privatised, the
threat of physical force is no longer necessary to coerce workers into
accepting jobs, even with low pay and poor conditions. To use
[right-"libertarian"] Ayn Rand's term, 'initial force' has **already
taken place,** by those who now have capital against those who do not. .
. . In other words, if a thief died and willed his 'ill-gotten gain' to
his children, would the children have a right to the stolen property?
Not legally. So if 'property is theft,' to borrow Proudhon's quip, and
the fruit of exploited labour is simply legal theft, then the only
factor giving the children of a deceased capitalist a right to inherit
the 'booty' is the law, the State. As Bakunin wrote, 'Ghosts should not
rule and oppress this world, which belongs only to the living.'"* [Jeff
Draughn, **Between Anarchism and Libertarianism**]

Or, in other words, right-Libertarianism fails to *"meet the charge that
normal operations of the market systematically places an entire class of
persons (wage earners) in circumstances that compel them to accept the
terms and conditions of labour dictated by those who offer work. While
it is true that individuals are formally free to seek better jobs or
withhold their labour in the hope of receiving higher wages, in the end
their position in the market works against them; they cannot live if
they do not find employment. When circumstances regularly bestow a
relative disadvantage on one class of persons in their dealings with
another class, members of the advantaged class have little need of
coercive measures to get what they want."* [Stephen L. Newman,
**Liberalism at Wit's End**, p. 130] Eliminating taxation does not end
oppression, in other words. As Tolstoy put it:

> *"in Russia serfdom was only abolished when all the land had been
> appropriated. When land was granted to the peasants, it was burdened
> with payments which took the place of the land slavery. In Europe,
> taxes that kept the people in bondage began to be abolished only when
> the people had lost their land, were unaccustomed to agricultural
> work, and . . . quite dependent on the capitalists . . . [They]
> abolish the taxes that fall on the workers . . . only because the
> majority of the people are already in the hands of the capitalists.
> One form of slavery is not abolished until another has already
> replaced it."* [**The Slavery of Our Times**, p. 32]

So Rothbard's argument (as well as being contradictory) misses the point
(and the reality of capitalism). Yes, **if** we define freedom as *"the
absence of coercion"* then the idea that wage labour does not restrict
liberty is unavoidable, but such a definition is useless. This is
because it hides structures of power and relations of domination and
subordination. As Carole Pateman argues, *"the contract in which the
worker allegedly sells his labour power is a contract in which, since he
cannot be separated from his capacities, he sells command over the use
of his body and himself . . . To sell command over the use of oneself
for a specified period . . . is to be an unfree labourer. The
characteristics of this condition are captured in the term **wage
slave**."* [**The Sexual Contract**, p. 151]

In other words, contracts about property in the person inevitably create
subordination. "Anarcho"-capitalism defines this source of unfreedom
away, but it still exists and has a major impact on people's liberty.
For anarchists freedom is better described as "self-government" or
"self-management" -- to be able to govern ones own actions (if alone) or
to participate in the determination of join activity (if part of a
group). Freedom, to put it another way, is not an abstract legal
concept, but the vital concrete possibility for every human being to
bring to full development all their powers, capacities, and talents
which nature has endowed them. A key aspect of this is to govern one own
actions when within associations (self-management). If we look at
freedom this way, we see that coercion is condemned but so is hierarchy
(and so is capitalism for during working hours people are not free to
make their own plans and have a say in what affects them. They are order
takers, **not** free individuals).

It is because anarchists have recognised the authoritarian nature of
capitalist firms that they have opposed wage labour and capitalist
property rights along with the state. They have desired to replace
institutions structured by subordination with institutions constituted
by free relationships (based, in other words, on self-management) in
**all** areas of life, including economic organisations. Hence
Proudhon's argument that the *"workmen's associations . . . are full of
hope both as a protest against the wage system, and as an affirmation of
**reciprocity**"* and that their importance lies *"in their denial of
the rule of capitalists, money lenders and governments."* [**The General
Idea of the Revolution**, pp. 98-99]

Unlike anarchists, the "anarcho"-capitalist account of freedom allows an
individual's freedom to be rented out to another while maintaining that
the person is still free. It may seem strange that an ideology
proclaiming its support for liberty sees nothing wrong with the
alienation and denial of liberty but, in actual fact, it is
unsurprising. After all, contract theory is a *"theoretical strategy
that justifies subjection by presenting it as freedom"* and has *"turned
a subversive proposition [that we are born free and equal] into a
defence of civil subjection."* Little wonder, then, that contract
*"creates a relation of subordination"* and not of freedom [Carole
Pateman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 39 and p. 59] Little wonder, then, that Colin
Ward argued that, as an anarchist, he is *"by definition, a socialist"*
and that *"[w]orkers' control of industrial production"* is *"the only
approach compatible with anarchism."* [**Talking Anarchy**, p. 25 and p.
26]

Ultimately, any attempt to build an ethical framework starting from the
abstract individual (as Rothbard does with his *"legitimate rights"*
method) will result in domination and oppression between people, **not**
freedom. Indeed, Rothbard provides an example of the dangers of idealist
philosophy that Bakunin warned about when he argued that while
*"[m]aterialism denies free will and ends in the establishment of
liberty; idealism, in the name of human dignity, proclaims free will,
and on the ruins of every liberty founds authority."* [**God and the
State**, p. 48] That this is the case with "anarcho"-capitalism can be
seen from Rothbard's wholehearted support for wage labour, landlordism
and the rules imposed by property owners on those who use, but do not
own, their property. Rothbard, basing himself on abstract individualism,
cannot help but justify authority over liberty. This, undoubtedly, flows
from the right-liberal and conservative roots of his ideology.
Individualist anarchist Shawn Wilbar once defined Wikipedia as *"the
most successful modern experiment in promoting obedience to authority as
freedom."* However, Wikipedia pales into insignificance compared to the
success of liberalism (in its many forms) in doing precisely that.
Whether politically or economically, liberalism has always rushed to
justify and rationalise the individual subjecting themselves to some
form of hierarchy. That "anarcho"-capitalism does this under the name
"anarchism" is deeply insulting to anarchists.

Overall, we can see that the logic of the right-"libertarian" definition
of "freedom" ends up negating itself because it results in the creation
and encouragement of **authority,** which is an **opposite** of freedom.
For example, as Ayn Rand pointed out, *"man has to sustain his life by
his own effort, the man who has no right to the product of his effort
has no means to sustain his life. The man who produces while others
dispose of his product, is a slave."* [**The Ayn Rand Lexicon:
Objectivism from A to Z**, pp. 388-9] But, as was shown in [section
C.2](secC2.html), capitalism is based on, as Proudhon put it, workers
working *"for an entrepreneur who pays them and keeps their products,"*
and so is a form of **theft.** Thus, by "libertarian" capitalism's
**own** logic, capitalism is based not on freedom, but on (wage)
slavery; for interest, profit and rent are derived from a worker's
**unpaid** labour, i.e. *"others dispose of his [sic] product."*

Thus it is debatable that a right-"libertarian" or "anarcho" capitalist
society would have less unfreedom or authoritarianism in it than
"actually existing" capitalism. In contrast to anarchism,
"anarcho"-capitalism, with its narrow definitions, restricts freedom to
only a few areas of social life and ignores domination and authority
beyond those aspects. As Peter Marshall points out, their *"definition
of freedom is entirely negative. It calls for the absence of coercion
but cannot guarantee the positive freedom of individual autonomy and
independence."* [**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 564] By confining
freedom to such a narrow range of human action, "anarcho"-capitalism is
clearly **not** a form of anarchism. Real anarchists support freedom in
every aspect of an individual's life.

In short, as French anarchist Elisee Reclus put it there is *"an abyss
between two kinds of society,"* one of which is *"constituted freely by
men of good will, based on a consideration of their common interests"*
and another which *"accepts the existence of either temporary or
permanent masters to whom [its members] owe obedience."* [quoted by
Clark and Martin, **Anarchy, Geography, Modernity**, p. 62] In other
words, when choosing between anarchism and capitalism,
"anarcho"-capitalists pick the latter and call it the former.

F.2.1 How does private property affect freedom?
-----------------------------------------------

The right-"libertarian" either does not acknowledge or dismisses as
irrelevant the fact that the (absolute) right of private property may
lead to extensive control by property owners over those who use, but do
not own, property (such as workers and tenants). Thus a free-market
capitalist system leads to a very selective and class-based protection
of "rights" and "freedoms." For example, under capitalism, the "freedom"
of employers inevitably conflicts with the "freedom" of employees. When
stockholders or their managers exercise their "freedom of enterprise" to
decide how their company will operate, they violate their employee's
right to decide how their labouring capacities will be utilised and so
under capitalism the "property rights" of employers will conflict with
and restrict the "human right" of employees to manage themselves.
Capitalism allows the right of self-management only to the few, not to
all. Or, alternatively, capitalism does not recognise certain human
rights as **universal** which anarchism does.

This can be seen from Austrian Economist W. Duncan Reekie's defence of
wage labour. While referring to *"intra-firm labour markets"* as
*"hierarchies"*, Reekie (in his best ***ex cathedra*** tone) states that
*"[t]here is nothing authoritarian, dictatorial or exploitative in the
relationship. Employees order employers to pay them amounts specified in
the hiring contract just as much as employers order employees to abide
by the terms of the contract."* [**Markets, Entrepreneurs and Liberty**,
p. 136 and p. 137]. Given that *"the terms of contract"* involve the
worker agreeing to obey the employers orders and that they will be fired
if they do not, its pretty clear that the ordering that goes on in the
*"intra-firm labour market"* is decidedly **one way**. Bosses have the
power, workers are paid to obey. And this begs the question: **if** the
employment contract creates a free worker, why must she abandon her
liberty during work hours?

Reekie actually recognises this lack of freedom in a "round about" way
when he notes that *"employees in a firm at any level in the hierarchy
can exercise an entrepreneurial role. The area within which that role
can be carried out increases the more authority the employee has."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 142] Which means workers **are** subject to control
from above which restricts the activities they are allowed to do and so
they are **not** free to act, make decisions, participate in the plans
of the organisation, to create the future and so forth within working
hours. And it is strange that while recognising the firm as a hierarchy,
Reekie tries to deny that it is authoritarian or dictatorial -- as if
you could have a hierarchy without authoritarian structures or an
unelected person in authority who is not a dictator. His confusion is
shared by Austrian guru Ludwig von Mises, who asserted that the
*"entrepreneur and capitalist are not irresponsible autocrats"* because
they are *"unconditionally subject to the sovereignty of the consumer"*
while, **on the next page**, admitting there was a *"managerial
hierarchy"* which contains *"the average subordinate employee."*
[**Human Action**, p. 809 and p. 810] It does not enter his mind that
the capitalist may be subject to some consumer control while being an
autocrat to their subordinated employees. Again, we find the
right-"libertarian" acknowledging that the capitalist managerial
structure is a hierarchy and workers are subordinated while denying it
is autocratic to the workers! Thus we have "free" workers within a
relationship distinctly **lacking** freedom -- a strange paradox.
Indeed, if your personal life were as closely monitored and regulated as
the work life of millions of people across the world, you would rightly
consider it the worse form of oppression and tyranny.

Somewhat ironically, right-wing liberal and "free market" economist
Milton Friedman contrasted *"central planning involving the use of
coercion -- the technique of the army or the modern totalitarian state"*
with *"voluntary co-operation between individuals -- the technique of
the marketplace"* as two distinct ways of co-ordinating the economic
activity of large groups (*"millions"*) of people. [**Capitalism and
Freedom**, p. 13] However, this misses the key issue of the internal
nature of the company. As right-"libertarians" themselves note, the
internal structure of a capitalist company is hierarchical. Indeed, the
capitalist company **is** a form of central planning and so shares the
same "technique" as the army. As Peter Drucker noted in his history of
General Motors, *"[t]here is a remarkably close parallel between General
Motors' scheme of organisation and those of the two institutions most
renowned for administrative efficiency: that of the Catholic Church and
that of the modern army."* [quoted by David Engler, **Apostles of
Greed**, p. 66] Thus capitalism is marked by a series of totalitarian
organisations. Dictatorship does not change much -- nor does it become
less fascistic -- when discussing economic structures rather than
political ones. To state the obvious, *"the employment contract (like
the marriage contract) is not an exchange; both contracts create social
relations that endure over time - social relations of subordination."*
[Carole Pateman, **The Sexual Contract**, p. 148]

Perhaps Reekie (like most right-"libertarians") will maintain that
workers voluntarily agree ("consent") to be subject to the bosses
dictatorship (he writes that *"each will only enter into the contractual
agreement known as a firm if each believes he will be better off
thereby. The firm is simply another example of mutually beneficial
exchange."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 137]). However, this does not stop the
relationship being authoritarian or dictatorial (and so exploitative as
it is **highly** unlikely that those at the top will not abuse their
power). Representing employment relations as voluntary agreement simply
mystifies the existence and exercise of power within the organisation so
created.

As we argue further in the [section F.3](secF3.html), in a capitalist
society workers have the option of finding a job or facing abject
poverty and/or starvation. Little wonder, then, that people
"voluntarily" sell their labour and "consent" to authoritarian
structures! They have little option to do otherwise. So, **within** the
labour market workers **can** and **do** seek out the best working
conditions possible, but that does not mean that the final contract
agreed is "freely" accepted and not due to the force of circumstances,
that both parties have equal bargaining power when drawing up the
contract or that the freedom of both parties is ensured.

Which means to argue (as right-"libertarians" do) that freedom cannot be
restricted by wage labour because people enter into relationships they
consider will lead to improvements over their initial situation totally
misses the point. As the initial situation is not considered relevant,
their argument fails. After all, agreeing to work in a sweatshop 14
hours a day **is** an improvement over starving to death -- but it does
not mean that those who so agree are free when working there or actually
**want** to be there. They are not and it is the circumstances, created
and enforced by the law (i.e., the state), that have ensured that they
"consent" to such a regime (given the chance, they would desire to
**change** that regime but cannot as this would violate their bosses
property rights and they would be repressed for trying).

So the right-wing "libertarian" right is interested only in a narrow
concept of freedom (rather than in freedom or liberty as such). This can
be seen in the argument of Ayn Rand that *"**Freedom**, in a political
context, means freedom from government coercion. It does **not** mean
freedom from the landlord, or freedom from the employer, or freedom from
the laws of nature which do not provide men with automatic prosperity.
It means freedom from the coercive power of the state -- and nothing
else!"* [**Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal**, p. 192] By arguing in this
way, right-"libertarians" ignore the vast number of authoritarian social
relationships that exist in capitalist society and, as Rand does here,
imply that these social relationships are like *"the laws of nature."*
However, if one looks at the world without prejudice but with an eye to
maximising freedom, the major coercive institutions are the state
**and** capitalist social relationships (and the latter relies on the
former). It should also be noted that, unlike gravity, the power of the
landlord and boss depends on the use of force -- gravity does not need
policemen to make things fall!

The right "libertarian," then, far from being a defender of freedom, is
in fact a keen defender of certain forms of authority. As Kropotkin
argued against a forerunner of right-"libertarianism":

> *"The modern Individualism initiated by Herbert Spencer is, like the
> critical theory of Proudhon, a powerful indictment against the dangers
> and wrongs of government, but its practical solution of the social
> problem is miserable -- so miserable as to lead us to inquire if the
> talk of 'No force' be merely an excuse for supporting landlord and
> capitalist domination."* [**Act For Yourselves**, p. 98]

To defend the "freedom" of property owners is to defend authority and
privilege -- in other words, statism. So, in considering the concept of
liberty as "freedom from," it is clear that by defending private
property (as opposed to possession) the "anarcho"-capitalist is
defending the power and authority of property owners to govern those who
use "their" property. And also, we must note, defending all the petty
tyrannies that make the work lives of so many people frustrating,
stressful and unrewarding.

Anarchism, by definition, is in favour of organisations and social
relationships which are non-hierarchical and non-authoritarian.
Otherwise, some people are more free than others. Failing to attack
hierarchy leads to massive contradiction. For example, since the British
Army is a volunteer one, it is an "anarchist" organisation! Ironically,
it can also allow a state to appear "libertarian" as that, too, can be
considered voluntary arrangement as long as it allows its subjects to
emigrate freely. So equating freedom with (capitalist) property rights
does not protect freedom, in fact it actively denies it. This lack of
freedom is only inevitable as long as we accept capitalist private
property rights. If we reject them, we can try and create a world based
on freedom in all aspects of life, rather than just in a few.

F.2.2 Do "libertarian"-capitalists support slavery?
---------------------------------------------------

Yes. It may come as a surprise to many people, but
right-"Libertarianism" is one of the few political theories that
justifies slavery. For example, Robert Nozick asks whether *"a free
system would allow [the individual] to sell himself into slavery"* and
he answers *"I believe that it would."* [**Anarchy, State and Utopia**,
p. 371] While some right-"libertarians" do not agree with Nozick, there
is no logical basis in their ideology for such disagreement.

This can be seen from "anarcho"-capitalist Walter Block, who, like
Nozick, supports voluntary slavery. As he puts it, *"if I own something,
I can sell it (and should be allowed by law to do so). If I can't sell,
then, and to that extent, I really don't own it."* Thus agreeing to sell
yourself for a lifetime *"is a bona fide contract"* which, if
*"abrogated, theft occurs."* He critiques those other right-wing
"libertarians" (like Murray Rothbard) who oppose voluntary slavery as
being inconsistent to their principles. Block, in his words, seeks to
make *"a tiny adjustment"* which *"strengthens libertarianism by making
it more internally consistent."* He argues that his position shows
*"that contract, predicated on private property [can] reach to the
furthest realms of human interaction, even to voluntary slave
contracts."* [*"Towards a Libertarian Theory of Inalienability: A
Critique of Rothbard, Barnett, Smith, Kinsella, Gordon, and Epstein,"*
pp. 39-85, **Journal of Libertarian Studies**, vol. 17, no. 2, p. 44, p.
48, p. 82 and p. 46]

So the logic is simple, you cannot really own something unless you can
sell it. Self-ownership is one of the cornerstones of laissez-faire
capitalist ideology. Therefore, since you own yourself you can sell
yourself.

This defence of slavery should not come as a surprise to any one
familiar with classical liberalism. An elitist ideology, its main
rationale is to defend the liberty and power of property owners and
justify unfree social relationships (such as government and wage labour)
in terms of "consent." Nozick and Block just takes it to its logical
conclusion. This is because his position is not new but, as with so many
other right-"libertarian" ones, can be found in John Locke's work. The
key difference is that Locke refused the term *"slavery"* and favoured
*"drudgery"* as, for him, slavery mean a relationship *"between a lawful
conqueror and a captive"* where the former has the power of life and
death over the latter. Once a *"compact"* is agreed between them, *"an
agreement for a limited power on the one side, and obedience on the
other . . . slavery ceases."* As long as the master could not kill the
slave, then it was *"drudgery."* Like Nozick, he acknowledges that *"men
did sell themselves; but, it is plain, this was only to drudgery, not to
slavery: for, it is evident, the person sold was not under an absolute,
arbitrary, despotical power: for the master could not have power to kill
him, at any time, whom, at a certain time, he was obliged to let go free
out of his service."* [Locke, **Second Treatise of Government**, Section
24] In other words, voluntary slavery was fine but just call it
something else.

Not that Locke was bothered by **involuntary** slavery. He was heavily
involved in the slave trade. He owned shares in the **"Royal Africa
Company"** which carried on the slave trade for England, making a profit
when he sold them. He also held a significant share in another slave
company, the **"Bahama Adventurers."** In the *"Second Treatise"*, Locke
justified slavery in terms of *"Captives taken in a just war,"* a war
waged against aggressors. [Section 85] That, of course, had nothing to
do with the **actual** slavery Locke profited from (slave raids were
common, for example). Nor did his "liberal" principles stop him
suggesting a constitution that would ensure that *"every freeman of
Carolina shall have absolute power and authority over his Negro
slaves."* The constitution itself was typically autocratic and
hierarchical, designed explicitly to *"avoid erecting a numerous
democracy."* [**The Works of John Locke**, vol. X, p. 196]

So the notion of contractual slavery has a long history within
right-wing liberalism, although most refuse to call it by that name. It
is of course simply embarrassment that stops many right-"libertarians"
calling a spade a spade. They incorrectly assume that slavery has to be
involuntary. In fact, historically, voluntary slave contracts have been
common (David Ellerman's **Property and Contract in Economics** has an
excellent overview). Any new form of voluntary slavery would be a
"civilised" form of slavery and could occur when an individual would
"agree" to sell their lifetime's labour to another (as when a starving
worker would "agree" to become a slave in return for food). In addition,
the contract would be able to be broken under certain conditions
(perhaps in return for breaking the contract, the former slave would
have pay damages to his or her master for the labour their master would
lose -- a sizeable amount no doubt and such a payment could result in
debt slavery, which is the most common form of "civilised" slavery. Such
damages may be agreed in the contract as a "performance bond" or
"conditional exchange."

In summary, right-"libertarians" are talking about "civilised" slavery
(or, in other words, civil slavery) and not forced slavery. While some
may have reservations about calling it slavery, they agree with the
basic concept that since people own themselves they can sell themselves,
that is sell their labour for a lifetime rather than piecemeal.

We must stress that this is no academic debate. "Voluntary" slavery has
been a problem in many societies and still exists in many countries
today (particularly third world ones where bonded labour -- i.e. where
debt is used to enslave people -- is the most common form). With the
rise of sweat shops and child labour in many "developed" countries such
as the USA, "voluntary" slavery (perhaps via debt and bonded labour) may
become common in all parts of the world -- an ironic (if not surprising)
result of "freeing" the market and being indifferent to the actual
freedom of those within it.

Some right-"libertarians" are obviously uneasy with the logical
conclusion of their definition of freedom. Murray Rothbard, for example,
stressed the *"unenforceability, in libertarian theory, of voluntary
slave contracts."* Of course, **other** "libertarian" theorists claim
the exact opposite, so *"libertarian theory"* makes no such claim, but
never mind! Essentially, his objection revolves around the assertion
that a person *"cannot, in nature, sell himself into slavery and have
this sale enforced -- for this would mean that his future will over his
own body was being surrendered in advance"* and that if a *"labourer
remains totally subservient to his master's will voluntarily, he is not
yet a slave since his submission is voluntary."* However, as we noted in
[section F.2](secF2.html), Rothbard emphasis on quitting fails to
recognise the actual denial of will and control over ones own body that
is explicit in wage labour. It is this failure that pro-slave contract
"libertarians" stress -- they consider the slave contract as an extended
wage contract. Moreover, a modern slave contract would likely take the
form of a *"performance bond,"* on which Rothbard laments about its
*"unfortunate suppression"* by the state. In such a system, the slave
could agree to perform X years labour or pay their master substantial
damages if they fail to do so. It is the threat of damages that enforces
the contract and such a "contract" Rothbard does agree is enforceable.
Another means of creating slave contracts would be *"conditional
exchange"* which Rothbard also supports. As for debt bondage, that too,
seems acceptable. He surreally notes that paying damages and debts in
such contracts is fine as *"money, of course, **is** alienable"* and so
forgets that it needs to be earned by labour which, he asserts, is
**not** alienable! [**The Ethics of Liberty,** pp. 134-135, p. 40, pp.
136-9, p. 141 and p. 138]

It should be noted that the slavery contract cannot be null and void
because it is unenforceable, as Rothbard suggests. This is because the
doctrine of specific performance applies to all contracts, not just to
labour contracts. This is because **all** contracts specify some future
performance. In the case of the lifetime labour contract, then it can be
broken as long as the slave pays any appropriate damages. As Rothbard
puts it elsewhere, *"if A has agreed to work for life for B in exchange
for 10,000 grams of gold, he will have to return the proportionate
amount of property if he terminates the arrangement and ceases to
work."* [**Man, Economy, and State**, vol. I , p. 441] This is
understandable, as the law generally allows material damages for
breached contracts, as does Rothbard in his support for the
*"performance bond"* and *"conditional exchange."* Needless to say,
having to pay such damages (either as a lump sum or over a period of
time) could turn the worker into the most common type of modern slave,
the debt-slave.

And it is interesting to note that even Murray Rothbard is not against
the selling of humans. He argued that children are the property of their
parents who can (bar actually murdering them by violence) do whatever
they please with them, even sell them on a *"flourishing free child
market."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 102] Combined with a whole
hearted support for child labour (after all, the child can leave its
parents if it objects to working for them) such a "free child market"
could easily become a "child slave market" -- with entrepreneurs making
a healthy profit selling infants and children or their labour to
capitalists (as did occur in 19th century Britain). Unsurprisingly,
Rothbard ignores the possible nasty aspects of such a market in human
flesh (such as children being sold to work in factories, homes and
brothels). But this is besides the point.

Of course, this theoretical justification for slavery at the heart of an
ideology calling itself "libertarianism" is hard for many
right-"libertarians" to accept and so they argue that such contracts
would be very hard to enforce. This attempt to get out of the
contradiction fails simply because it ignores the nature of the
capitalist market. If there is a demand for slave contracts to be
enforced, then companies will develop to provide that "service" (and it
would be interesting to see how two "protection" firms, one defending
slave contracts and another not, could compromise and reach a peaceful
agreement over whether slave contracts were valid). Thus we could see a
so-called "free" society producing companies whose specific purpose was
to hunt down escaped slaves (i.e. individuals in slave contracts who
have not paid damages to their owners for freedom). Of course, perhaps
Rothbard would claim that such slave contracts would be "outlawed" under
his *"general libertarian law code"* but this is a denial of market
"freedom". If slave contracts **are** "banned" then surely this is
paternalism, stopping individuals from contracting out their "labour
services" to whom and however long they "desire". You cannot have it
both ways.

So, ironically, an ideology proclaiming itself to support "liberty" ends
up justifying and defending slavery. Indeed, for the right-"libertarian"
the slave contract is an exemplification, not the denial, of the
individual's liberty! How is this possible? How can slavery be supported
as an expression of liberty? Simple, right-"libertarian" support for
slavery is a symptom of a **deeper** authoritarianism, namely their
uncritical acceptance of contract theory. The central claim of contract
theory is that contract is the means to secure and enhance individual
freedom. Slavery is the antithesis to freedom and so, in theory,
contract and slavery must be mutually exclusive. However, as indicated
above, some contract theorists (past and present) have included slave
contracts among legitimate contracts. This suggests that contract theory
cannot provide the theoretical support needed to secure and enhance
individual freedom.

As Carole Pateman argues, *"contract theory is primarily about a way of
creating social relations constituted by subordination, not about
exchange."* Rather than undermining subordination, contract theorists
justify modern subjection -- *"contract doctrine has proclaimed that
subjection to a master -- a boss, a husband -- is freedom."* [**The
Sexual Contract**, p. 40 and p. 146] The question central to contract
theory (and so right-Libertarianism) is not "are people free" (as one
would expect) but "are people free to subordinate themselves in any
manner they please." A radically different question and one only fitting
to someone who does not know what liberty means.

Anarchists argue that not all contracts are legitimate and no free
individual can make a contract that denies his or her own freedom. If an
individual is able to express themselves by making free agreements then
those free agreements must also be based upon freedom internally as
well. Any agreement that creates domination or hierarchy negates the
assumptions underlying the agreement and makes itself null and void. In
other words, voluntary government is still government and a defining
characteristic of an anarchy must be, surely, "no government" and "no
rulers."

This is most easily seen in the extreme case of the slave contract. John
Stuart Mill stated that such a contract would be "null and void." He
argued that an individual may voluntarily choose to enter such a
contract but in so doing *"he abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any
future use of it beyond that single act. He therefore defeats, in his
own case, the very purpose which is the justification of allowing him to
dispose of himself. . .The principle of freedom cannot require that he
should be free not to be free. It is not freedom, to be allowed to
alienate his freedom."* He adds that *"these reasons, the force of which
is so conspicuous in this particular case, are evidently of far wider
application."* [quoted by Pateman, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 171-2]

And it is such an application that defenders of capitalism fear (Mill
did in fact apply these reasons wider and unsurprisingly became a
supporter of a market syndicalist form of socialism). If we reject slave
contracts as illegitimate then, logically, we must also reject **all**
contracts that express qualities similar to slavery (i.e. deny freedom)
including wage slavery. Given that, as David Ellerman points out, *"the
voluntary slave . . . and the employee cannot in fact take their will
out of their intentional actions so that they could be 'employed' by the
master or employer"* we are left with *"the rather implausible assertion
that a person can vacate his or her will for eight or so hours a day for
weeks, months, or years on end but cannot do so for a working
lifetime."* [**Property and Contract in Economics**, p. 58] This is
Rothbard's position.

The implications of supporting voluntary slavery is quite devastating
for all forms of right-wing "libertarianism." This was proven by
Ellerman when he wrote an extremely robust defence of it under the
pseudonym "J. Philmore" called **The Libertarian Case for Slavery**
(first published in **The Philosophical Forum**, xiv, 1982). This
classic rebuttal takes the form of "proof by contradiction" (or
**reductio ad absurdum**) whereby he takes the arguments of
right-libertarianism to their logical end and shows how they reach the
memorably conclusion that the *"time has come for liberal economic and
political thinkers to stop dodging this issue and to critically
re-examine their shared prejudices about certain voluntary social
institutions . . . this critical process will inexorably drive
liberalism to its only logical conclusion: libertarianism that finally
lays the true moral foundation for economic and political slavery."*
Ellerman shows how, from a right-"libertarian" perspective there is a
*"fundamental contradiction"* in a modern liberal society for the state
to prohibit slave contracts. He notes that there *"seems to be a basic
shared prejudice of liberalism that slavery is inherently involuntary,
so the issue of genuinely voluntary slavery has received little
scrutiny. The perfectly valid liberal argument that involuntary slavery
is inherently unjust is thus taken to include voluntary slavery (in
which case, the argument, by definition, does not apply). This has
resulted in an abridgement of the freedom of contract in modern liberal
society."* Thus it is possible to argue for a *"civilised form of
contractual slavery."* ["J. Philmore,", **Op. Cit.**]

So accurate and logical was Ellerman's article that many of its readers
were convinced it **was** written by a right-"libertarian" (including,
we have to say, us!). One such writer was Carole Pateman, who correctly
noted that *"[t]here is a nice historical irony here. In the American
South, slaves were emancipated and turned into wage labourers, and now
American contractarians argue that all workers should have the
opportunity to turn themselves into civil slaves."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
63]).

The aim of Ellerman's article was to show the problems that employment
(wage labour) presents for the concept of self-government and how
contract need not result in social relationships based on freedom. As
"Philmore" put it, *"[a]ny thorough and decisive critique of voluntary
slavery or constitutional non-democratic government would carry over to
the employment contract -- which is the voluntary contractual basis for
the free-market free-enterprise system. Such a critique would thus be a
**reductio ad absurdum**."* As *"contractual slavery"* is an *"extension
of the employer-employee contract,"* he shows that the difference
between wage labour and slavery is the time scale rather than the
principle or social relationships involved. [**Op. Cit.**] This explains
why the early workers' movement called capitalism ***"wage slavery"***
and why anarchists still do. It exposes the unfree nature of capitalism
and the poverty of its vision of freedom. While it is possible to
present wage labour as "freedom" due to its "consensual" nature, it
becomes much harder to do so when talking about slavery or dictatorship
(and let us not forget that Nozick also had no problem with autocracy --
see [section B.4](secB4.html)). Then the contradictions are exposed for
all to see and be horrified by.

All this does not mean that we must reject free agreement. Far from it!
Free agreement is **essential** for a society based upon individual
dignity and liberty. There are a variety of forms of free agreement and
anarchists support those based upon co-operation and self-management
(i.e. individuals working together as equals). Anarchists desire to
create relationships which reflect (and so express) the liberty that is
the basis of free agreement. Capitalism creates relationships that deny
liberty. The opposition between autonomy and subjection can only be
maintained by modifying or rejecting contract theory, something that
capitalism cannot do and so the right-wing "libertarian" rejects
autonomy in favour of subjection (and so rejects socialism in favour of
capitalism).

So the real contrast between genuine libertarians and
right-"libertarians" is best expressed in their respective opinions on
slavery. Anarchism is based upon the individual whose individuality
depends upon the maintenance of free relationships with other
individuals. If individuals deny their capacities for self-government
through a contract the individuals bring about a qualitative change in
their relationship to others -- freedom is turned into mastery and
subordination. For the anarchist, slavery is thus the paradigm of what
freedom is **not**, instead of an exemplification of what it is (as
right-"libertarians" state). As Proudhon argued:

> *"If I were asked to answer the following question: What is slavery?
> and I should answer in one word, It is murder, my meaning would be
> understood at once. No extended argument would be required to show
> that the power to take from a man his thought, his will, his
> personality, is a power of life and death; and that to enslave a man
> is to kill him."* [**What is Property?**, p. 37]

In contrast, the right-"libertarian" effectively argues that "I support
slavery because I believe in liberty." It is a sad reflection of the
ethical and intellectual bankruptcy of our society that such an
"argument" is actually proposed by some people under the name of
liberty. The concept of "slavery as freedom" is far too Orwellian to
warrant a critique -- we will leave it up to right-"libertarians" to
corrupt our language and ethical standards with an attempt to prove it.

From the basic insight that slavery is the opposite of freedom, the
anarchist rejection of authoritarian social relations quickly follows:

> *"Liberty is inviolable. I can neither sell nor alienate my liberty;
> every contract, every condition of a contract, which has in view the
> alienation or suspension of liberty, is null: the slave, when he
> plants his foot upon the soil of liberty, at that moment becomes a
> free man . . . Liberty is the original condition of man; to renounce
> liberty is to renounce the nature of man: after that, how could we
> perform the acts of man?"* [P.J. Proudhon, **Op. Cit.**, p. 67]

The employment contract (i.e. wage slavery) abrogates liberty. It is
based upon inequality of power and *"exploitation is a consequence of
the fact that the sale of labour power entails the worker's
subordination."* [Carole Pateman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 149] Hence Proudhon's
support for self-management and opposition to capitalism -- any
relationship that resembles slavery is illegitimate and no contract that
creates a relationship of subordination is valid. Thus in a truly
anarchistic society, slave contracts would be unenforceable -- people in
a truly free (i.e. non-capitalist) society would **never** tolerate such
a horrible institution or consider it a valid agreement. If someone was
silly enough to sign such a contract, they would simply have to say they
now rejected it in order to be free -- such contracts are made to be
broken and without the force of a law system (and private defence firms)
to back it up, such contracts will stay broken.

The right-"libertarian" support for slave contracts (and wage slavery)
indicates that their ideology has little to do with liberty and far more
to do with justifying property and the oppression and exploitation it
produces. Their theoretical support for permanent and temporary
voluntary slavery and autocracy indicates a deeper authoritarianism
which negates their claims to be libertarians.
