F.1 Are "anarcho"-capitalists really anarchists?
================================================

In a word, no. While "anarcho"-capitalists obviously try to associate
themselves with the anarchist tradition by using the word "anarcho" or
by calling themselves "anarchists" their ideas are distinctly at odds
with those associated with anarchism. As a result, any claims that their
ideas are anarchist or that they are part of the anarchist tradition or
movement are false.

"Anarcho"-capitalists claim to be anarchists because they say that they
oppose government. As noted in the [last section](secFint.html), they
use a dictionary definition of anarchism. However, this fails to
appreciate that anarchism is a **political theory**. As dictionaries are
rarely politically sophisticated things, this means that they fail to
recognise that anarchism is more than just opposition to government, it
is also marked a opposition to capitalism (i.e. exploitation and private
property). Thus, opposition to government is a necessary but not
sufficient condition for being an anarchist -- you also need to be
opposed to exploitation and capitalist private property. As
"anarcho"-capitalists do not consider interest, rent and profits (i.e.
capitalism) to be exploitative nor oppose capitalist property rights,
they are not anarchists.

Part of the problem is that Marxists, like many academics, also tend to
assert that anarchists are simply against the state. It is significant
that both Marxists and "anarcho"-capitalists tend to define anarchism as
purely opposition to government. This is no co-incidence, as both seek
to exclude anarchism from its place in the wider socialist movement.
This makes perfect sense from the Marxist perspective as it allows them
to present their ideology as the only serious anti-capitalist one around
(not to mention associating anarchism with "anarcho"-capitalism is an
excellent way of discrediting our ideas in the wider radical movement).
It should go without saying that this is an obvious and serious
misrepresentation of the anarchist position as even a superficial glance
at anarchist theory and history shows that no anarchist limited their
critique of society simply at the state. So while academics and Marxists
seem aware of the anarchist opposition to the state, they usually fail
to grasp the anarchist critique applies to all other authoritarian
social institutions and how it fits into the overall anarchist analysis
and struggle. They seem to think the anarchist condemnation of
capitalist private property, patriarchy and so forth are somehow
superfluous additions rather than a logical position which reflects the
core of anarchism:

> *"Critics have sometimes contended that anarchist thought, and
> classical anarchist theory in particular, has emphasised opposition to
> the state to the point of neglecting the real hegemony of economic
> power. This interpretation arises, perhaps, from a simplistic and
> overdrawn distinction between the anarchist focus on political
> domination and the Marxist focus on economic exploitation . . . there
> is abundant evidence against such a thesis throughout the history of
> anarchist thought."* [John P. Clark and Camille Martin, **Anarchy,
> Geography, Modernity**, p. 95]

So Reclus simply stated the obvious when he wrote that *"the
anti-authoritarian critique to which the state is subjected applies
equally to all social institutions."* [quoted by Clark and Martin, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 140] Proudhon, Bakunin, Kropotkin, Goldman and so on would
all agree with that. While they all stressed that anarchism was against
the state they quickly moved on to present a critique of private
property and other forms of hierarchical authority. So while anarchism
obviously opposes the state, *"sophisticated and developed anarchist
theory proceeds further. It does not stop with a criticism of political
organisation, but goes on to investigate the authoritarian nature of
economic inequality and private property, hierarchical economic
structures, traditional education, the patriarchal family, class and
racial discrimination, and rigid sex- and age-roles, to mention just a
few of the more important topics."* For the *"essence of anarchism is,
after all, not the theoretical opposition to the state, but the
practical and theoretical struggle against domination."* [John Clark,
**The Anarchist Moment**, p. 128 and p. 70]

This is also the case with individualist anarchists whose defence of
certain forms of property did stop them criticising key aspects of
**capitalist** property rights. As Jeremy Jennings notes, the *"point to
stress is that all anarchists, and not only those wedded to the
predominant twentieth-century strain of anarchist communism have been
critical of private property to the extent that it was a source of
hierarchy and privilege."* He goes on to state that anarchists like
Tucker and Spooner *"agreed with the proposition that property was
legitimate only insofar as it embraced no more than the total product of
individual labour."* [*"Anarchism"*, **Contemporary Political
Ideologies**, Roger Eatwell and Anthony Wright (eds.), p. 132] This is
acknowledged by the likes of Rothbard who had to explicitly point how
that his position on such subjects was fundamentally different (i.e., at
odds) with individualist anarchism.

As such, it would be fair to say that most "anarcho"-capitalists are
capitalists first and foremost. If aspects of anarchism do not fit with
some element of capitalism, they will reject that element of anarchism
rather than question capitalism (Rothbard's selective appropriation of
the individualist anarchist tradition is the most obvious example of
this). This means that right-"libertarians" attach the "anarcho" prefix
to their ideology because they believe that being against government
intervention is equivalent to being an anarchist (which flows into their
use of the dictionary definition of anarchism). That they ignore the
bulk of the anarchist tradition should prove that there is hardly
anything anarchistic about them at all. They are not against authority,
hierarchy or the state -- they simply want to privatise them.

Ironically, this limited definition of "anarchism" ensures that
"anarcho"-capitalism is inherently self-refuting. This can be seen from
leading "anarcho"-capitalist Murray Rothbard. He thundered against the
evil of the state, arguing that it *"arrogates to itself a monopoly of
force, of ultimate decision-making power, over a given territorial
area."* In and of itself, this definition is unremarkable. That a few
people (an elite of rulers) claim the right to rule others must be
**part** of any sensible definition of the state or government. However,
the problems begin for Rothbard when he notes that *"[o]bviously, in a
free society, Smith has the ultimate decision-making power over his own
just property, Jones over his, etc."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 170
and p. 173] The logical contradiction in this position should be
obvious, but not to Rothbard. It shows the power of ideology, the
ability of mere words (the expression *"private property"*) to turn the
bad (*"ultimate decision-making power over a given area"*) into the good
(*"ultimate decision-making power over a given area"*).

Now, this contradiction can be solved in only **one** way -- the users
of the *"given area"* are also its owners. In other words, a system of
possession (or "occupancy and use") as favoured by anarchists. However,
Rothbard is a capitalist and supports private property, non-labour
income, wage labour, capitalists and landlords. This means that he
supports a divergence between ownership and use and this means that this
*"ultimate decision-making power"* extends to those who **use,** but do
not own, such property (i.e. tenants and workers). The statist nature of
private property is clearly indicated by Rothbard's words -- the
property owner in an "anarcho"-capitalist society possesses the
*"ultimate decision-making power"* over a given area, which is also what
the state has currently. Rothbard has, ironically, proved by his own
definition that "anarcho"-capitalism is not anarchist.

Of course, it would be churlish to point out that the usual name for a
political system in which the owner of a territory is also its ruler is,
in fact, monarchy. Which suggests that while "anarcho"-capitalism may be
called "anarcho-statism" a far better term could be
"anarcho-monarchism." In fact, some "anarcho"-capitalists have made
explicit this obvious implication of Rothbard's argument. Hans-Hermann
Hoppe is one.

Hoppe prefers monarchy to democracy, considering it the superior system.
He argues that the monarch is the **private** owner of the government --
all the land and other resources are **owned** by him. Basing himself on
Austrian economics (what else?) and its notion of time preference, he
concludes that the monarch will, therefore, work to maximise both
current income and the total capital value of his estate. Assuming
self-interest, his planning horizon will be farsighted and exploitation
be far more limited. Democracy, in contrast, is a publicly-owned
government and the elected rulers have use of resources for a short
period only and **not** their capital value. In other words, they do not
own the country and so will seek to maximise their short-term interests
(and the interests of those they think will elect them into office). In
contrast, Bakunin stressed that if anarchism rejects democracy it was
*"hardly in order to reverse it but rather to advance it,"* in
particular to extend it via *"the great economic revolution without
which every right is but an empty phrase and a trick."* He rejected
wholeheartedly *"the camp of aristocratic . . . reaction."* [**The Basic
Bakunin**, p. 87]

However, Hoppe is not a traditional monarchist. His ideal system is one
of **competing** monarchies, a society which is led by a *"voluntarily
acknowledged 'natural' elite -- a **nobilitas naturalis**"* comprised of
*"families with long-established records of superior achievement,
farsightedness, and exemplary personal conduct."* This is because *"a
few individuals quickly acquire the status of an elite"* and their
inherent qualities will *"more likely than not [be] passed on within a
few -- noble -- families."* The sole "problem" with traditional
monarchies was *"with **monopoly**, not with elites or nobility,"* in
other words the King monopolised the role of judge and their subjects
could not turn to other members of the noble class for services. [*"The
Political Economy of Monarchy and Democracy and the Idea of a Natural
Order,"* pp. 94-121, **Journal of Libertarian Studies**, vol. 11, no. 2,
p. 118 and p. 119]

Which simply confirms the anarchist critique of "anarcho"-capitalism,
namely that it is **not** anarchist. This becomes even more obvious when
Hoppe helpfully expands on the reality of "anarcho"-capitalism:

> *"In a covenant concluded among proprietor and community tenants for
> the purpose of protecting their private property, no such thing as a
> right to free (unlimited) speech exists, not even to unlimited speech
> on one's own tenant-property. One may say innumerable things and
> promote almost any idea under the sun, but naturally no one is
> permitted to advocate ideas contrary to the very purpose of the
> covenant of preserving private property, such as democracy and
> communism. There can be no tolerance towards democrats and communists
> in a libertarian social order. They will have to be physically
> separated and expelled from society. Likewise in a covenant founded
> for the purpose of protecting family and kin, there can be no
> tolerance toward those habitually promoting lifestyles incompatible
> with this goal. They -- the advocates of alternative, non-family and
> kin-centred lifestyles such as, for instance, individual hedonism,
> parasitism, nature-environment worship, homosexuality, or communism --
> will have to be physically removed from society, too, if one is to
> maintain a libertarian order."* [**Democracy: the God that Failed**,
> p. 218]

Thus the proprietor has power/authority over his tenants and can decree
what they can and cannot do, excluding anyone whom they consider as
being subversive (in the tenants' own interests, of course). In other
words, the autocratic powers of the boss are extended into **all**
aspects of society -- all under the mask of advocating liberty. Sadly,
the preservation of property rights destroys liberty for the many (Hoppe
states clearly that for the "anarcho"-capitalist the *"natural outcome
of the voluntary transactions between various private property owners is
decidedly non-egalitarian, hierarchical and elitist."* [*"The Political
Economy of Monarchy and Democracy and the Idea of a Natural Order,"*
**Op. Cit.**, p. 118]). Unsurprisingly, Chomsky argued that right-wing
"libertarianism" has *"no objection to tyranny as long as it is private
tyranny."* In fact it (like other contemporary ideologies) *"reduce[s]
to advocacy of one or another form of illegitimate authority, quite
often real tyranny."* [**Chomsky on Anarchism**, p. 235 and p. 181] As
such, it is hard not to conclude that "anarcho"-capitalism is little
more than a play with words. It is not anarchism but a cleverly designed
and worded surrogate for elitist, autocratic conservatism. Nor is too
difficult to conclude that genuine anarchists and libertarians (of all
types) would not be tolerated in this so-called *"libertarian social
order."*

Some "anarcho"-capitalists do seem dimly aware of this glaringly obvious
contradiction. Rothbard, for example, does present an argument which
could be used to solve it, but he utterly fails. He simply ignores the
crux of the matter, that capitalism is based on hierarchy and,
therefore, cannot be anarchist. He does this by arguing that the
hierarchy associated with capitalism is fine as long as the private
property that produced it was acquired in a "just" manner. Yet in so
doing he yet again draws attention to the identical authority structures
and social relationships of the state and property. As he puts it:

> *"**If** the State may be said to properly **own** its territory, then
> it is proper for it to make rules for everyone who presumes to live in
> that area. It can legitimately seize or control private property
> because there **is** no private property in its area, because it
> really owns the entire land surface. **So long** as the State permits
> its subjects to leave its territory, then, it can be said to act as
> does any other owner who sets down rules for people living on his
> property."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 170]

Obviously Rothbard argues that the state does not "justly" own its
territory. He asserts that *"our homesteading theory"* of the creation
of private property *"suffices to demolish any such pretensions by the
State apparatus"* and so the problem with the state is that it *"claims
and exercises a compulsory monopoly of defence and ultimate
decision-making over an area larger than an individual's justly-acquired
property."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 171 and p. 173] There are four fundamental
problems with his argument.

First, it assumes his "homesteading theory" is a robust and libertarian
theory, but neither is the case (see [section
F.4.1](secF4.html#secf41)). Second, it ignores the history of
capitalism. Given that the current distribution of property is just as
much the result of violence and coercion as the state, his argument is
seriously flawed. It amounts to little more than an ***"immaculate
conception of property"*** unrelated to reality. Third, even if we
ignore these issues and assume that private property could be and was
legitimately produced by the means Rothbard assumes, it does not justify
the hierarchy associated with it as current and future generations of
humanity have, effectively, been excommunicated from liberty by previous
ones. If, as Rothbard argues, property is a natural right and the basis
of liberty then why should the many be excluded from their birthright by
a minority? In other words, Rothbard denies that liberty should be
universal. He chooses property over liberty while anarchists choose
liberty over property. Fourthly, it implies that the fundamental problem
with the state is **not**, as anarchists have continually stressed, its
hierarchical and authoritarian nature but rather the fact that it does
not justly own the territory it claims to rule.

Even worse, the possibility that private property can result in **more**
violations of individual freedom (at least for non-proprietors ) than
the state of its citizens was implicitly acknowledged by Rothbard. He
uses as a hypothetical example a country whose King is threatened by a
rising "libertarian" movement. The King responses by *"employ[ing] a
cunning stratagem,"* namely he *"proclaims his government to be
dissolved, but just before doing so he arbitrarily parcels out the
entire land area of his kingdom to the 'ownership' of himself and his
relatives."* Rather than taxes, his subjects now pay rent and he can
*"regulate the lives of all the people who presume to live on"* his
property as he sees fit. Rothbard then asks:

> *"Now what should be the reply of the libertarian rebels to this pert
> challenge? If they are consistent utilitarians, they must bow to this
> subterfuge, and resign themselves to living under a regime no less
> despotic than the one they had been battling for so long. Perhaps,
> indeed, **more** despotic, for now the king and his relatives can
> claim for themselves the libertarians' very principle of the absolute
> right of private property, an absoluteness which they might not have
> dared to claim before."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 54]

It should go without saying that Rothbard argues that we should reject
this *"cunning stratagem"* as a con as the new distribution of property
would not be the result of "just" means. However, he failed to note how
his argument undermines his own claims that capitalism can be
libertarian. As he himself argues, not only does the property owner have
the same monopoly of power over a given area as the state, it is
**more** despotic as it is based on the *"absolute right of private
property"*! And remember, Rothbard is arguing **in favour** of
"anarcho"-capitalism (*"if you have unbridled capitalism, you will have
all kinds of authority: you will have **extreme** authority."* [Chomsky,
**Understanding Power**, p. 200]). The fundamental problem is that
Rothbard's ideology blinds him to the obvious, namely that the state and
private property produce identical social relationships (ironically, he
opines the theory that the state owns its territory *"makes the State,
as well as the King in the Middle Ages, a feudal overlord, who at least
theoretically **owned** all the land in his domain"* without noticing
that this makes the capitalist or landlord a King and a feudal overlord
within "anarcho"-capitalism. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 171]).

One group of Chinese anarchists pointed out the obvious in 1914. As
anarchism *"takes opposition to authority as its essential principle,"*
anarchists aim to *"sweep away all the evil systems of present society
which have an authoritarian nature"* and so *"our ideal society"* would
be *"without landlords, capitalists, leaders, officials, representatives
or heads of families."* [quoted by Arif Dirlik, **Anarchism in the
Chinese Revolution**, p. 131] Only this, the elimination of all forms of
hierarchy (political, economic and social) would achieve genuine
anarchism, a society without authority (an-archy). In practice, private
property is a major source of oppression and authoritarianism within
society -- there is little or no freedom subject to a landlord or within
capitalist production (as Bakunin noted, *"the worker sells his person
and his liberty for a given time"*). In stark contrast to anarchists,
"anarcho"-capitalists have no problem with landlords and factory fascism
(i.e. wage labour), a position which seems highly illogical for a theory
calling itself libertarian. If it were truly libertarian, it would
oppose all forms of domination, not just statism (*"Those who reject
authoritarianism will require nobody' permission to breathe. The
libertarian . . . is not grateful to get permission to reside anywhere
on his own planet and denies the right of any one to screen off bits of
it for their own use or rule."* [Stuart Christie and Albert Meltzer,
**Floodgates of Anarchy**, p. 31]). This illogical and
self-contradictory position flows from the "anarcho"-capitalist
definition of freedom as the absence of coercion and will be discussed
in [section F.2](secF2.html) in more detail. The ironic thing is that
"anarcho"-capitalists implicitly prove the anarchist critique of their
own ideology.

Of course, the "anarcho"-capitalist has another means to avoid the
obvious, namely the assertion that the market will limit the abuses of
the property owners. If workers do not like their ruler then they can
seek another. Thus capitalist hierarchy is fine as workers and tenants
"consent" to it. While the logic is obviously the same, it is doubtful
that an "anarcho"-capitalist would support the state just because its
subjects can leave and join another one. As such, this does not address
the core issue -- the authoritarian nature of capitalist property (see
[section A.2.14](secA2.html#seca214)). Moreover, this argument
completely ignores the reality of economic and social power. Thus the
"consent" argument fails because it ignores the social circumstances of
capitalism which limit the choice of the many.

Anarchists have long argued that, as a class, workers have little choice
but to "consent" to capitalist hierarchy. The alternative is either dire
poverty or starvation. "Anarcho"-capitalists dismiss such claims by
denying that there is such a thing as economic power. Rather, it is
simply freedom of contract. Anarchists consider such claims as a joke.
To show why, we need only quote (yet again) Rothbard on the abolition of
slavery and serfdom in the 19th century. He argued, correctly, that the
*"**bodies** of the oppressed were freed, but the property which they
had worked and eminently deserved to own, remained in the hands of their
former oppressors. With economic power thus remaining in their hands,
the former lords soon found themselves virtual masters once more of what
were now free tenants or farm labourers. The serfs and slaves had tasted
freedom, but had been cruelly derived of its fruits."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
74]

To say the least, anarchists fail to see the logic in this position.
Contrast this with the standard "anarcho"-capitalist claim that if
market forces ("voluntary exchanges") result in the creation of
*"tenants or farm labourers"* then they are free. Yet labourers
dispossessed by market forces are in exactly the same social and
economic situation as the ex-serfs and ex-slaves. If the latter do not
have the fruits of freedom, neither do the former. Rothbard sees the
obvious *"economic power"* in the latter case, but denies it in the
former (ironically, Rothbard dismissed economic power under capitalism
in the same work. [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 221-2]). It is only Rothbard's
ideology that stops him from drawing the obvious conclusion -- identical
economic conditions produce identical social relationships and so
capitalism is marked by *"economic power"* and *"virtual masters."* The
only solution is for "anarcho"-capitalist to simply say that the
ex-serfs and ex-slaves were actually free to choose and, consequently,
Rothbard was wrong. It might be inhuman, but at least it would be
consistent!

Rothbard's perspective is alien to anarchism. For example, as
individualist anarchist William Bailie noted, under capitalism there is
a class system marked by *"a dependent industrial class of
wage-workers"* and *"a privileged class of wealth-monopolisers, each
becoming more and more distinct from the other as capitalism advances."*
This has turned property into *"a social power, an economic force
destructive of rights, a fertile source of injustice, a means of
enslaving the dispossessed."* He concluded: *"Under this system equal
liberty cannot obtain."* Bailie notes that the modern *"industrial world
under capitalistic conditions"* have *"arisen under the **regime** of
status"* (and so *"law-made privileges"*) however, it seems unlikely
that he would have concluded that such a class system would be fine if
it had developed naturally or the current state was abolished while
leaving that class structure intact. [**The Individualist Anarchists**,
p. 121] As we discuss in [section G.4](secG4.html), Individualist
Anarchists like Tucker and Yarrows ended up recognising that even the
freest competition had become powerless against the enormous
concentrations of wealth associated with corporate capitalism.

Therefore anarchists recognise that "free exchange" or "consent" in
unequal circumstances will reduce freedom as well as increasing
inequality between individuals and classes. As we discuss in [section
F.3](secF3.html), inequality will produce social relationships which are
based on hierarchy and domination, **not** freedom. As Noam Chomsky put
it:

> *"Anarcho-capitalism, in my opinion, is a doctrinal system which, if
> ever implemented, would lead to forms of tyranny and oppression that
> have few counterparts in human history. There isn't the slightest
> possibility that its (in my view, horrendous) ideas would be
> implemented, because they would quickly destroy any society that made
> this colossal error. The idea of 'free contract' between the potentate
> and his starving subject is a sick joke, perhaps worth some moments in
> an academic seminar exploring the consequences of (in my view, absurd)
> ideas, but nowhere else."* [**Noam Chomsky on Anarchism**, interview
> with Tom Lane, December 23, 1996]

Clearly, then, by its own arguments "anarcho"-capitalism is not
anarchist. This should come as no surprise to anarchists. Anarchism, as
a political theory, was born when Proudhon wrote **What is Property?**
specifically to refute the notion that workers are free when capitalist
property forces them to seek employment by landlords and capitalists. He
was well aware that in such circumstances property *"violates equality
by the rights of exclusion and increase, and freedom by despotism . . .
[and has] perfect identity with robbery."* He, unsurprisingly, talks of
the *"proprietor, to whom [the worker] has sold and surrendered his
liberty."* For Proudhon, anarchy was *"the absence of a master, of a
sovereign"* while *"proprietor"* was *"synonymous"* with *"sovereign"*
for he *"imposes his will as law, and suffers neither contradiction nor
control."* This meant that *"property engenders despotism,"* as *"each
proprietor is sovereign lord within the sphere of his property."*
[**What is Property**, p. 251, p. 130, p. 264 and pp. 266-7] It must
also be stressed that Proudhon's classic work is a lengthy critique of
the kind of apologetics for private property Rothbard espouses to
salvage his ideology from its obvious contradictions.

So, ironically, Rothbard repeats the same analysis as Proudhon but draws
the **opposite** conclusions and expects to be considered an anarchist!
Moreover, it seems equally ironic that "anarcho"-capitalism calls itself
"anarchist" while basing itself on the arguments that anarchism was
created in opposition to. As shown, "anarcho"-capitalism makes as much
sense as "anarcho-statism" -- an oxymoron, a contradiction in terms. The
idea that "anarcho"-capitalism warrants the name "anarchist" is simply
false. Only someone ignorant of anarchism could maintain such a thing.
While you expect anarchist theory to show this to be the case, the
wonderful thing is that "anarcho"-capitalism itself does the same.

Little wonder Bob Black argues that *"[t]o demonise state
authoritarianism while ignoring identical albeit contract-consecrated
subservient arrangements in the large-scale corporations which control
the world economy is fetishism at its worst."* [*"The Libertarian As
Conservative"*, **The Abolition of Work and Other Essays**, pp. 142]
Left-liberal Stephen L. Newman makes the same point:

> *"The emphasis [right-wing] libertarians place on the opposition of
> liberty and political power tends to obscure the role of authority in
> their worldview . . . the authority exercised in private
> relationships, however -- in the relationship between employer and
> employee, for instance -- meets with no objection. . . . [This]
> reveals a curious insensitivity to the use of private authority as a
> means of social control. Comparing public and private authority, we
> might well ask of the [right-wing] libertarians: When the price of
> exercising one's freedom is terribly high, what practical difference
> is there between the commands of the state and those issued by one's
> employer? . . . Though admittedly the circumstances are not identical,
> telling disgruntled empowers that they are always free to leave their
> jobs seems no different in principle from telling political dissidents
> that they are free to emigrate."* [**Liberalism at Wit's End**, pp.
> 45-46]

As Bob Black pointed out, right libertarians argue that *"'one can at
least change jobs.' But you can't avoid having a job -- just as under
statism one can at least change nationalities but you can't avoid
subjection to one nation-state or another. But freedom means more than
the right to change masters."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 147] The similarities
between capitalism and statism are clear -- and so why
"anarcho"-capitalism cannot be anarchist. To reject the authority (the
*"ultimate decision-making power"*) of the state and embrace that of the
property owner indicates not only a highly illogical stance but one at
odds with the basic principles of anarchism. This whole-hearted support
for wage labour and capitalist property rights indicates that
"anarcho"-capitalists are not anarchists because they do not reject all
forms of **archy.** They obviously support the hierarchy between boss
and worker (wage labour) and landlord and tenant. Anarchism, by
definition, is against all forms of archy, including the hierarchy
generated by capitalist property. To ignore the obvious archy associated
with capitalist property is highly illogical and trying to dismiss one
form of domination as flowing from "just" property while attacking the
other because it flows from "unjust" property is not seeing the wood for
the trees.

In addition, we must note that such inequalities in power and wealth
will need "defending" from those subject to them ("anarcho"-capitalists
recognise the need for private police and courts to defend property from
theft -- and, anarchists add, to defend the theft and despotism
associated with property!). Due to its support of private property (and
thus authority), "anarcho"-capitalism ends up retaining a state in its
"anarchy": namely a **private** state whose existence its proponents
attempt to deny simply by refusing to call it a state, like an ostrich
hiding its head in the sand. As one anarchist so rightly put it,
"anarcho"-capitalists *"simply replaced the state with private security
firms, and can hardly be described as anarchists as the term is normally
understood."* [Brian Morris, *"Global Anti-Capitalism"*, pp. 170-6,
**Anarchist Studies**, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 175] As we discuss more fully
in [section F.6](secF6.html) this is why "anarcho"-capitalism is better
described as "private state" capitalism as there would be a functional
equivalent of the state and it would be just as skewed in favour of the
propertied elite as the existing one (if not more so). As Albert Meltzer
put it:

> *"Commonsense shows that any capitalist society might dispense with a
> 'State' . . . but it could not dispense with organised government, or
> a privatised form of it, if there were people amassing money and
> others working to amass it for them. The philosophy of
> 'anarcho-capitalism' dreamed up by the 'libertarian' New Right, has
> nothing to do with Anarchism as known by the Anarchist movement
> proper. It is a lie . . . Patently unbridled capitalism . . . needs
> some force at its disposal to maintain class privileges, either from
> the State itself or from private armies. What they believe in is in
> fact a limited State -- that is, one in which the State has one
> function, to protect the ruling class, does not interfere with
> exploitation, and comes as cheap as possible for the ruling class. The
> idea also serves another purpose . . . a moral justification for
> bourgeois consciences in avoiding taxes without feeling guilty about
> it."* [**Anarchism: Arguments For and Against**, p. 50]

For anarchists, this need of capitalism for some kind of state is
unsurprising. For *"Anarchy without socialism seems equally as
impossible to us [as socialism without anarchy], for in such a case it
could not be other than the domination of the strongest, and would
therefore set in motion right away the organisation and consolidation of
this domination; that is to the constitution of government."* [Errico
Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 148] Because of
this, the "anarcho"-capitalist rejection of the anarchist critique of
capitalism and our arguments on the need for equality, they cannot be
considered anarchists or part of the anarchist tradition. To anarchists
it seems bizarre that "anarcho"-capitalists want to get rid of the state
but maintain the system it helped create and its function as a defender
of the capitalist class's property and property rights. In other words,
to reduce the state purely to its function as (to use Malatesta's apt
word) the gendarme of the capitalist class is ***not*** an anarchist
goal.

Thus anarchism is far more than the common dictionary definition of "no
government" -- it also entails being against all forms of **archy**,
including those generated by capitalist property. This is clear from the
roots of the word "anarchy." As we noted in [section A.1](secA1.html),
the word anarchy means "no rulers" or "contrary to authority." As
Rothbard himself acknowledges, the property owner is the ruler of their
property and, therefore, those who use it. For this reason
"anarcho"-capitalism cannot be considered as a form of anarchism -- a
real anarchist must logically oppose the authority of the property owner
along with that of the state. As "anarcho"-capitalism does not
explicitly (or implicitly, for that matter) call for economic
arrangements that will end wage labour and usury it cannot be considered
anarchist or part of the anarchist tradition. While anarchists have
always opposed capitalism, "anarcho"-capitalists have embraced it and
due to this embrace their "anarchy" will be marked by relationships
based upon subordination and hierarchy (such as wage labour), **not**
freedom (little wonder that Proudhon argued that *"property is
despotism"* -- it creates authoritarian and hierarchical relationships
between people in a similar way to statism). Their support for "free
market" capitalism ignores the impact of wealth and power on the nature
and outcome of individual decisions within the market (see sections
[F.2](secF2.html) and [F.3](secF3.html) for further discussion).
Furthermore, any such system of (economic and social) power will require
extensive force to maintain it and the "anarcho"-capitalist system of
competing "defence firms" will simply be a new state, enforcing
capitalist power, property rights and law.

Thus the "anarcho"-capitalist and the anarchist have different starting
positions and opposite ends in mind. Their claims to being anarchists
are bogus simply because they reject so much of the anarchist tradition
as to make what little they do pay lip-service to non-anarchist in
theory and practice. Little wonder Peter Marshall said that *"few
anarchists would accept the 'anarcho-capitalists' into the anarchist
camp since they do not share a concern for economic equality and social
justice."* As such, "anarcho"-capitalists, *"even if they do reject the
State, might therefore best be called right-wing libertarians rather
than anarchists."* [**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 565]
