F.6 Is "anarcho"-capitalism against the state?
==============================================

No. Due to its basis in private property, "anarcho"-capitalism implies a
class division of society into bosses and workers. Any such division
will require a state to maintain it. However, it need not be the same
state as exists now. Regarding this point, "anarcho"-capitalism plainly
advocates "defence associations" to protect property. For the
"anarcho"-capitalist these private companies are not states. For
anarchists, they most definitely. As Bakunin put it, the state *"is
authority, domination, and force, organised by the property-owning and
so-called enlightened classes against the masses."* [**The Basic
Bakunin**, p. 140] It goes without saying that "anarcho"-capitalism has
a state in the anarchist sense.

According to Murray Rothbard [**Society Without A State**, p. 192], a
state must have one or both of the following characteristics:

He makes the same point elsewhere. [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 171]
Significantly, he stresses that *"our definition of anarchism"* is a
system which *"provides no legal sanction"* for aggression against
person and property rather than, say, being against government or
authority. [**Society without a State**, p. 206]

Instead of this, the "anarcho"-capitalist thinks that people should be
able to select their own "defence companies" (which would provide the
needed police) and courts from a free market in "defence" which would
spring up after the state monopoly has been eliminated. These companies
*"all . . . would have to abide by the basic law code,"* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 206] Thus a *"general libertarian law code"* would govern the actions
of these companies. This "law code" would prohibit coercive aggression
at the very least, although to do so it would have to specify what
counted as legitimate property, how said can be owned and what actually
constitutes aggression. Thus the law code would be quite extensive.

How is this law code to be actually specified? Would these laws be
democratically decided? Would they reflect common usage (i.e. custom)?
"Supply and demand"? "Natural law"? Given the strong dislike of
democracy shown by "anarcho"-capitalists, we think we can safely say
that some combination of the last two options would be used. Murray
Rothbard argued for "Natural Law" and so the judges in his system would
*"not [be] making the law but finding it on the basis of agreed-upon
principles derived either from custom or reason."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
206] David Friedman, on the other hand, argues that different defence
firms would sell their own laws. [**The Machinery of Freedom**, p. 116]
It is sometimes acknowledged that non-"libertarian" laws may be demanded
(and supplied) in such a market although the obvious fact that the rich
can afford to pay for more laws (either in quantity or in terms of being
more expensive to enforce) is downplayed.

Around this system of "defence companies" is a free market in
"arbitrators" and "appeal judges" to administer justice and the *"basic
law code."* Rothbard believes that such a system would see *"arbitrators
with the best reputation for efficiency and probity"* being *"chosen by
the various parties in the market"* and *"will come to be given an
increasing amount of business."* Judges *"will prosper on the market in
proportion to their reputation for efficiency and impartiality."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 199 and p. 204] Therefore, like any other company,
arbitrators would strive for profits with the most successful ones would
*"prosper"*, i.e. become wealthy. Such wealth would, of course, have no
impact on the decisions of the judges, and if it did, the population (in
theory) are free to select any other judge. Of course, the competing
judges would **also** be striving for profits and wealth -- which means
the choice of character may be somewhat limited! -- and the laws which
they were using to guide their judgements would be enforcing capitalist
rights.

Whether or not this system would work as desired is discussed in the
following sections. We think that it will not. Moreover, we will argue
that "anarcho"-capitalist "defence companies" meet not only the criteria
of statehood we outlined in [section B.2](secB2.html), but also
Rothbard's own criteria for the state. As regards the anarchist
criterion, it is clear that "defence companies" exist to defend private
property; that they are hierarchical (in that they are capitalist
companies which defend the power of those who employ them); that they
are professional coercive bodies; and that they exercise a monopoly of
force over a given area (the area, initially, being the property of the
person or company who is employing the company). Not only that, as we
discuss in [section F.6.4](secF6.html#secf64) these "defence companies"
also matches the right-libertarian and "anarcho"-capitalist definition
of the state. For this (and other reasons), we should call the
"anarcho"-capitalist defence firms "private states" -- that is what they
are -- and "anarcho"-capitalism "private state" capitalism.

F.6.1 What's wrong with this "free market" justice?
---------------------------------------------------

It does not take much imagination to figure out whose interests
prosperous arbitrators, judges and defence companies would defend: their
own as well as those who pay their wages -- which is to say, other
members of the rich elite. As the law exists to defend property, then it
(by definition) exists to defend the power of capitalists against their
workers. Rothbard argued that the *"judges"* would *"not [be] making the
law but finding it on the basis of agreed-upon principles derived either
from custom or reason."* [**Society without a State**, p. 206] However,
this begs the question: **whose** reason? **whose** customs? Do
individuals in different classes share the same customs? The same ideas
of right and wrong? Would rich and poor desire the same from a *"basic
law code"*? Obviously not. The rich would only support a code which
defended their power over the poor.

Rothbard does not address this issue. He stated that
"anarcho"-capitalism would involve *"taking the largely libertarian
common law, and correcting it by the use of man's reason, before
enshrining it as a permanently fixed libertarian law code."* [*"On
Freedom and the Law"*, **New Individualist Review**, Winter 1962, p. 40]
Needless to say, *"man"* does not exist -- it is an abstraction (and a
distinctly collectivist one, we should note). There are only individual
men and women and so individuals and **their** reason. By *"man's
reason"* Rothbard meant, at best, the prejudices of those individuals
with whom he agreed with or, at worse, his own value judgements.
Needless to say, what is considered acceptable will vary from individual
to individual and reflect their social position. Similarly, as Kropotkin
stressed, "common law" does not develop in isolation of class struggles
and so is a mishmash of customs genuinely required by social life and
influences imposed by elites by means of state action. [**Anarchism**,
pp. 204-6] This implies what should be *"corrected"* from the "common
law" will also differ based on their class position and their general
concepts of what is right and wrong. History is full of examples of
lawyers, jurists and judges (not to mention states) *"correcting"*
common law and social custom in favour of a propertarian perspective
which, by strange co-incidence, favoured the capitalists and landlords,
i.e. those of the same class as the politicians, lawyers, jurists and
judges (see [section F.8](secF8.html) for more details). We can imagine
the results of similar "correcting" of common law by those deemed worthy
by Rothbard and his followers of representing both "man" and "natural
law."

Given these obvious points, it should come as no surprise that Rothbard
solves this problem by explicitly excluding the general population from
deciding which laws they will be subject to. As he put it, *"it would
not be a very difficult task for Libertarian lawyers and jurists to
arrive at a rational and objective code of libertarian legal principles
and procedures . . . This code would then be followed and applied to
specific cases by privately-competitive and free-market courts and
judges, all of whom would be pledged to abide by the code."* [*"The
Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An Economist's View"*, pp. 5-15, **Journal of
Libertarian Studies**, Vol. 20, No. 1, p. 7] By jurist Rothbard means a
professional or an expert who studies, develops, applies or otherwise
deals with the law, i.e. a lawyer or a judge. That is, law-making by
privately-competitive judges and lawyers. And not only would the law be
designed by experts, so would its interpretation:

> *"If legislation is replaced by such judge-made law fixity and
> certainty . . . will replace the capriciously changing edicts of
> statutory legislation. The body of judge-made law changes very slowly
> . . . decisions properly apply only to the particular case, judge-made
> law -- in contrast to legislation -- permits a vast body of voluntary,
> freely-adapted rules, bargains, and arbitrations to proliferate as
> needed in society. The twin of the free market economy, then, is . . .
> a proliferation of voluntary rules interpreted and applied by experts
> in the law."* [*"On Freedom and the Law"*, **Op. Cit.** p. 38]

In other words, as well as privatising the commons in land he also seeks
to privatise "common law." This will be expropriated from the general
population and turned over to wealthy judges and libertarian scholars to
"correct" as they see fit. Within this mandatory legal regime, there
would be "voluntary" interpretations yet it hardly taxes the imagination
to see how economic inequality would shape any "bargains" made on it. So
we have a legal system created and run by judges and jurists within
which specific interpretations would be reached by "bargains" conducted
between the rich and the poor. A fine liberation indeed!

So although only *"finding"* the law, the arbitrators and judges still
exert an influence in the "justice" process, an influence not impartial
or neutral. As the arbitrators themselves would be part of a profession,
with specific companies developing within the market, it does not take a
genius to realise that when *"interpreting"* the *"basic law code,"*
such companies would hardly act against their own interests as
companies. As we noted in [section F.3.2](secF3.html#secf32), the basic
class interest of keeping the current property rights system going will
still remain -- a situation which wealthy judges would be, to say the
least, happy to see continue. In addition, if the "justice" system was
based on "one dollar, one vote," the "law" would best defend those with
the most "votes" (the question of market forces will be discussed in
[section F.6.3](secF6.html#secf63)). Moreover, even if "market forces"
would ensure that "impartial" judges were dominant, all judges would be
enforcing a **very** partial law code (namely one that defended
**capitalist** property rights). Impartiality when enforcing partial
laws hardly makes judgements less unfair.

Thus, due to these three pressures -- the interests of
arbitrators/judges, the influence of money and the nature of the law --
the terms of "free agreements" under such a law system would be tilted
in favour of lenders over debtors, landlords over tenants, employers
over employees, and in general, the rich over the poor just as we have
today. This is what one would expect in a system based on "unrestricted"
property rights and a (capitalist) free market.

Some "anarcho"-capitalists, however, claim that just as cheaper cars
were developed to meet demand, so cheaper defence associations and
"people's arbitrators" would develop on the market for the working
class. In this way impartiality will be ensured. This argument overlooks
a few key points.

Firstly, the general "libertarian" law code would be applicable to
**all** associations, so they would have to operate within a system
determined by the power of money and of capital. The law code would
reflect, therefore, property **not** labour and so "socialistic" law
codes would be classed as "outlaw" ones. The options then facing working
people is to select a firm which best enforced the **capitalist** law in
their favour. And as noted above, the impartial enforcement of a biased
law code will hardly ensure freedom or justice for all. This means that
saying the possibility of competition from another judge would keep them
honest becomes meaningless when they are all implementing the **same**
capitalist law!

Secondly, in a race between a Jaguar and a Volkswagen Beetle, who is
more likely to win? The rich would have "the best justice money can
buy," even more than they do now. Members of the capitalist class would
be able to select the firms with the best lawyers, best private cops and
most resources. Those without the financial clout to purchase quality
"justice" would simply be out of luck -- such is the "magic" of the
marketplace.

Thirdly, because of the tendency toward concentration, centralisation,
and oligopoly under capitalism (due to increasing capital costs for new
firms entering the market, as discussed in [section C.4](secC4.html)), a
few companies would soon dominate the market -- with obvious
implications for "justice." Different firms will have different
resources and in a conflict between a small firm and a larger one, the
smaller one is at a disadvantage. They may not be in a position to fight
the larger company if it rejects arbitration and so may give in simply
because, as the "anarcho"-capitalists so rightly point out, conflict and
violence will push up a company's costs and so they would have to be
avoided by smaller ones (it is ironic that the "anarcho"-capitalist
implicitly assumes that every "defence company" is approximately of the
same size, with the same resources behind it and in real life this would
clearly **not** the case). Moreover, it seems likely that a
Legal-Industrial complex would develop, with other companies buying
shares in "defence" firms as well as companies which provide lawyers and
judges (and vice versa). We would also expect mergers to develop as well
as cross-ownership between companies, not to mention individual judges
and security company owners and managers having shares in other
capitalist firms. Even if the possibility that the companies providing
security and "justice" have links with other capitalism firms is
discounted then the fact remains that these firms would hardly be
sympathetic to organisations and individuals seeking to change the
system which makes them rich or, as property owners and bosses, seeking
to challenge the powers associated with both particularly if the law is
designed from a propertarian perspective.

Fourthly, it is **very** likely that many companies would make
subscription to a specific "defence" firm or court a requirement of
employment and residence. Just as today many (most?) workers have to
sign no-union contracts (and face being fired if they change their
minds), it does not take much imagination to see that the same could
apply to "defence" firms and courts. This was/is the case in company
towns (indeed, you can consider unions as a form of "defence" firm and
these companies refused to recognise them). As the labour market is
almost always a buyer's market, it is not enough to argue that workers
can find a new job without this condition. They may not and so have to
put up with this situation. And if (as seems likely) the laws and rules
of the property-owner will take precedence in any conflict, then workers
and tenants will be at a disadvantage no matter how "impartial" the
judges.

Ironically, some "anarcho"-capitalists (like David Friedman) have
pointed to company/union negotiations as an example of how different
defence firms would work out their differences peacefully. Sadly for
this argument, union rights under "actually existing capitalism" were
hard fought for, often resulting in strikes which quickly became
mini-wars as the capitalists used the full might associated with their
wealth to stop them getting a foothold or to destroy them if they had.
In America the bosses usually had recourse to private defence firms like
the Pinkertons to break unions and strikes. Since 1935 in America, union
rights have been protected by the state in direct opposition to
capitalist "freedom of contract." Before the law was changed (under
pressure from below, in the face of business opposition and violence),
unions were usually crushed by force -- the companies were better armed,
had more resources and had the law on their side (Rothbard showed his
grasp of American labour history by asserting that union *"restrictions
and strikes"* were the *"result of government privilege, notably in the
Wagner Act of 1935."* [**The Logic of Action II**, p. 194]). Since the
1980s and the advent of the free(r) market, we can see what happens to
"peaceful negotiation" and "co-operation" between unions and companies
when it is no longer required and when the resources of both sides are
unequal. The market power of companies far exceeds those of the unions
and the law, by definition, favours the companies. As an example of how
competing "protection agencies" will work in an "anarcho"-capitalist
society, it is far more insightful than originally intended!

Now let us consider Rothbard's *"basic law code"* itself. For Rothbard,
the laws in the *"general libertarian law code"* would be unchangeable,
selected by those considered as "the voice of nature" (with obvious
authoritarian implications). David Friedman, in contrast, argues that as
well as a market in defence companies, there will also be a market in
laws and rights. However, there will be extensive market pressure to
unify these differing law codes into one standard one (imagine what
would happen if ever CD manufacturer created a unique CD player, or
every computer manufacturer different sized floppy-disk drivers --
little wonder, then, that over time companies standardise their
products). Friedman himself acknowledges that this process is likely
(and uses the example of standard paper sizes to illustrate it). Which
suggests that competition would be meaningless as **all** firms would be
enforcing the same (capitalist) law.

In any event, the laws would not be decided on the basis of "one person,
one vote"; hence, as market forces worked their magic, the "general" law
code would reflect vested interests and so be very hard to change. As
rights and laws would be a commodity like everything else in capitalism,
they would soon reflect the interests of the rich -- particularly if
those interpreting the law are wealthy professionals and companies with
vested interests of their own. Little wonder that the individualist
anarchists proposed "trial by jury" as the only basis for real justice
in a free society. For, unlike professional "arbitrators," juries are ad
hoc, made up of ordinary people and do not reflect power, authority, or
the influence of wealth. And by being able to judge the law as well as a
conflict, they can ensure a populist revision of laws as society
progresses.

Rothbard, unsurprisingly, is at pains to dismiss the individualist
anarchist idea of juries judging the law as well as the facts, stating
it would give each free-market jury *"totally free rein over judicial
decisions"* and this *"could not be expected to arrive at just or even
libertarian decisions."* [*"The Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An Economist's
View"*, **Op. Cit.**, p.7] However, the opposite is the case as juries
made up of ordinary people will be more likely to reach just decisions
which place genuinely libertarian positions above a law dedicated to
maintaining capitalist property and power. History is full of examples
of juries acquitting people for so-called crimes against property which
are the result of dire need or simply reflect class injustice. For
example, during the Great Depression unemployed miners in Pennsylvania
*"dug small mines on company property, mined coal, trucked it to cities
and sold it below the commercial rate. By 1934, 5 million tons of this
'bootleg' coal were produced by twenty thousand men using four thousand
vehicles. When attempts were made to prosecute, local juries would not
convict, local jailers would not imprison."* [Howard Zinn, **A People's
History of the United States**, pp. 385-6] It is precisely this outcome
which causes Rothbard to reject that system.

Thus Rothbard postulated a **judge** directed system of laws in stark
contrast to individualist anarchism's **jury** directed system. It is
understandable that Rothbard would seek to replace juries with judges,
it is the only way he can exclude the general population from having a
say in the laws they are subjected to. Juries allow the general public
to judge the law as well as any crime and so this would allow those
aspects "corrected" by right-"libertarians" to seep back into the
"common law" and so make private property and power accountable to the
general public rather than vice versa. Moreover, concepts of right and
wrong evolve over time and in line with changes in socio-economic
conditions. To have a "common law" which is unchanging means that social
evolution is considered to have stopped when Murray Rothbard decided to
call his ideology "anarcho"-capitalism.

In a genuinely libertarian system, social customs (common law) would
evolve based on what the general population thought was right and wrong
based on changing social institutions and relationships between
individuals. That is why ruling classes have always sought to replace it
with state determined and enforced laws. Changing social norms and
institutions can be seen from property. As Proudhon noted, property
*"changed its nature"* over time. Originally, *"the word **property**
was synonymous with . . . **individual possession**"* but it became more
*"complex"* and turned into **private property** -- *"the right to use
it by his neighbour's labour."* [**What is Property?**, p. 395] The
changing nature of property created relations of domination and
exploitation between people absent before. For the capitalist, however,
both the tools of the self-employed artisan and the capital of a
transnational corporation are both forms of "property" and so basically
identical. Changing social relations impact on society and the
individuals who make it up. This would be reflected in any genuinely
libertarian society, something right-"libertarians" are aware of. They,
therefore, seek to freeze the rights framework and legal system to
protect institutions, like property, no matter how they evolve and come
to replace whatever freedom enhancing features they had with oppression.
Hence we find Rothbard's mentor, Ludwig von Mises asserting that
*"[t]here may possibly be a difference of opinion about whether a
particular institution is socially beneficial or harmful. But once it
has been judged [by whom?] beneficial, one can no longer contend that,
for some inexplicable reason, it must be condemned as immoral."*
[**Liberalism**, p. 34] Rothbard's system is designed to ensure that the
general population cannot judge whether a particular institution has
changed is social impact. Thus a system of "defence" on the capitalist
market will continue to reflect the influence and power of property
owners and wealth and not be subject to popular control beyond choosing
between companies to enforce the capitalist laws.

Ultimately, such an "anarcho"-capitalist system would be based on simple
absolute principles decided in advance by a small group of ideological
leaders. We are then expected to live with the consequences as best we
can. If people end up in a worse condition than before then that is
irrelevant as that we have enforced the eternal principles they have
proclaimed as being in our best interests.

F.6.2 What are the social consequences of such a system?
--------------------------------------------------------

The "anarcho" capitalist imagines that there will be police agencies,
"defence associations," courts, and appeals courts all organised on a
free-market basis and available for hire. As David Wieck points out,
however, the major problem with such a system would not be the
corruption of "private" courts and police forces (although, as suggested
above, this could indeed be a problem):

> "There is something more serious than the 'Mafia danger', and this
> other problem concerns the role of such 'defence' institutions in a
> given social and economic context.
> "[The] context . . . is one of a free-market economy with no
> restraints upon accumulation of property. Now, we had an American
> experience, roughly from the end of the Civil War to the 1930's, in
> what were in effect private courts, private police, indeed private
> governments. We had the experience of the (private) Pinkerton police
> which, by its spies, by its **agents provocateurs,** and by methods
> that included violence and kidnapping, was one of the most powerful
> tools of large corporations and an instrument of oppression of working
> people. We had the experience as well of the police forces established
> to the same end, within corporations, by numerous companies . . . (The
> automobile companies drew upon additional covert instruments of a
> private nature, usually termed vigilante, such as the Black Legion).
> These were, in effect, private armies, and were sometimes described as
> such. The territories owned by coal companies, which frequently
> included entire towns and their environs, the stores the miners were
> obliged by economic coercion to patronise, the houses they lived in,
> were commonly policed by the private police of the United States Steel
> Corporation or whatever company owned the properties. The chief
> practical function of these police was, of course, to prevent labour
> organisation and preserve a certain balance of 'bargaining.' . . .
> These complexes were a law unto themselves, powerful enough to ignore,
> when they did not purchase, the governments of various jurisdictions
> of the American federal system. This industrial system was, at the
> time, often characterised as feudalism." [**Anarchist Justice**, pp.
> 223-224]

For a description of the weaponry and activities of these private
armies, the Marxist economic historian Maurice Dobb presents an
excellent summary in **Studies in Capitalist Development**. [pp.
353-357] According to a report on *"Private Police Systems"* quoted by
Dobb, in a town dominated by Republican Steel the *"civil liberties and
the rights of labour were suppressed by company police. Union organisers
were driven out of town."* Company towns had their own (company-run)
money, stores, houses and jails and many corporations had machine-guns
and tear-gas along with the usual shot-guns, rifles and revolvers. The
*"usurpation of police powers by privately paid 'guards and 'deputies',
often hired from detective agencies, many with criminal records"* was
*"a general practice in many parts of the country."*

The local (state-run) law enforcement agencies turned a blind-eye to
what was going on (after all, the workers **had** broken their contracts
and so were "criminal aggressors" against the companies) even when union
members and strikers were beaten and killed. The workers own defence
organisations (unions) were the only ones willing to help them, and if
the workers seemed to be winning then troops were called in to "restore
the peace" (as happened in the Ludlow strike, when strikers originally
cheered the troops as they thought they would defend them; needless to
say, they were wrong).

Here we have a society which is claimed by many "anarcho"-capitalists as
one of the closest examples to their "ideal," with limited state
intervention, free reign for property owners, etc. What happened? The
rich reduced the working class to a serf-like existence, capitalist
production undermined independent producers (much to the annoyance of
individualist anarchists at the time), and the result was the emergence
of the corporate America that "anarcho"-capitalists (sometimes) say they
oppose.

Are we to expect that "anarcho"-capitalism will be different? That,
unlike before, "defence" firms will intervene on behalf of strikers?
Given that the *"general libertarian law code"* will be enforcing
capitalist property rights, workers will be in exactly the same
situation as they were then. Support of strikers violating property
rights would be a violation of the law and be costly for profit making
firms to do (if not dangerous as they could be "outlawed" by the rest).
This suggests that "anarcho"-capitalism will extend extensive rights and
powers to bosses, but few if any rights to rebellious workers. And this
difference in power is enshrined within the fundamental institutions of
the system. This can easily be seen from Rothbard's numerous anti-union
tirades and his obvious hatred of them, strikes and pickets (which he
habitually labelled as violent). As such it is not surprising to
discover that Rothbard complained in the 1960s that, because of the
Wagner Act, the American police *"commonly remain 'neutral' when
strike-breakers are molested or else blame the strike-breakers for
'provoking' the attacks on them . . . When unions are permitted to
resort to violence, the state or other enforcing agency has implicitly
delegated this power to the unions. The unions, then, have become
'private states.'"* [**The Logic of Action II**, p. 41] The role of the
police was to back the property owner against their rebel workers, in
other words, and the state was failing to provide the appropriate
service (of course, that bosses exercising power over workers provoked
the strike is irrelevant, while private police attacking picket lines is
purely a form of "defensive" violence and is, likewise, of no concern).

In evaluating "anarcho"-capitalism's claim to be a form of anarchism,
Peter Marshall notes that *"private protection agencies would merely
serve the interests of their paymasters."* [**Demanding the
Impossible**, p. 653] With the increase of private "defence
associations" under "really existing capitalism" today (associations
that many "anarcho"-capitalists point to as examples of their ideas), we
see a vindication of Marshall's claim. There have been many documented
experiences of protesters being badly beaten by private security guards.
As far as market theory goes, the companies are only supplying what the
buyer is demanding. The rights of others are **not a factor** (yet more
"externalities," obviously). Even if the victims successfully sue the
company, the message is clear -- social activism can seriously damage
your health. With a reversion to *"a general libertarian law code"*
enforced by private companies, this form of "defence" of "absolute"
property rights can only increase, perhaps to the levels previously
attained in the heyday of US capitalism, as described above by Wieck.

F.6.3 But surely market forces will stop abuses by the rich?
------------------------------------------------------------

Unlikely. The rise of corporations within America indicates exactly how
a *"general libertarian law code"* would reflect the interests of the
rich and powerful. The laws recognising corporations as "legal persons"
were **not** primarily a product of "the state" but of private lawyers
hired by the rich. As Howard Zinn notes:

> *"the American Bar Association, organised by lawyers accustomed to
> serving the wealthy, began a national campaign of education to reverse
> the [Supreme] Court decision [that companies could not be considered
> as a person]. . . . By 1886, they succeeded . . . the Supreme Court
> had accepted the argument that corporations were 'persons' and their
> money was property protected by the process clause of the Fourteenth
> Amendment . . . The justices of the Supreme Court were not simply
> interpreters of the Constitution. They were men of certain
> backgrounds, of certain [class] interests."* [**A People's History of
> the United States**, p. 255]

Of course it will be argued that the Supreme Court is chosen by the
government and is a state enforced monopoly and so our analysis is
flawed. Yet this is not the case. As Rothbard made clear, the *"general
libertarian law code"* would be created by lawyers and jurists and
everyone would be expected to obey it. Why expect **these** lawyers and
jurists to be any less class conscious then those in the 19th century?
If the Supreme Court *"was doing its bit for the ruling elite"* then why
would those creating the law system be any different? *"How could it be
neutral between rich and poor,"* argues Zinn, *"when its members were
often former wealthy lawyers, and almost always came from the upper
class?"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 254] Moreover, the corporate laws came about
because there was a demand for them. That demand would still have
existed in "anarcho"-capitalism. Now, while there may nor be a Supreme
Court, Rothbard does maintain that *"the basic Law Code . . . would have
to be agreed upon by all the judicial agencies"* but he maintains that
this *"would imply no unified legal system"*! Even though *"[a]ny
agencies that transgressed the basic libertarian law code would be open
outlaws"* and soon crushed this is **not**, apparently, a monopoly.
[**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 234] So, you either agree to the law code
or you go out of business. And that is **not** a monopoly! Therefore, we
think, our comments on the Supreme Court are valid (see also [section
F.7.2](secF7.html#secf72)).

If all the available defence firms enforce the same laws, then it can
hardly be called "competitive"! And if this is the case (and it is)
*"when private wealth is uncontrolled, then a police-judicial complex
enjoying a clientele of wealthy corporations whose motto is
self-interest is hardly an innocuous social force controllable by the
possibility of forming or affiliating with competing 'companies.'"*
[Wieck, **Op. Cit.**, p. 225] This is particularly true if these
companies are themselves Big Business and so have a large impact on the
laws they are enforcing. If the law code recognises and protects
capitalist power, property and wealth as fundamental **any** attempt to
change this is "initiation of force" and so the power of the rich is
written into the system from the start!

(And, we must add, if there is a general libertarian law code to which
all must subscribe, where does that put customer demand? If people
demand a non-libertarian law code, will defence firms refuse to supply
it? If so, will not new firms, looking for profit, spring up that will
supply what is being demanded? And will that not put them in direct
conflict with the existing, pro-general law code ones? And will a market
in law codes not just reflect economic power and wealth? David Friedman,
who is for a market in law codes, argues that *"[i]f almost everyone
believes strongly that heroin addiction is so horrible that it should
not be permitted anywhere under any circumstances anarcho-capitalist
institutions will produce laws against heroin. Laws are being produced
on the market, and that is what the market wants."* And he adds that
*"market demands are in dollars, not votes. The legality of heroin will
be determined, not by how many are for or against but how high a cost
each side is willing to bear in order to get its way."* [**The Machinery
of Freedom**, p. 127] And, as the market is less than equal in terms of
income and wealth, such a position will mean that the capitalist class
will have a higher effective demand than the working class and more
resources to pay for any conflicts that arise. Thus any law codes that
develop will tend to reflect the interests of the wealthy.)

Which brings us nicely on to the next problem regarding market forces.

As well as the obvious influence of economic interests and differences
in wealth, another problem faces the "free market" justice of
"anarcho"-capitalism. This is the *"general libertarian law code"*
itself. Even if we assume that the system actually works like it should
in theory, the simple fact remains that these "defence companies" are
enforcing laws which explicitly defend capitalist property (and so
social relations). Capitalists own the means of production upon which
they hire wage-labourers to work and this is an inequality established
**prior** to any specific transaction in the labour market. This
inequality reflects itself in terms of differences in power within (and
outside) the company and in the "law code" of "anarcho"-capitalism which
protects that power against the dispossessed.

In other words, the law code within which the defence companies work
assumes that capitalist property is legitimate and that force can
legitimately be used to defend it. This means that, in effect,
"anarcho"-capitalism is based on a monopoly of law, a monopoly which
explicitly exists to defend the power and capital of the wealthy. The
major difference is that the agencies used to protect that wealth will
be in a weaker position to act independently of their pay-masters.
Unlike the state, the "defence" firm is not remotely accountable to the
general population and cannot be used to equalise even slightly the
power relationships between worker and capitalist (as the state has, on
occasion done, due to public pressure and to preserve the system as a
whole). And, needless to say, it is very likely that the private police
forces **will** give preferential treatment to their wealthier customers
(which business does not?) and that the law code will reflect the
interests of the wealthier sectors of society (particularly if
prosperous judges administer that code) in reality, even if not in
theory. Since, in capitalist practice, "the customer is always right,"
the best-paying customers will get their way in "anarcho"-capitalist
society.

For example, in chapter 29 of **The Machinery of Freedom**, David
Friedman presents an example of how a clash of different law codes could
be resolved by a bargaining process (the law in question is the death
penalty). This process would involve one defence firm giving a sum of
money to the other for them accepting the appropriate (anti/pro capital
punishment) court. Friedman claims that *"[a]s in any good trade,
everyone gains"* but this is obviously not true. Assuming the
anti-capital punishment defence firm pays the pro one to accept an
anti-capital punishment court, then, yes, both defence firms have made
money and so are happy, so are the anti-capital punishment consumers but
the pro-death penalty customers have only (perhaps) received a cut in
their bills. Their desire to see criminals hanged (for whatever reason)
has been ignored (if they were not in favour of the death penalty, they
would not have subscribed to that company). Friedman claims that the
deal, by allowing the anti-death penalty firm to cut its costs, will
ensure that it *"keep its customers and even get more"* but this is just
an assumption. It is just as likely to loose customers to a defence firm
that refuses to compromise (and has the resources to back it up).
Friedman's assumption that lower costs will automatically win over
people's passions is unfounded as is the assumption that both firms have
equal resources and bargaining power. If the pro-capital punishment firm
demands more than the anti can provide and has larger weaponry and
troops, then the anti defence firm may have to agree to let the pro one
have its way. So, all in all, it is **not** clear that *"everyone
gains"* -- there may be a sizeable percentage of those involved who do
not "gain" as their desire for capital punishment is traded away by
those who claimed they would enforce it. This may, in turn, produce a
demand for defence firms which do **not** compromise with obvious
implications for public peace.

In other words, a system of competing law codes and privatised rights
does not ensure that **all** individual interests are meet. Given
unequal resources within society, it is clear that the "effective
demand" of the parties involved to see their law codes enforced is
drastically different. The wealthy head of a transnational corporation
will have far more resources available to him to pay for **his** laws to
be enforced than one of his employees on the assembly line. Moreover, as
we noted in [section F.3.1](secF3.html#secf31), the labour market is
usually skewed in favour of capitalists. This means that workers have to
compromise to get work and such compromises may involve agreeing to join
a specific "defence" firm or not join one at all (just as workers are
often forced to sign non-union contracts today in order to get work). In
other words, a privatised law system is very likely to skew the
enforcement of laws in line with the skewing of income and wealth in
society. At the very least, unlike every other market, the customer is
**not** guaranteed to get exactly what they demand simply because the
product they "consume" is dependent on others within the same market to
ensure its supply. The unique workings of the law/defence market are
such as to deny customer choice (we will discuss other aspects of this
unique market shortly). Wieck summed by pointing out the obvious:

> *"any judicial system is going to exist in the context of economic
> institutions. If there are gross inequalities of power in the economic
> and social domains, one has to imagine society as strangely
> compartmentalised in order to believe that those inequalities will
> fail to reflect themselves in the judicial and legal domain, and that
> the economically powerful will be unable to manipulate the legal and
> judicial system to their advantage. To abstract from such influences
> of context, and then consider the merits of an abstract judicial
> system. . . is to follow a method that is not likely to take us far.
> This, by the way, is a criticism that applies. . .to any theory that
> relies on a rule of law to override the tendencies inherent in a given
> social and economic system"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 225]

There is another reason why "market forces" will not stop abuse by the
rich, or indeed stop the system from turning from private to public
statism. This is due to the nature of the "defence" market (for a
similar analysis of the "defence" market see right-"libertarian"
economist Tyler Cowen's *"Law as a Public Good: The Economics of
Anarchy"* [**Economics and Philosophy**, no. 8 (1992), pp. 249-267] and
*"Rejoinder to David Friedman on the Economics of Anarchy"* [**Economics
and Philosophy**, no. 10 (1994), pp. 329-332]). In "anarcho"-capitalist
theory it is assumed that the competing "defence companies" have a
vested interest in peacefully settling differences between themselves by
means of arbitration. In order to be competitive on the market,
companies will have to co-operate via contractual relations otherwise
the higher price associated with conflict will make the company
uncompetitive and it will go under. Those companies that ignore
decisions made in arbitration would be outlawed by others, ostracised
and their rulings ignored. By this process, it is argued, a system of
competing "defence" companies will be stable and not turn into a civil
war between agencies with each enforcing the interests of their clients
against others by force.

However, there is a catch. Unlike every other market, the businesses in
competition in the "defence" industry **must** co-operate with its
fellows in order to provide its services for its customers. They need to
be able to agree to courts and judges, agree to abide by decisions and
law codes and so forth. In economics there are other, more accurate,
terms to describe co-operative activity between companies: collusion and
cartels. These are when companies in a specific market agree to work
together (co-operate) to restrict competition and reap the benefits of
monopoly power by working to achieve the same ends in partnership with
each other. By stressing the co-operative nature of the "defence"
market, "anarcho"-capitalists are implicitly acknowledging that
collusion is built into the system. The necessary contractual relations
between agencies in the "protection" market require that firms
co-operate and, by so doing, to behave (effectively) as one large firm
(and so resemble a normal state even more than they already do). Quoting
Adam Smith seems appropriate here: *"People of the same trade seldom
meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation
ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise
prices."* [**The Wealth of Nations**, p. 117] Having a market based on
people of the same trade co-operating seems, therefore, an unwise move.

For example, when buying food it does not matter whether the
supermarkets visited have good relations with each other. The goods
bought are independent of the relationships that exist between competing
companies. However, in the case of private states this is **not** the
case. If a specific "defence" company has bad relationships with other
companies in the market then it is against a customer's self-interest to
subscribe to it. Why subscribe to a private state if its judgements are
ignored by the others and it has to resort to violence to be heard?
This, as well as being potentially dangerous, will also push up the
prices that have to be paid. Arbitration is one of the most important
services a defence firm can offer its customers and its market share is
based upon being able to settle interagency disputes without risk of war
or uncertainty that the final outcome will not be accepted by all
parties. Lose that and a company will lose market share.

Therefore, the market set-up within the "anarcho"-capitalist "defence"
market is such that private states **have to co-operate** with the
others (or go out of business fast) and this means collusion can take
place. In other words, a system of private states will have to agree to
work together in order to provide the service of "law enforcement" to
their customers and the result of such co-operation is to create a
cartel. However, unlike cartels in other industries, the "defence"
cartel will be a stable body simply because its members **have** to work
with their competitors in order to survive.

Let us look at what would happen after such a cartel is formed in a
specific area and a new "defence company" desired to enter the market.
This new company will have to work with the members of the cartel in
order to provide its services to its customers (note that
"anarcho"-capitalists already assume that they *"will have to"*
subscribe to the same law code). If the new defence firm tries to
under-cut the cartel's monopoly prices, the other companies would refuse
to work with it. Having to face constant conflict or the possibility of
conflict, seeing its decisions being ignored by other agencies and being
uncertain what the results of a dispute would be, few would patronise
the new "defence company." The new company's prices would go up and it
would soon face either folding or joining the cartel. Unlike every other
market, if a "defence company" does not have friendly, co-operative
relations with other firms in the same industry then it will go out of
business.

This means that the firms that are co-operating have simply to agree not
to deal with new firms which are attempting to undermine the cartel in
order for them to fail. A "cartel busting" firm goes out of business in
the same way an outlaw one does -- the higher costs associated with
having to solve all its conflicts by force, not arbitration, increases
its production costs much higher than the competitors and the firm faces
insurmountable difficulties selling its products at a profit (ignoring
any drop of demand due to fears of conflict by actual and potential
customers). Even if we assume that many people will happily join the new
firm in spite of the dangers to protect themselves against the cartel
and its taxation (i.e. monopoly profits), enough will remain members of
the cartel so that co-operation will still be needed and conflict
unprofitable and dangerous (and as the cartel will have more resources
than the new firm, it could usually hold out longer than the new firm
could). In effect, breaking the cartel may take the form of an armed
revolution -- as it would with any state.

The forces that break up cartels and monopolies in other industries
(such as free entry -- although, of course the "defence" market will be
subject to oligopolistic tendencies as any other and this will create
barriers to entry) do not work here and so new firms have to co-operate
or loose market share and/or profits. This means that "defence
companies" will reap monopoly profits and, more importantly, have a
monopoly of force over a given area.

It is also likely that a multitude of cartels would develop, with a
given cartel operating in a given locality. This is because law
enforcement would be localised in given areas as most crime occurs where
the criminal lives (few criminals would live in Glasgow and commit
crimes in Paris). However, as defence companies have to co-operate to
provide their services, so would the cartels. Few people live all their
lives in one area and so firms from different cartels would come into
contact, so forming a cartel of cartels. This cartel of cartels may
(perhaps) be less powerful than a local cartel, but it would still be
required and for exactly the same reasons a local one is. Therefore
"anarcho"-capitalism would, like "actually existing capitalism," be
marked by a series of public states covering given areas, co-ordinated
by larger states at higher levels. Such a set up would parallel the
United States in many ways except it would be run directly by wealthy
shareholders without the sham of "democratic" elections. Moreover, as in
the USA and other states there will still be a monopoly of rules and
laws (the *"general libertarian law code"*).

Hence a monopoly of private states will develop in addition to the
existing monopoly of law and this is a de facto monopoly of force over a
given area (i.e. some kind of public state run by share holders). New
companies attempting to enter the "defence" industry will have to work
with the existing cartel in order to provide the services it offers to
its customers. The cartel is in a dominant position and new entries into
the market either become part of it or fail. This is exactly the
position with the state, with "private agencies" free to operate as long
as they work to the state's guidelines. As with the monopolist *"general
libertarian law code"*, if you do not toe the line, you go out of
business fast.

"Anarcho"-capitalists claim that this will not occur, but that the
co-operation needed to provide the service of law enforcement will
somehow **not** turn into collusion between companies. However, they are
quick to argue that renegade "agencies" (for example, the so-called
"Mafia problem" or those who reject judgements) will go out of business
because of the higher costs associated with conflict and not
arbitration. Yet these higher costs are ensured because the firms in
question do not co-operate with others. If other agencies boycott a firm
but co-operate with all the others, then the boycotted firm will be at
the same disadvantage -- regardless of whether it is a cartel buster or
a renegade. So the "anarcho"-capitalist is trying to have it both ways.
If the punishment of non-conforming firms cannot occur, then
"anarcho"-capitalism will turn into a war of all against all or, at the
very least, the service of social peace and law enforcement cannot be
provided. If firms cannot deter others from disrupting the social peace
(one service the firm provides) then "anarcho"-capitalism is not stable
and will not remain orderly as agencies develop which favour the
interests of their own customers and enforce their own law codes at the
expense of others. If collusion cannot occur (or is too costly) then
neither can the punishment of non-conforming firms and
"anarcho"-capitalism will prove to be unstable.

So, to sum up, the "defence" market of private states has powerful
forces within it to turn it into a monopoly of force over a given area.
From a privately chosen monopoly of force over a specific (privately
owned) area, the market of private states will turn into a monopoly of
force over a general area. This is due to the need for peaceful
relations between companies, relations which are required for a firm to
secure market share. The unique market forces that exist within this
market ensure collusion and the system of private states will become a
cartel and so a public state - unaccountable to all but its
shareholders, a state of the wealthy, by the wealthy, for the wealthy.

F.6.4 Why are these "defence associations" states?
--------------------------------------------------

It is clear that "anarcho"-capitalist defence associations meet the
criteria of statehood outlined in section B.2 (["Why are anarchists
against the state"](secB2.html)). They defend property and preserve
authority relationships, they practice coercion, and are hierarchical
institutions which govern those under them on behalf of a "ruling
elite," i.e. those who employ both the governing forces and those they
govern. Thus, from an anarchist perspective, these "defence
associations" are most definitely states.

What is interesting, however, is that by their own definitions a very
good case can be made that these "defence associations" are states in
the "anarcho"-capitalist sense too. Capitalist apologists usually define
a "government" (or state) as something which has a monopoly of force and
coercion within a given area. Relative to the rest of the society, these
defence associations would have a monopoly of force and coercion of a
given piece of property: thus, by the "anarcho"-capitalists' **own
definition** of statehood, these associations would qualify!

If we look at Rothbard's definition of statehood, which requires (a) the
power to tax and/or (b) a *"coerced monopoly of the provision of defence
over a given area"*, "anarcho"-capitalism runs into trouble.

In the first place, the costs of hiring defence associations will be
deducted from the wealth created by those who use, but do not own, the
property of capitalists and landlords. Let us not forget that a
capitalist will only employ a worker or rent out land and housing if
they make a profit from so doing. Without the labour of the worker,
there would be nothing to sell and no wages to pay for rent and so a
company's or landlord's "defence" firm will be paid from the revenue
gathered from the capitalists power to extract a tribute from those who
use, but do not own, a property. In other words, workers would pay for
the agencies that enforce their employers' authority over them via the
wage system and rent -- taxation in a more insidious form.

In the second, under capitalism most people spend a large part of their
day on other people's property -- that is, they work for capitalists
and/or live in rented accommodation. Hence if property owners select a
"defence association" to protect their factories, farms, rental housing,
etc., their employees and tenants will view it as a *"coerced monopoly
of the provision of defence over a given area."* For certainly the
employees and tenants will not be able to hire their own defence
companies to expropriate the capitalists and landlords. So, from the
standpoint of the employees and tenants, the owners do have a monopoly
of "defence" over the areas in question. Of course, the
"anarcho"-capitalist will argue that the tenants and workers "consent"
to **all** the rules and conditions of a contract when they sign it and
so the property owner's monopoly is not "coerced." However, the
"consent" argument is so weak in conditions of inequality as to be
useless (see [section F.3.1](secF3.html#secf31), for example) and,
moreover, it can and has been used to justify the state. In other words,
"consent" in and of itself does not ensure that a given regime is not
statist. So an argument along these lines is deeply flawed and can be
used to justify regimes which are little better than "industrial
feudalism" (such as, as indicated in [section B.4](secB4.html), company
towns, for example -- an institution which right-"libertarians" have no
problem with). Even the *"general libertarian law code,"* could be
considered a "monopoly of government over a particular area,"
particularly if ordinary people have no real means of affecting the law
code, either because it is market-driven and so is money-determined, or
because it will be "natural" law and so unchangeable by mere mortals.

In other words, **if** the state *"arrogates to itself a monopoly of
force, of ultimate decision-making power, over a given area territorial
area"* then its pretty clear that the property owner shares this power.
As we indicated in [section F.1](secF1.html), Rothbard agrees that the
owner is, after all, the *"ultimate decision-making power"* in their
workplace or on their land. If the boss takes a dislike to you (for
example, you do not follow their orders) then you get fired. If you
cannot get a job or rent the land without agreeing to certain conditions
(such as not joining a union or subscribing to the "defence firm"
approved by your employer) then you either sign the contract or look for
something else. Rothbard fails to draw the obvious conclusion and
instead refers to the state *"prohibiting the voluntary purchase and
sale of defence and judicial services."* [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p.
170 and p. 171] But just as surely as the law of contract allows the
banning of unions from a property, it can just as surely ban the sale
and purchase of defence and judicial services (it could be argued that
market forces will stop this happening, but this is unlikely as bosses
usually have the advantage on the labour market and workers have to
compromise to get a job). After all, in the company towns, only company
money was legal tender and company police the only law enforcers.

Therefore, it is obvious that the "anarcho"-capitalist system meets the
Weberian criteria of a monopoly to enforce certain rules in a given area
of land. The *"general libertarian law code"* is a monopoly and property
owners determine the rules that apply on their property. Moreover, if
the rules that property owners enforce are subject to rules contained in
the monopolistic *"general libertarian law code"* (for example, that
they cannot ban the sale and purchase of certain products -- such as
defence -- on their own territory) then "anarcho"-capitalism
**definitely** meets the Weberian definition of the state (as described
by Ayn Rand as an institution *"that holds the exclusive power to
**enforce** certain rules of conduct in a given geographical area"*
[**Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal**, p. 239]) as its "law code" overrides
the desires of property owners to do what they like on their own
property.

Therefore, no matter how you look at it, "anarcho"-capitalism and its
"defence" market promotes a *"monopoly of ultimate decision making
power"* over a *"given territorial area"*. It is obvious that for
anarchists, the "anarcho"-capitalist system is a state system. And, as
we note, a reasonable case can be made for it also being a state in the
"anarcho"-capitalist sense as well. So, in effect, "anarcho"-capitalism
has a **different** sort of state, one in which bosses hire and fire the
policeman. As anarchist Peter Sabatini notes:

> *"Within [right] Libertarianism, Rothbard represents a minority
> perspective that actually argues for the total elimination of the
> state. However Rothbard's claim as an anarchist is quickly voided when
> it is shown that he only wants an end to the public state. In its
> place he allows countless private states, with each person supplying
> their own police force, army, and law, or else purchasing these
> services from capitalist vendors . . . Rothbard sees nothing at all
> wrong with the amassing of wealth, therefore those with more capital
> will inevitably have greater coercive force at their disposal, just as
> they do now."* [**Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy**]

Far from wanting to abolish the state, then, "anarcho"-capitalists only
desire to privatise it - to make it solely accountable to capitalist
wealth. Their "companies" perform the same services as the state, for
the same people, in the same manner. However, there is one slight
difference. Property owners would be able to select between competing
companies for their "services." Because such "companies" are employed by
the boss, they would be used to reinforce the totalitarian nature of
capitalist firms by ensuring that the police and the law they enforce
are not even slightly accountable to ordinary people. Looking beyond the
"defence association" to the defence market itself (as we argued in the
[last section](secF6.html#secf63)), this will become a cartel and so
become some kind of public state. The very nature of the private state,
its need to co-operate with others in the same industry, push it towards
a monopoly network of firms and so a monopoly of force over a given
area. Given the assumptions used to defend "anarcho"-capitalism, its
system of private statism will develop into public statism -- a state
run by managers accountable only to the share-holding elite.

To quote Peter Marshall again, the "anarcho"-capitalists *"claim that
all would benefit from a free exchange on the market, it is by no means
certain; any unfettered market system would most likely sponsor a
reversion to an unequal society with defence associations perpetuating
exploitation and privilege."* [**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 565]
History, and current practice, prove this point.

In short, "anarcho"-capitalists are not anarchists at all, they are just
capitalists who desire to see private states develop -- states which are
strictly accountable to their paymasters without even the sham of
democracy we have today. Hence a far better name for
"anarcho"-capitalism would be "private-state" capitalism. At least that
way we get a fairer idea of what they are trying to sell us. Bob Black
put it well: *"To my mind a right-wing anarchist is just a minarchist
who'd abolish the state to his own satisfaction by calling it something
else . . . They don't denounce what the state does, they just object to
who's doing it."* [*"The Libertarian As Conservative"*, **The Abolition
of Work and Other Essays**, p. 144]
