F.3 Why do anarcho"-capitalists place little or no value on equality?
=====================================================================

Murray Rothbard argued that *"the 'rightist' libertarian is not opposed
to inequality."* [**For a New Liberty**, p. 47] In contrast, genuine
libertarians oppose inequality because it has harmful effects on
individual liberty. Part of the reason "anarcho"-capitalism places
little or no value on "equality" derives from their definition of that
term. *"A and B are 'equal,'"* Rothbard argued, *"if they are identical
to each other with respect to a given attribute . . . There is one and
only one way, then, in which any two people can really be 'equal' in the
fullest sense: they must be identical in **all** their attributes."* He
then pointed out the obvious fact that *"men are not uniform . . . the
species, mankind, is uniquely characterised by a high degree of variety,
diversity, differentiation: in short, inequality."* [**Egalitarianism as
a Revolt against Nature and Other Essays**, p. 4 and p.5]

In others words, every individual is unique -- something no egalitarian
has ever denied. On the basis of this amazing insight, he concludes that
equality is impossible (except "equality of rights") and that the
attempt to achieve "equality" is a *"revolt against nature."* The
utility of Rothbard's sophistry to the rich and powerful should be
obvious as it moves analysis away from the social system we live in and
onto biological differences. This means that because we are all unique,
the outcome of our actions will not be identical and so social
inequality flows from natural differences and not due to the economic
system we live under. Inequality of endowment, in this perspective,
implies inequality of outcome and so social inequality. As individual
differences are a fact of nature, attempts to create a society based on
"equality" (i.e. making everyone identical in terms of possessions and
so forth) is impossible and "unnatural." That this would be music to the
ears of the wealthy should go without saying.

Before continuing, we must note that Rothbard is destroying language to
make his point and that he is not the first to abuse language in this
particular way. In George Orwell's **1984**, the expression *"all men
are created equal"* could be translated into Newspeak *"but only in the
same sense in which **All men are redhaired** is a possible Oldspeak
sentence. It did not contain a grammatical error, but it expressed a
palpable untruth -- i.e. that all men are of equal size, weight, or
strength."* [*"Appendix: The Principles of Newspeak"*, **1984**, p. 246]
It is nice to know that "Mr. Libertarian" is stealing ideas from Big
Brother, and for the same reason: to make critical thought impossible by
restricting the meaning of words.

"Equality," in the context of political discussion, does not mean
"identical," it means equality of rights, respect, worth, power and so
forth. It does not imply treating everyone identically (for example,
expecting an eighty year old man to do identical work as an eighteen
violates treating both equally with respect as unique individuals).
Needless to say, no anarchist has ever advocated such a notion of
equality as being identical. As discussed in [section
A.2.5](secA2.html#seca25), anarchists have always based our arguments on
the need for social equality on the fact that, while people are
different, we all have the same right to be free and that inequality in
wealth produces inequalities of liberty. For anarchists:

> *"equality does not mean an equal amount but equal **opportunity** . .
> . Do not make the mistake of identifying equality in liberty with the
> forced equality of the convict camp. True anarchist equality implies
> freedom, not quantity. It does not mean that every one must eat,
> drink, or wear the same things, do the same work, or live in the same
> manner. Far from it: the very reverse, in fact. Individual needs and
> tastes differ, as appetites differ. It is **equal** opportunity to
> satisfy them that constitutes true equality. Far from levelling, such
> equality opens the door for the greatest possible variety of activity
> and development. For human character is diverse, and only the
> repression of this free diversity results in levelling, in uniformity
> and sameness. Free opportunity and acting out your individuality means
> development of natural dissimilarities and variations. . . . Life in
> freedom, in anarchy will do more than liberate man merely from his
> present political and economic bondage. That will be only the first
> step, the preliminary to a truly human existence."* [**What is
> Anarchism?**, pp. 164-5]

So it is precisely the diversity of individuals (their uniqueness) which
drives the anarchist support for equality, not its denial. Thus
anarchists reject the Rothbardian-Newspeak definition of equality as
meaningless. No two people are identical and so imposing "identical"
equality between them would mean treating them as **unequals**, i.e. not
having equal worth or giving them equal respect as befits them as human
beings and fellow unique individuals.

So what should we make of Rothbard's claim? It is tempting just to quote
Rousseau when he argued *"it is . . . useless to inquire whether there
is any essential connection between the two inequalities [social and
natural]; for this would be only asking, in other words, whether those
who command are necessarily better than those who obey, and if strength
of body or of mind, wisdom, or virtue are always found in particular
individuals, in proportion to their power or wealth: a question fit
perhaps to be discussed by slaves in the hearing of their masters, but
highly unbecoming to reasonable and free men in search of the truth."*
[**The Social Contract and Discourses**, p. 49] This seems applicable
when you see Rothbard proclaim that inequality of individuals will lead
to inequalities of income as *"each man will tend to earn an income
equal to his 'marginal productivity.'"* This is because *"some men"*
(and it is always men!) are *"more intelligent, others more alert and
farsighted, than the remainder of the population"* and capitalism will
*"allow the rise of these natural aristocracies."* In fact, for
Rothbard, all government, in its essence, is a conspiracy against the
superior man. [**The Logic of Action II**, p. 29 and p. 34] But a few
more points should be raised.

The uniqueness of individuals has always existed but for the vast
majority of human history we have lived in very egalitarian societies.
If social inequality did, indeed, flow from natural inequalities then
**all** societies would be marked by it. This is not the case. Indeed,
taking a relatively recent example, many visitors to the early United
States noted its egalitarian nature, something that soon changed with
the rise of capitalism (a rise dependent upon state action, we must
add). This implies that the society we live in (its rights framework,
the social relationships it generates and so forth) has far more of a
decisive impact on inequality than individual differences. Thus certain
rights frameworks will tend to magnify "natural" inequalities (assuming
that is the source of the initial inequality, rather than, say, violence
and force). As Noam Chomsky argues:

> *"Presumably it is the case that in our 'real world' some combination
> of attributes is conducive to success in responding to 'the demands of
> the economic system.' Let us agree, for the sake of discussion, that
> this combination of attributes is in part a matter of native
> endowment. Why does this (alleged) fact pose an 'intellectual dilemma'
> to egalitarians? Note that we can hardly claim much insight into just
> what the relevant combination of attributes may be . . . One might
> suppose that some mixture of avarice, selfishness, lack of concern for
> others, aggressiveness, and similar characteristics play a part in
> getting ahead and 'making it' in a competitive society based on
> capitalist principles. . . . Whatever the correct collection of
> attributes may be, we may ask what follows from the fact, if it is a
> fact, that some partially inherited combination of attributes tends to
> material success? All that follows . . . is a comment on our
> particular social and economic arrangements . . . The egalitarian
> might respond, in all such cases, that the social order should be
> changed so that the collection of attributes that tends to bring
> success no longer do so. He might even argue that in a more decent
> society, the attributes that now lead to success would be recognised
> as pathological, and that gentle persuasion might be a proper means to
> help people to overcome their unfortunate malady."* [**The Chomsky
> Reader**, p. 190]

So if we change society then the social inequalities we see today would
disappear. It is more than probable that natural difference has been
long ago been replaced with **social** inequalities, especially
inequalities of property. And as we argue in [section F.8](secF8.html)
these inequalities of property were initially the result of force,
**not** differences in ability. Thus to claim that social inequality
flows from natural differences is false as most social inequality has
flown from violence and force. This initial inequality has been
magnified by the framework of capitalist property rights and so the
inequality within capitalism is far more dependent upon, say, the
existence of wage labour rather than "natural" differences between
individuals.

This can be seen from existing society: we see that in workplaces and
across industries many, if not most, unique individuals receive
identical wages for identical work (although this often is not the case
for women and blacks, who receive less wages than male, white workers
for identical labour). Similarly, capitalists have deliberately
introduced wage inequalities and hierarchies for no other reason that to
divide and so rule the workforce (see [section D.10](secD10.html)).
Thus, if we assume egalitarianism **is** a revolt against nature, then
much of capitalist economic life is in such a revolt and when it is not,
the "natural" inequalities have usually been imposed artificially by
those in power either within the workplace or in society as a whole by
means of state intervention, property laws and authoritarian social
structures. Moreover, as we indicated in [section
C.2.5](secC2.html#secc25), anarchists have been aware of the
***collective*** nature of production within capitalism since Proudhon
wrote **What is Property?** in 1840. Rothbard ignores both the anarchist
tradition and reality when he stresses that individual differences
produce inequalities of outcome. As an economist with a firmer grasp of
the real world put it, the *"notion that wages depend on personal skill,
as expressed in the value of output, makes no sense in any organisation
where production is interdependent and joint -- which is to say it makes
no sense in virtually any organisation."* [James K. Galbraith, **Created
Unequal**, p. 263]

Thus "natural" differences do not necessarily result in inequality as
such nor do such differences have much meaning in an economy marked by
joint production. Given a different social system, "natural" differences
would be encouraged and celebrated far wider than they are under
capitalism (where hierarchy ensures the crushing of individuality rather
than its encouragement) without any reduction in social equality. At its
most basic, the elimination of hierarchy within the workplace would not
only increase freedom but also reduce inequality as the few would not be
able to monopolise the decision making process and the fruit of joint
productive activity. So the claim that "natural" differences generate
social inequalities is question begging in the extreme -- it takes the
rights framework of capitalism as a given and ignores the initial source
of inequality in property and power. Indeed, inequality of outcome or
reward is more likely to be influenced by social conditions rather than
individual differences (as would be expected in a society based on wage
labour or other forms of exploitation).

Rothbard is at pains to portray egalitarians as driven by envy of the
rich. It is hard to credit "envy" as the driving force of the likes of
Bakunin and Kropotkin who left the life of wealthy aristocrats to become
anarchists, who suffered imprisonment in their struggles for liberty for
all rather than an elite. When this is pointed out, the typical
right-wing response is to say that this shows that **real** working
class people are not socialists. In other words if you are a working
class anarchist then you are driven by envy and if not, if you reject
your class background, then you show that socialism is not a working
class movement! So driven by this assumption and hatred for socialism
Rothbard went so far as to distort Karl Marx's words to fit it into his
own ideological position. He stated that *"Marx concedes the truth of
the charge of anti-communists then and now"* that communism was the
expression of envy and a desire to reduce all to a common level. Except,
of course, Marx did nothing of the kind. In the passages Rothbard
presented as evidence for his claims, Marx is critiquing what he termed
"crude" communism (the *"this type of communism"* in the passage
Rothbard quoted but clearly did not understand) and it is, therefore,
not surprising Marx *"clearly did not stress this dark side of communist
revolution in the his later writings"* as he explicitly **rejected**
this type of communism! For Rothbard, all types of socialism seem to be
identical and identified with central planning -- hence his bizarre
comment that *"Stalin established socialism in the Soviet Union."*
[**The Logic of Action II**, pp. 394-5 and p. 200]

Another reason for "anarcho"-capitalist lack of concern for equality is
that they think that (to use Robert Nozick's expression) *"liberty
upsets patterns"*. It is argued that equality (or any *"end-state
principle of justice"*) cannot be *"continuously realised without
continuous interference with people's lives,"* i.e. can only be
maintained by restricting individual freedom to make exchanges or by
taxation of income. [**Anarchy, State, and Utopia**, pp. 160-3] However,
what this argument fails to acknowledge is that inequality also
restricts individual freedom and that the capitalist property rights
framework is not the only one possible. After all, money is power and
inequalities in terms of power easily result in restrictions of liberty
and the transformation of the majority into order takers rather than
free producers. In other words, once a certain level of inequality is
reached property does not promote, but actually conflicts with, the ends
which render private property legitimate. As we argue in [the next
section](secF3.html#secf31), inequality can easily led to the situation
where self-ownership is used to justify its own negation and so
unrestricted property rights will undermine the meaningful
self-determination which many people intuitively understand by the term
"self-ownership" (i.e., what anarchists would usually call "freedom"
rather than self-ownership). Thus private property itself leads to
continuous interference with people's lives, as does the enforcement of
Nozick's "just" distribution of property and the power that flows from
such inequality. Moreover, as many critics have noted Nozick's argument
assumes what it sets out to proves. As one put it, while Nozick may
*"wish to defend capitalist private property rights by insisting that
these are founded in basic liberties,"* in fact he *"has produced . . .
an argument for unrestricted private property using unrestricted private
property, and thus he begs the question he tries to answer."* [Andrew
Kerhohan, *"Capitalism and Self-Ownership"*, pp. 60-76, **Capitalism**,
Ellen Frankel Paul, Fred D. Miler, Jr, Jeffrey Paul and John Ahrens
(eds.), p. 71]

So in response to the claim that equality could only be maintained by
continuously interfering with people's lives, anarchists would say that
the inequalities produced by capitalist property rights also involve
extensive and continuous interference with people's lives. After all, as
Bob Black notes *"it is apparent that the source of greatest direct
duress experienced by the ordinary adult is **not** the state but rather
the business that employs him [or her]. Your foreman or supervisor gives
you more or-else orders in a week than the police do in a decade."*
[*"The Libertarian As Conservative"*, **The Abolition of Work and Other
Essays**, p. 145] For example, a worker employed by a capitalist cannot
freely exchange the machines or raw materials they have been provided
with to use but Nozick does not class this distribution of "restricted"
property rights as infringing liberty (nor does he argue that wage
slavery itself restricts freedom, of course). Thus claims that equality
involves infringing liberty ignores the fact that inequality also
infringes liberty (never mind the significant negative effects of
inequality, both of wealth and power, we discussed in [section
B.1](secB1.html)). A reorganisation of society could effectively
minimise inequalities by eliminating the major source of such
inequalities (wage labour) by self-management. We have no desire to
restrict free exchanges (after all, most anarchists desire to see the
"gift economy" become a reality sooner or later) but we argue that free
exchanges need not involve the unrestricted capitalist property rights
Nozick assumes (see [section I.5.12](secI5.html#seci512) for a
discussion of "capitalistic acts" within an anarchist society).

Rothbard, ironically, is aware of the fact that inequality restricts
freedom for the many. As he put it *"inequality of control"* is an
*"inevitable corollary of freedom"* for in any organisation *"there will
always be a minority of people who will rise to the position of leaders
and others who will remain as followers in the rank and file."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 30] To requote Bob Black: *"Some people giving orders and
others obeying them: this is the essence of servitude."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 147] Perhaps if Rothbard had spent some time in a workplace rather
than in a tenured academic post he may have realised that bosses are
rarely the natural elite he thought they were. Like the factory owner
Engels, he was blissfully unaware that it is the self-activity of the
non-"elite" on the shop floor (the product of which the boss
monopolises) that keeps the whole hierarchical structure going (as we
discuss in [section H.4.4](secH4.html#sech44), the work to rule -- were
workers do **exactly** what the boss orders them to do -- is a
devastating weapon in the class struggle). It does seem somewhat ironic
that the anti-Marxist Rothbard should has recourse to the same argument
as Engels in order to refute the anarchist case for freedom within
association! It should also be mentioned that Black has also recognised
this, noting that right-"libertarianism" and mainstream Marxism *"are as
different as Coke and Pepsi when it comes to consecrating class society
and the source of its power, work. Only upon the firm foundation of
factory fascism and office oligarchy do libertarians and Leninists dare
to debate the trivial issues dividing them."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 146]

So, as Rothbard admits, inequality produces a **class** system and
authoritarian social relationships which are rooted in ownership and
control of private property. These produce specific areas of conflict
over liberty, a fact of life which Rothbard (like other
"anarcho"-capitalists) is keen to deny as we discuss in [section
F.3.2](secF3.html#secf32). Thus, for anarchists, the
"anarcho"-capitalist opposition to equality misses the point and is
extremely question begging. Anarchists do not desire to make people
"identical" (which would be impossible and a total denial of liberty
**and** equality) but to make the social relationships between
individuals equal in **power.** In other words, they desire a situation
where people interact together without institutionalised power or
hierarchy and are influenced by each other "naturally," in proportion to
how the (individual) **differences** between (social) **equals** are
applicable in a given context. To quote Michael Bakunin, *"[t]he
greatest intelligence would not be equal to a comprehension of the
whole. Thence results . . . the necessity of the division and
association of labour. I receive and I give -- such is human life. Each
directs and is directed in his turn. Therefore there is no fixed and
constant authority, but a continual exchange of mutual, temporary, and,
above all, voluntary authority and subordination."* [**God and the
State**, p. 33]

Such an environment can only exist within self-managed associations, for
capitalism (i.e. wage labour) creates very specific relations and
institutions of authority. It is for this reason anarchists are
socialists. In other words, anarchists support equality precisely
**because** we recognise that everyone is unique. If we are serious
about "equality of rights" or "equal freedom" then conditions must be
such that people can enjoy these rights and liberties. If we assume the
right to develop one's capacities to the fullest, for example, then
inequality of resources and so power within society destroys that right
simply because most people do not have the means to freely exercise
their capacities (they are subject to the authority of the boss, for
example, during work hours).

So, in direct contrast to anarchism, right-"libertarianism" is
unconcerned about any form of equality except "equality of rights". This
blinds them to the realities of life; in particular, the impact of
economic and social power on individuals within society and the social
relationships of domination they create. Individuals may be "equal"
before the law and in rights, but they may not be free due to the
influence of social inequality, the relationships it creates and how it
affects the law and the ability of the oppressed to use it. Because of
this, all anarchists insist that equality is essential for freedom,
including those in the Individualist Anarchist tradition the
"anarcho"-capitalist tries to co-opt (*"Spooner and Godwin insist that
inequality corrupts freedom. Their anarchism is directed as much against
inequality as against tyranny"* and so *"[w]hile sympathetic to
Spooner's individualist anarchism, they [Rothbard and David Friedman]
fail to notice or conveniently overlook its egalitarian implications."*
[Stephen L. Newman, **Liberalism at Wit's End**, p. 74 and p. 76]).
Without social equality, individual freedom is so restricted that it
becomes a mockery (essentially limiting freedom of the majority to
choosing **which** master will govern them rather than being free).

Of course, by defining "equality" in such a restrictive manner,
Rothbard's own ideology is proved to be nonsense. As L.A. Rollins notes,
*"Libertarianism, the advocacy of 'free society' in which people enjoy
'equal freedom' and 'equal rights,' is actually a specific form of
egalitarianism. As such, Libertarianism itself is a revolt against
nature. If people, by their very biological nature, are unequal in all
the attributes necessary to achieving, and preserving 'freedom' and
'rights' . . . then there is no way that people can enjoy 'equal
freedom' or 'equal rights'. If a free society is conceived as a society
of 'equal freedom,' then there ain't no such thing as 'a free
society'."* [**The Myth of Natural Law**, p. 36] Under capitalism,
freedom is a commodity like everything else. The more money you have,
the greater your freedom. "Equal" freedom, in the Newspeak-Rothbardian
sense, **cannot** exist! As for "equality before the law", its clear
that such a hope is always dashed against the rocks of wealth and market
power. As far as rights go, of course, both the rich and the poor have
an "equal right" to sleep under a bridge (assuming the bridge's owner
agrees of course!); but the owner of the bridge and the homeless have
**different** rights, and so they cannot be said to have "equal rights"
in the Newspeak-Rothbardian sense either. Needless to say, poor and rich
will not "equally" use the "right" to sleep under a bridge, either.

As Bob Black observed: *"The time of your life is the one commodity you
can sell but never buy back. Murray Rothbard thinks egalitarianism is a
revolt against nature, but his day is 24 hours long, just like everybody
else's."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 147]

By twisting the language of political debate, the vast differences in
power in capitalist society can be "blamed" not on an unjust and
authoritarian system but on "biology" (we are all unique individuals,
after all). Unlike genes (although biotechnology corporations are
working on this, too!), human society **can** be changed, by the
individuals who comprise it, to reflect the basic features we all share
in common -- our humanity, our ability to think and feel, and our need
for freedom.

F.3.1 Why is this disregard for equality important?
---------------------------------------------------

Simply because a disregard for equality soon ends with liberty for the
majority being negated in many important ways. Most
"anarcho"-capitalists and right-Libertarians deny (or at best ignore)
market power. Rothbard, for example, claims that economic power does not
exist under capitalism; what people call *"economic power"* is *"simply
the right under freedom to refuse to make an exchange"* and so the
concept is meaningless. [**The Ethics of Liberty**, p. 222]

However, the fact is that there are substantial power centres in society
(and so are the source of hierarchical power and authoritarian social
relations) which are **not the state.** As Elisee Reclus put it, the
*"power of kings and emperors has limits, but that of wealth has none at
all. The dollar is the master of masters."* Thus wealth is a source of
power as *"the essential thing"* under capitalism *"is to train oneself
to pursue monetary gain, with the goal of commanding others by means of
the omnipotence of money. One's power increases in direct proportion to
one's economic resources."* [quoted by John P. Clark and Camille Martin
(eds.), **Anarchy, Geography, Modernity**, p. 95 and pp. 96-7] Thus the
central fallacy of "anarcho"-capitalism is the (unstated) assumption
that the various actors within an economy have relatively equal power.
This assumption has been noted by many readers of their works. For
example, Peter Marshall notes that *"'anarcho-capitalists' like Murray
Rothbard assume individuals would have equal bargaining power in a
[capitalist] market-based society."* [**Demanding the Impossible**, p.
46] George Walford also makes this point in his comments on David
Friedman's **The Machinery of Freedom**:

> "The private ownership envisaged by the anarcho-capitalists would be
> very different from that which we know. It is hardly going too far to
> say that while the one is nasty, the other would be nice. In
> anarcho-capitalism there would be no National Insurance, no Social
> Security, no National Health Service and not even anything
> corresponding to the Poor Laws; there would be no public safety-nets
> at all. It would be a rigorously competitive society: work, beg or
> die. But as one reads on, learning that each individual would have to
> buy, personally, all goods and services needed, not only food,
> clothing and shelter but also education, medicine, sanitation,
> justice, police, all forms of security and insurance, even permission
> to use the streets (for these also would be privately owned), as one
> reads about all this a curious feature emerges: everybody always has
> enough money to buy all these things.
>
> "There are no public casualty wards or hospitals or hospices, but
> neither is there anybody dying in the streets. There is no public
> educational system but no uneducated children, no public police
> service but nobody unable to buy the services of an efficient security
> firm, no public law but nobody unable to buy the use of a private
> legal system. Neither is there anybody able to buy much more than
> anybody else; no person or group possesses economic power over others.
>
> "No explanation is offered. The anarcho-capitalists simply take it for
> granted that in their favoured society, although it possesses no
> machinery for restraining competition (for this would need to exercise
> authority over the competitors and it is an **anarcho**- capitalist
> society) competition would not be carried to the point where anybody
> actually suffered from it. While proclaiming their system to be a
> competitive one, in which private interest rules unchecked, they show
> it operating as a co-operative one, in which no person or group
> profits at the cost of another." [**On the Capitalist Anarchists**]

This assumption of (relative) equality comes to the fore in Murray
Rothbard's "Homesteading" concept of property (discussed in [section
F.4.1](secF4.html#secf41)). "Homesteading" paints a picture of
individuals and families going into the wilderness to make a home for
themselves, fighting against the elements and so forth. It does **not**
invoke the idea of transnational corporations employing tens of
thousands of people or a population without land, resources and selling
their labour to others. Rothbard as noted argued that economic power
does not exist (at least under capitalism, as we saw in [section
F.1](secF1.html) he does make -- highly illogical -- exceptions).
Similarly, David Friedman's example of a pro-death penalty and
anti-death penalty "defence" firm coming to an agreement (see [section
F.6.3](secF6.html#secf63)) implicitly assumes that the firms have equal
bargaining powers and resources -- if not, then the bargaining process
would be very one-sided and the smaller company would think twice before
taking on the larger one in battle (the likely outcome if they cannot
come to an agreement on this issue) and so compromise.

However, the right-"libertarian" denial of market power is unsurprising.
The *"necessity, not the redundancy, of the assumption about natural
equality* is required *"if the inherent problems of contract theory are
not to become too obvious."* If some individuals **are** assumed to have
significantly more power are more capable than others, and if they are
always self-interested, then a contract that creates equal partners is
impossible -- the pact will establish an association of masters and
servants. Needless to say, the strong will present the contract as being
to the advantage of both: the strong no longer have to labour (and
become rich, i.e. even stronger) and the weak receive an income and so
do not starve. [Carole Pateman, **The Sexual Contract**, p. 61] So if
freedom is considered as a function of ownership then it is very clear
that individuals lacking property (outside their own body, of course)
lose effective control over their own person and labour (which was,
least we forget, the basis of their equal natural rights). When ones
bargaining power is weak (which is typically the case in the labour
market) exchanges tend to magnify inequalities of wealth and power over
time rather than working towards an equalisation.

In other words, "contract" need not replace power if the bargaining
position and wealth of the would-be contractors are not equal (for, if
the bargainers had equal power it is doubtful they would agree to sell
control of their liberty/labour to another). This means that "power" and
"market" are not antithetical terms. While, in an abstract sense, all
market relations are voluntary in practice this is not the case within a
capitalist market. A large company has a comparative advantage over
smaller ones, communities and individual workers which will definitely
shape the outcome of any contract. For example, a large company or rich
person will have access to more funds and so stretch out litigations and
strikes until their opponents resources are exhausted. Or, if a company
is polluting the environment, the local community may put up with the
damage caused out of fear that the industry (which it depends upon)
would relocate to another area. If members of the community **did** sue,
then the company would be merely exercising its property rights when it
threatened to move to another location. In such circumstances, the
community would "freely" consent to its conditions or face massive
economic and social disruption. And, similarly, *"the landlords' agents
who threatened to discharge agricultural workers and tenants who failed
to vote the reactionary ticket"* in the 1936 Spanish election were just
exercising their legitimate property rights when they threatened working
people and their families with economic uncertainty and distress.
[Murray Bookchin, **The Spanish Anarchists**, p. 260]

If we take the labour market, it is clear that the "buyers" and
"sellers" of labour power are rarely on an equal footing (if they were,
then capitalism would soon go into crisis -- see [section
C.7](secC7.html)). As we stressed in [section C.9](secC9.html), under
capitalism competition in labour markets is typically skewed in favour
of employers. Thus the ability to refuse an exchange weighs most heavily
on one class than another and so ensures that "free exchange" works to
ensure the domination (and so exploitation) of one by the other.
Inequality in the market ensures that the decisions of the majority of
people within it are shaped in accordance with that needs of the
powerful, not the needs of all. It was for this reason, for example,
that the Individual Anarchist J.K. Ingalls opposed Henry George's
proposal of nationalising the land. Ingalls was well aware that the rich
could outbid the poor for leases on land and so the dispossession of the
working class would continue.

The market, therefore, does not end power or unfreedom -- they are still
there, but in different forms. And for an exchange to be truly
voluntary, both parties must have equal power to accept, reject, or
influence its terms. Unfortunately, these conditions are rarely meet on
the labour market or within the capitalist market in general. Thus
Rothbard's argument that economic power does not exist fails to
acknowledge that the rich can out-bid the poor for resources and that a
corporation generally has greater ability to refuse a contract (with an
individual, union or community) than vice versa (and that the impact of
such a refusal is such that it will encourage the others involved to
compromise far sooner). In such circumstances, formally free individuals
will have to "consent" to be unfree in order to survive. Looking at the
tread-mill of modern capitalism, at what we end up tolerating for the
sake of earning enough money to survive it comes as no surprise that
anarchists have asked whether the market is serving us or are we serving
it (and, of course, those who have positions of power within it).

So inequality cannot be easily dismissed. As Max Stirner pointed out,
free competition *"is not 'free,' because I lack the **things** for
competition."* Due to this basic inequality of wealth (of "things") we
find that *"[u]nder the **regime** of the commonality the labourers
always fall into the hands of the possessors . . . of the capitalists,
therefore. The labourer cannot **realise** on his labour to the extent
of the value that it has for the customer . . . The capitalist has the
greatest profit from it."* [**The Ego and Its Own**, p. 262 and p. 115]
It is interesting to note that even Stirner recognised that capitalism
results in exploitation and that its roots lie in inequalities in
property and so power. And we may add that value the labourer does not
*"realise"* goes into the hands of the capitalists, who invest it in
more "things" and which consolidates and increases their advantage in
"free" competition. To quote Stephan L. Newman:

> *"Another disquieting aspect of the libertarians' refusal to
> acknowledge power in the market is their failure to confront the
> tension between freedom and autonomy. . . Wage labour under capitalism
> is, of course, formally free labour. No one is forced to work at gun
> point. Economic circumstance, however, often has the effect of force;
> it compels the relatively poor to accept work under conditions
> dictated by owners and managers. The individual worker retains freedom
> [i.e. negative liberty] but loses autonomy [positive liberty]."*
> [**Liberalism at Wit's End**, pp. 122-123]

If we consider "equality before the law" it is obvious that this also
has limitations in an (materially) unequal society. Brian Morris notes
that for Ayn Rand, *"[u]nder capitalism . . . politics (state) and
economics (capitalism) are separated . . . This, of course, is pure
ideology, for Rand's justification of the state is that it 'protects'
private property, that is, it supports and upholds the economic power of
capitalists by coercive means."* [**Ecology & Anarchism**, p. 189] The
same can be said of "anarcho"-capitalism and its "protection agencies"
and *"general libertarian law code."* If within a society a few own all
the resources and the majority are dispossessed, then any law code which
protects private property **automatically** empowers the owning class.
Workers will **always** be initiating force if they rebel against their
bosses or act against the code and so equality before the law" reflects
and reinforces inequality of power and wealth. This means that a system
of property rights protects the liberties of some people in a way which
gives them an unacceptable degree of power over others. And this
critique cannot be met merely by reaffirming the rights in question, we
have to assess the relative importance of the various kinds of liberty
and other values we hold dear.

Therefore right-"libertarian" disregard for equality is important
because it allows "anarcho"-capitalism to ignore many important
restrictions of freedom in society. In addition, it allows them to brush
over the negative effects of their system by painting an unreal picture
of a capitalist society without vast extremes of wealth and power
(indeed, they often construe capitalist society in terms of an ideal --
namely artisan production -- that is **pre**-capitalist and whose social
basis has been eroded by capitalist development). Inequality shapes the
decisions we have available and what ones we make:

> *"An 'incentive' is always available in conditions of substantial
> social inequality that ensure that the 'weak' enter into a contract.
> When social inequality prevails, questions arise about what counts as
> voluntary entry into a contract. This is why socialists and feminists
> have focused on the conditions of entry into the employment contract
> and the marriage contract. Men and women . . . are now juridically
> free and equal citizens, but, in unequal social conditions, the
> possibility cannot be ruled out that some or many contracts create
> relationships that bear uncomfortable resemblances to a slave
> contract."* [Carole Pateman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 62]

This ideological confusion of right-libertarianism can also be seen from
their opposition to taxation. On the one hand, they argue that taxation
is wrong because it takes money from those who "earn" it and gives it to
the poor. On the other hand, "free market" capitalism is assumed to be a
more equal society! If taxation takes from the rich and gives to the
poor, how will "anarcho"-capitalism be more egalitarian? That
equalisation mechanism would be gone (of course, it could be claimed
that all great riches are purely the result of state intervention
skewing the "free market" but that places all their "rags to riches"
stories in a strange position). Thus we have a problem: either we have
relative equality or we do not. Either we have riches, and so market
power, or we do not. And its clear from the likes of Rothbard,
"anarcho"-capitalism will not be without its millionaires (there is,
according to him, apparently nothing un-libertarian about *"hierarchy,
wage-work, granting of funds by libertarian millionaires, and a
libertarian party"* [quoted by Black, **Op. Cit.**, p. 142]). And so we
are left with market power and so extensive unfreedom.

Thus, for a ideology that denounces egalitarianism as a *"revolt against
nature"* it is pretty funny that they paint a picture of
"anarcho"-capitalism as a society of (relative) equals. In other words,
their propaganda is based on something that has never existed, and never
will: an egalitarian capitalist society. Without the implicit assumption
of equality which underlies their rhetoric then the obvious limitations
of their vision of "liberty" become too obvious. Any real laissez-faire
capitalism would be unequal and *"those who have wealth and power would
only increase their privileges, while the weak and poor would go to the
wall . . . Right-wing libertarians merely want freedom for themselves to
protect their privileges and to exploit others."* [Peter Marshall, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 653]

F.3.2 Can there be harmony of interests in an unequal society?
--------------------------------------------------------------

Like the right-liberalism it is derived from, "anarcho"-capitalism is
based on the concept of *"harmony of interests"* which was advanced by
the likes of Frédéric Bastiat in the 19th century and Rothbard's mentor
Ludwig von Mises in the 20th. For Rothbard, *"all classes live in
harmony through the voluntary exchange of goods and services that
mutually benefits them all."* This meant that capitalists and workers
have no antagonistic class interests [**Classical Economics: An Austrian
Perspective on the History of Economic Thought**, Vol. 2, p. 380 and p.
382]

For Rothbard, class interest and conflict does not exist within
capitalism, except when it is supported by state power. It was, he
asserted, *"fallacious to employ such terms as 'class interests' or
'class conflict' in discussing the market economy."* This was because of
two things: *"harmony of interests of different groups"* **and** *"lack
of homogeneity among the interests of any one social class."* It is only
in *"relation to **state** action that the interests of different men
become welded into 'classes'."* This means that the *"homogeneity
**emerges from** the interventions of the government into society."*
[**Conceived in Liberty**, vol. 1, p. 261] So, in other words, class
conflict is impossible under capitalism because of the wonderful
coincidence that there are, simultaneously, both common interests
between individuals and classes and lack of any!

You do not need to be an anarchist or other socialist to see that this
argument is nonsense. Adam Smith, for example, simply recorded reality
when he noted that workers and bosses have *"interests [which] are by no
means the same. The workmen desire to get as much, the masters to give
as little as possible. The former are disposed to combine in order to
raise, the latter to lower the wages of labour."* [**The Wealth of
Nations**, p. 58] The state, Smith recognised, was a key means by which
the property owning class maintained their position in society. As such,
it **reflects** economic class conflict and interests and does not
**create** it (this is **not** to suggest that economic class is the
only form of social hierarchy of course, just an extremely important
one). American workers, unlike Rothbard, were all too aware of the truth
in Smith's analysis. For example, one group argued in 1840 that the
bosses *"hold us then at their mercy, and make us work solely for their
profit . . . The capitalist has no other interest in us, than to get as
much labour out of us as possible. We are hired men, and hired men, like
hired horses, have no souls."* Thus *"their interests as capitalist, and
ours as labourers, are directly opposite"* and *"in the nature of
things, hostile, and irreconcilable."* [quoted by Christopher L.
Tomlins, **Law, Labor, and Ideology in the Early American Republic**, p.
10] Then there is Alexander Berkman's analysis:

> "It is easy to understand why the masters don't want you to be
> organised, why they are afraid of a real labour union. They know very
> well that a strong, fighting union can compel higher wages and better
> conditions, which means less profit for the plutocrats. That is why
> they do everything in their power to stop labour from organising . . .
>
> "The masters have found a very effective way to paralyse the strength
> of organised labour. They have persuaded the workers that they have
> the same interests as the employers . . . and what is good for the
> employer is also good for his employees . . . If your interests are
> the same as those of your boss, then why should you fight him? That is
> what they tell you . . . It is good for the industrial magnates to
> have their workers believe [this] . . . [as they] will not think of
> fighting their masters for better conditions, but they will be patient
> and wait till the employer can 'share his prosperity' with them . . .
> If you listen to your exploiters and their mouthpieces you will be
> 'good' and consider only the interests of your masters . . . but no
> one cares about **your** interests . . . 'Don't be selfish,' they
> admonish you, while the boss is getting rich by your being good and
> unselfish. And they laugh in their sleeves and thank the Lord that you
> are such an idiot.
>
> "But . . . the interests of capital and labour are not the same. No
> greater lie was ever invented than the so-called 'identity of
> interests' . . . It is clear that . . . they are entirely opposite, in
> fact antagonistic to each other." [**What is Anarchism?**, pp. 74-5]

That Rothbard denies this says a lot about the power of ideology.

Rothbard was clear what unions do, namely limit the authority of the
boss and ensure that workers keep more of the surplus value they
produce. As he put it, unions *"attempt to persuade workers that they
can better their lot at the expense of the employer. Consequently, they
invariably attempt as much as possible to establish work rules that
hinder management's directives . . . In other words, instead of agreeing
to submit to the work orders of management in exchange for his pay, the
worker now set up not only minimum wages, but also work rules without
which they refuse to work."* This will *"lower output."* [**The Logic of
Action II**, p. 40 and p. 41] Notice the assumption, that the income of
and authority of the boss are sacrosanct.

For Rothbard, unions lower productivity and harm profits because they
contest the authority of the boss to do what they like on their property
(apparently, laissez-faire was not applicable for working class people
during working hours). Yet this implicitly acknowledges that there
**are** conflicts of interests between workers and bosses. It does not
take too much thought to discover possible conflicts of interests which
could arise between workers who seek to maximise their wages and
minimise their labour and bosses who seek to minimise their wage costs
and maximise the output their workers produce. It could be argued that
if workers do win this conflict of interests then their bosses will go
out of business and so they harm themselves by not obeying their
industrial masters. The rational worker, in this perspective, would be
the one who best understood that his or her interests have become the
same as the interests of the boss because his or her prosperity will
depend on how well their firm is doing. In such cases, they will put the
interest of the firm before their own and not hinder the boss by
questioning their authority. If that is the case, then "harmony of
interests" simply translates as "bosses know best" and "do what you are
told" -- and such obedience is a fine "harmony" for the order giver we
are sure!

So the interesting thing is that Rothbard's perspective produces a
distinctly servile conclusion. If workers do not have a conflict of
interests with their bosses then, obviously, the logical thing for the
employee is to do whatever their boss orders them to do. By serving
their master, they automatically benefit themselves. In contrast,
anarchists have rejected such a position. For example, William Godwin
rejected capitalist private property precisely because of the *"spirit
of oppression, the spirit of servility, and the spirit of fraud"* it
produced. [**An Enquiry into Political Justice**, p. 732]

Moreover, we should note that Rothbard's diatribe against unions also
implicitly acknowledges the socialist critique of capitalism which
stresses that it is being subject to the authority of boss during work
hours which makes exploitation possible (see [section C.2](secC2.html)).
If wages represented the workers' "marginal" contribution to production,
bosses would not need to ensure their orders were followed. So any real
boss fights unions precisely because they limit their ability to extract
as much product as possible from the worker for the agreed wage. As
such, the hierarchical social relations within the workplace ensure that
there are no *"harmony of interests"* as the key to a successful
capitalist firm is to minimise wage costs in order to maximise profits.
It should also be noted that Rothbard has recourse to another concept
"Austrian" economists claims to reject during his anti-union comments.
Somewhat ironically, he appeals to equilibrium analysis as, apparently,
*"wage rates on the non-union labour market will always tend toward
equilibrium in a smooth and harmonious manner"* (in another essay, he
opines that *"in the Austrian tradition . . . the entrepreneur
harmoniously adjusts the economy in the direction of equilibrium"*).
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 41 and p. 234] True, he does not say that the wages
will reach equilibrium (and what stops them, unless, in part, it is the
actions of entrepreneurs disrupting the economy?) however, it is strange
that the labour market can approximate a situation which Austrian
economists claim does not exist! However, as noted in [section
C.1.6](secC1.html#secc16) this fiction is required to hide the obvious
economic power of the boss class under capitalism.

Somewhat ironically, given his claims of *"harmony of interests,"*
Rothbard was well aware that landlords and capitalists have always used
the state to further their interests. However, he preferred to call this
*"mercentilism"* rather than capitalism. As such, it is amusing to read
his short article *"Mercentilism: A Lesson for Our Times?"* as it
closely parallels Marx's classic account of *"Primitive Accumulation"*
contained in volume 1 of **Capital**. [Rothbard, **Op. Cit.**, pp.
43-55] The key difference is that Rothbard simply refused to see this
state action as creating the necessary preconditions for his beloved
capitalism nor does it seem to impact on his mantra of *"harmony of
interests"* between classes. In spite of documenting exactly how the
capitalist and landlord class used the state to enrich themselves at the
expense of the working class, he refuses to consider how this refutes
any claim of *"harmony of interests"* between exploiter and exploited.

Rothbard rightly notes that mercantilism involved the *"use of the state
to cripple or prohibit one's competition."* This applies to both foreign
capitalists and to the working class who are, of course, competitors in
terms of how income is divided. Unlike Marx, he simply failed to see how
mercantilist policies were instrumental for building an industrial
economy and creating a proletariat. Thus he thunders against
mercantilism for *"lowering interest rates artificially"* and promoting
inflation which *"did not benefit the poor"* as *"wages habitually
lagged behind the rise in prices."* He describes the *"desperate
attempts by the ruling classes to coerce wages below their market
rates."* Somewhat ironically, given the "anarcho"-capitalist opposition
to legal holidays, he noted the mercantilists *"dislike of holidays, by
which the 'nation' was deprived of certain amounts of labour; the desire
of the individual worker for leisure was never considered worthy of
note."* So why were such "bad" economic laws imposed? Simply because the
landlords and capitalists were in charge of the state. As Rothbard
notes, *"this was clearly legislation for the benefit of the feudal
landlords and to the detriment of the workers"* while Parliament *"was
heavily landlord-dominated."* In Massachusetts the upper house consisted
*"of the wealthiest merchants and landowners."* The mercantilists, he
notes but does not ponder, *"were frankly interested in exploiting [the
workers'] labour to the utmost."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 44, p. 46, p. 47, p.
51, p. 48, p. 51, p. 47, p. 54 and p. 47] Yet these policies made
perfect sense from their class perspective, they were essential for
maximising a surplus (profits) which was subsequently invested in
developing industry. As such, they were very successful and laid the
foundation for the industrial capitalism of the 19th century. The key
change between mercantilism and capitalism proper is that economic power
is greater as the working class has been successfully dispossessed from
the means of life and, as such, political power need not be appealed to
as often and can appear, in rhetoric at least, defensive.

Discussing attempts by employers in Massachusetts in 1670 and 1672 to
get the state to enforce a maximum wage Rothbard opined that there
*"seemed to be no understanding of how wages are set in an unhampered
market."* [**Conceived in Liberty**, vol. 2, p. 18] On the contrary,
dear professor, the employers were perfectly aware of how wages were set
in a market where workers have the upper hand and, consequently, sought
to use the state to hamper the market. As they have constantly done
since the dawn of capitalism as, unlike certain economists, they are
fully aware of the truth of *"harmony of interests"* and acted
accordingly. As we document in [section F.8](secF8.html), the history of
capitalism is filled with the capitalist class using the state to
enforce the kind of *"harmony of interests"* which masters have always
sought -- obedience. This statist intervention has continued to this day
as, in practice, the capitalist class has never totally relied on
economic power to enforce its rule due to the instability of the
capitalist market -- see [section C.7](secC7.html) -- as well as the
destructive effects of market forces on society and the desire to
bolster its position in the economy at the expense of the working class
-- see [section D.1](secD1.html). That the history and current practice
of capitalism was not sufficient to dispel Rothbard of his *"harmony of
interests"* position is significant. But, as Rothbard was always at
pains to stress as a good "Austrian" economist, empirical testing does
not prove or disprove a theory and so the history and practice of
capitalism matters little when evaluating the pros and cons of that
system (unless its history confirms Rothbard's ideology then he does
make numerous empirical statements).

For Rothbard, the obvious **class** based need for such policies is
missing. Instead, we get the pathetic comment that only *"certain"*
merchants and manufacturers *"benefited from these mercantilist laws."*
[**The Logic of Action II**, p. 44] He applied this same myopic
perspective to "actually existing" capitalism as well, of course,
lamenting the use of the state by certain capitalists as the product of
economic ignorance and/or special interests specific to the capitalists
in question. He simply could not see the forest for the trees. This is
hardly a myopia limited to Rothbard. Bastiat formulated his *"harmony of
interests"* theory precisely when the class struggle between workers and
capitalists had become a threat to the social order, when socialist
ideas of all kinds (including anarchism, which Bastiat explicitly
opposed) were spreading and the labour movement was organising illegally
due to state bans in most countries. As such, he was propagating the
notion that workers and bosses had interests in common when, in
practice, it was most obviously the case they had not. What "harmony"
that did exist was due to state repression of the labour movement,
itself a strange necessity if labour and capital **did** share
interests.

The history of capitalism causes problems within "anarcho"-capitalism as
it claims that everyone benefits from market exchanges and that this,
not coercion, produces faster economic growth. If this **is** the case,
then why did some individuals reject the market in order to enrich
themselves by political means and, logically, impoverish themselves in
the long run (and it has been an **extremely** long run)? And why have
the economically dominant class generally also been the ones to control
the state? After all, if there are no class interests or conflict then
why has the property owning classes always sought state aid to skew the
economy in its interests? If the classes **did** have harmonious
interests then they would have no need to bolster their position nor
would they seek to. Yet state policy has always reflected the needs of
the property-owning elite -- subject to pressures from below, of course
(as Rothbard rather lamely notes, without pondering the obvious
implications, the *"peasantry and the urban labourers and artisans were
never able to control the state apparatus and were therefore at the
bottom of the state-organised pyramid and exploited by the ruling
groups."* [**Conceived in Liberty**, vol. 1, p. 260]). It is no
coincidence that the working classes have not been able to control the
state nor that legislation is *"grossly the favourer of the rich against
the poor."* [William Godwin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 93] They **are** the ones
passing the laws, after all. This long and continuing anti-labour
intervention in the market does, though, place Rothbard's opinion that
government is a conspiracy against the superior man in a new light!

So when right-"libertarians" assert that there are *"harmony of
interests"* between classes in an unhampered market, anarchists simply
reply by pointing out that the very fact we have a "hampered" market
shows that no such thing exists within capitalism. It will be argued, of
course, that the right-"libertarian" is against state intervention for
the capitalists (beyond defending their property which is a significant
use of state power in and of itself) and that their political ideas aim
to stop it. Which is true (and why a revolution would be needed to
implement it!). However, the very fact that the capitalist class has
habitually turned to the state to bolster its economic power is
precisely the issue as it shows that the right-"libertarian" harmony of
interests (on which they place so much stress as the foundation of their
new order) simply does not exist. If it did, then the property owning
class would never have turned to the state in the first place nor would
it have tolerated "certain" of its members doing so.

If there were harmony of interests between classes, then the bosses
would not turn to death squads to kill rebel workers as they have
habitually done (and it should be stressed that libertarian union
organisers have been assassinated by bosses and their vigilantes,
including the lynching of IWW members and business organised death
squads against CNT members in Barcelona). This use of private and public
violence should not be surprising, for, at the very least, as Mexican
anarchist Ricardo Flores Magon noted, there can be no real fraternity
between classes *"because the possessing class is always disposed to
perpetuate the economic, political, and social system that guarantees it
the tranquil enjoyment of its plunders, while the working class makes
efforts to destroy this iniquitous system."* [**Dreams of Freedom**, p.
139]

Rothbard's obvious hatred of unions and strikes can be explained by his
ideological commitment to the *"harmony of interests."* This is because
strikes and the need of working class people to organise gives the lie
to the doctrine of *"harmony of interests"* between masters and workers
that apologists for capitalism like Rothbard suggested underlay
industrial relations. Worse, they give credibility to the notion that
there exists opposed interests between classes. Strangely, Rothbard
himself provides more than enough evidence to refute his own dogmas when
he investigates state intervention on the market.

Every ruling class seeks to deny that it has interests separate from the
people under it. Significantly those who deny class struggle the most
are usually those who practice it the most (for example, Mussolini,
Pinochet and Thatcher all proclaimed the end of class struggle while, in
America, the Republican-right denounces anyone who points out the
results of **their** class war on the working class as advocating "class
war"). The elite has long been aware, as Black Nationalist Steve Biko
put it, that the *"most potent weapon in the hands of the oppressor is
the mind of the oppressed."* Defenders of slavery and serfdom presented
it as god's will and that the master's duty was to treat the slave well
just as the slave's duty was to obey (while, of course, blaming the
slave if the master did not hold up his side of the covenant). So every
hierarchical system has its own version of the *"harmony of interests"*
position and each hierarchical society which replaces the last mocks the
previous incarnations of it while, at the same time, solemnly announcing
that **this** society truly does have harmony of interests as its
founding principle. Capitalism is no exception, with many economists
repeating the mantra that every boss has proclaimed from the dawn of
time, namely that workers and their masters have common interests. As
usual, it is worthwhile to quote Rothbard on this matter. He (rightly)
takes to task a defender of the slave master's version of *"harmony of
interests"* and, in so doing, exposes the role of economics under
capitalism. To quote Rothbard:

> "The increasing alienation of the slaves and the servants led . . .
> the oligarchy to try to win their allegiance by rationalising their
> ordeal as somehow natural, righteous, and divine. So have tyrants
> always tried to dupe their subjects into approving -- or at least
> remaining resigned to -- their fate . . . Servants, according to the
> emphatically non-servant [Reverend Samuel] Willard, were duty-bound to
> revere and obey their masters, to serve them diligently and
> cheerfully, and to be patient and submissive even to the cruellest
> master. A convenient ideology indeed for the masters! . . . All the
> subjects must do, in short, was to surrender their natural born gift
> of freedom and independence, to subject themselves completely to the
> whims and commands of others, who could then be blindly trusted to
> 'take care' of them permanently . . .
>
> "Despite the myths of ideology and the threats of the whip, servants
> and slaves found many ways of protest and rebellion. Masters were
> continually denouncing servants for being disobedient, sullen, and
> lazy." [**Conceived in Liberty**, vol. 2, pp. 18-19]

Change Reverend Samuel Willard to the emphatically non-worker Professor
Murray Rothbard and we have a very succinct definition of the role his
economics plays within capitalism. There are differences. The key one
was that while Willard wanted permanent servitude, Rothbard sought a
temporary form and allowed the worker to change masters. While Willard
turned to the whip and the state, Rothbard turned to absolute private
property and the capitalist market to ensure that workers had to sell
their liberty to the boss class (unsurprisingly, as Willard lived in an
economy whose workers had access to land and tools while in Rothbard's
time the class monopolisation of the means of life was complete and
workers have little alternative but to sell their liberty to the owning
class).

Rothbard did not seek to ban unions and strikes. He argued that his
system of absolute property rights would simply make it nearly
impossible for unions to organise or for any form of collective action
to succeed. Even basic picketing would be impossible for, as Rothbard
noted many a time, the pavement outside the workplace would be owned by
the boss who would be as unlikely to allow picketing as he would allow a
union. Thus we would have private property and economic power making
collective struggle **de facto** illegal rather than the **de jure**
illegality which the state has so enacted on behalf of the capitalists.
As he put it, while unions were *"theoretically compatible with the
existence of a purely free market"* he doubted that it would be possible
as unions relied on the state to be "neutral" and tolerate their
activities as they *"acquire almost all their power through the wielding
of force, specifically force against strike-beakers and against the
property of employers."* [**The Logic of Action II**, p. 41] Thus we
find right-"libertarians" in favour of "defensive" violence (i.e., that
limited to defending the property and power of the capitalists and
landlords) while denouncing as violence any action of those subjected to
it.

Rothbard, of course, allowed workers to leave their employment in order
to seek another job if they felt exploited. Yet for all his obvious
hatred of unions and strikes, Rothbard does not ask the most basic
question -- if there is not clash of interests between labour and
capital then why do unions even exist and why do bosses always resist
them (often brutally)? And why has capital always turned to the state to
bolster its position in the labour market? If there were really harmony
of interests between classes then capital would not have turned
repeatedly to the state to crush the labour movement. For anarchists,
the reasons are obvious as is why the bosses always deny any clash of
interests for *"it is to the interests of capital to keep the workers
from understanding that they are wage slaves. The 'identity of
interest'; swindle is one of the means of doing it . . . All those who
profit from wage slavery are interested in keeping up the system, and
all of them naturally try to prevent the workers from understanding the
situation."* [Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 77]

Rothbard's vociferous anti-unionism and his obvious desire to make any
form of collective action by workers impossible in practice if not in
law shows how economics has replaced religion as a control mechanism. In
any hierarchical system it makes sense for the masters to indoctrinate
the servant class with such self-serving nonsense but only capitalists
have the advantage that it is proclaimed a "science" rather than, say, a
religion. Yet even here, the parallels are close. As Colin Ward noted in
passing, the *"so-called Libertarianism of the political Right"* is
simply *"the worship of the market economy."* [**Talking Anarchy**, p.
76] So while Willard appealed to god as the basis of his natural order,
Rothbard appeal to "science" was nothing of the kind given the
ideological apriorism of "Austrian" economics. As a particularly
scathing reviewer of one of his economics books rightly put it, the
*"main point of the book is to show that the never-never land of the
perfectly free market economy represents the best of all conceivable
worlds giving maximum satisfaction to all participants. Whatever is, is
right in the free market . . . It would appear that Professor Rothbard's
book is more akin to systematic theology than economics . . . its real
interest belongs to the student of the sociology of religion."* [D.N.
Winch, **The Economic Journal**, vol. 74, No. 294, pp. 481-2]

To conclude, it is best to quote Emma Goldman's biting dismissal of the
right-liberal individualism that Rothbard's ideology is just another
form of. She rightly attacked that *"'rugged individualism' which is
only a masked attempt to repress and defeat the individual and his
individuality. So-called Individualism is the social and economic
**laissez-faire**: the exploitation of the masses by classes by means of
trickery, spiritual debasement and systematic indoctrination of the
servile spirit . . . That corrupt and perverse 'individualism' is the
strait-jacket of individuality . . . This 'rugged individualism' has
inevitably resulted in the greatest modern slavery, the crassest class
distinctions . . . 'Rugged individualism' has meant all the
'individualism' for the masters, while the people are regimented into a
slave caste to serve a handful of self-seeking 'supermen' . . . [and] in
whose name political tyranny and social oppression are defended and held
up as virtues while every aspiration and attempt of man to gain freedom
and social opportunity to live is denounced as . . . evil in the name of
that same individualism."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 112]

So, to conclude. Both the history and current practice of capitalism
shows that there can be no harmony of interests in an unequal society.
Anyone who claims otherwise has not been paying attention.
