G.2 Why do individualist anarchists reject social anarchism?
============================================================

As noted in the [last section](secG1.html), the individualist anarchists
considered themselves as anti-capitalists and many called themselves
mutualists and socialists. It may be objected that they opposed the more
obviously socialist types of anarchism like communist-anarchism and, as
a consequence, should be considered as supporters of capitalism. This is
not the case as can be seen from **why** they rejected
communist-anarchism. The key thing to remember is that capitalism does
not equal the market. So while the individualist anarchists advocated a
market economy, it *"is evident from their writings that they rejected
both capitalism and communism -- as did Proudhon."* [Brian Morris,
*"Global Anti-Capitalism"*, pp. 170-6, **Anarchist Studies**, vol. 14,
no. 2, p. 175]

It should noted that while Tucker came to excommunicate
non-individualist forms of anarchism from the movement, his initial
comments on the likes of Bakunin and Kropotkin were very favourable. He
reprinted articles by Kropotkin from his paper **La Revolte**, for
example, and discussed *"the Anarchistic philosophy, as developed by the
great Proudhon and actively propagated by the heroic Bakunin and his
successors on both sides of the Atlantic."* [**Liberty**, no. 26, p. 3]
After the rise of the IWPA in the early 1880s and the Haymarket police
riot of 1886, Tucker changed his position. Now it was a case that the
*"Anarchistic social ideal"* was *"utterly inconsistent with that of
those Communists who falsely call themselves Anarchists while at the
same time advocating a **regime** of Archism fully as despotic as that
of the State Socialists themselves."* For Tucker, real anarchists did
not advocate, like communist anarchists, *"forcible expropriation"* nor
*"force as a revolutionary agent and authority as a safeguard of the new
social order."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, pp. 88-9] As will
become clear, Tucker's summation of communist-anarchism leaves a lot to
be desired. However, even after the break between individualist and
communist anarchism in America, Tucker saw that both had things in
common as both were socialists:

> *"To be sure, there is a certain and very sincere comradeship that
> must exist between all honest antagonists of the exploitation of
> labour, but the word comrade cannot gloss over the vital difference
> between so-called Communist-Anarchism and Anarchism proper."*
> [**Liberty**, no. 172, p. 1]

Social anarchists would agree with Tucker in part, namely the need not
to gloss over vital differences between anarchist schools but most
reject Tucker's attempts to exclude other tendencies from *"Anarchism
proper."* Instead, they would agree with Kropotkin and, while
disagreeing with certain aspects of the theory, refuse to excommunicate
him from the anarchist movement. As we discuss in [section
G.2.5](secG2.html#secg25), few anarchists agreed with Tucker's
sectarianism at the time and communist-anarchism was, and remains, the
dominant tendency within anarchism.

It is these disagreements to which we now turn. It should be stressed,
though, that the individualist anarchists, while tending to
excommunicate social anarchism, also had many inclusive moments and so
it makes these objections often seem petty and silly. Yes, there was
certainly pettiness involved and it worked both ways and there was a
certain amount of tit-for-tat, just as there is now (although to a much
lesser degree these days). Anarchist-communist opposition to what some
of them sadly called *"bourgeois anarchism"* was a fact, as was
individualist anarchist opposition to communist-anarchism. Yet this
should not blind us to what both schools had in common. However, if it
were not for some opponents of anarchism (particularly those seeking to
confuse libertarian ideas with propertarian ones) dragging these (mostly
resolved) disagreements back into the light of day this section would be
a lot shorter. As it is, covering these disagreements and showing how
they could be resolved is a useful task -- if only to show how
individualist and communist anarchism are not as alien as some make out.

There were four main objections made to communist-anarchism by the
individualists. Firstly, that communist-anarchism was compulsory and any
compulsory system could not be anarchist. Secondly, that a revolution
would be imposing anarchism and so contradicted its principles. Thirdly,
that distribution by need was based on altruism and, consequently,
unlikely to succeed. Fourthly, that the communist-anarchists are
determining how a free society would be organised which is
authoritarian. Needless to say, communist-anarchists rejected these
claims as being false and while we have already sketched these
arguments, objections and replies in [section A.3.1](secA3.html#seca31)
it is worthwhile to repeat (and expand on) them here as these
disagreements are sometimes highlighted by those who fail to stress what
both schools have in common and, consequently, distort the debates and
issues involved.

We will discuss these objections in the following sections.

G.2.1 Is communist-anarchism compulsory?
----------------------------------------

Some individualist anarchists argued that communist-anarchists wanted to
force everyone to be communists and, as such, this proved they were not
anarchists. This objection is, ironically, both the most serious **and**
the easiest to refute. As Tucker noted, *"to eliminate the compulsory
element from Communism is to remove, in the view of every man who values
liberty above aught else, the **chief** objection to it."* [**Liberty**,
no. 122, p. 5] For Henry Appleton, there was *"a class of ranting
enthusiasts who falsely call themselves Anarchists"* who advocated both
violence and *"levelling"*. *"All Communism,"* he asserted, *"under
whatever guise, is the natural enemy of Anarchism and a Communist
sailing under the flag of Anarchism is as false a figure as could be
invented."* Yet, ironically, A. H. Simpson disproved that particular
claim for while attacking communism he ended by stating his *"argument
applies only to aggressive Communists"* and that *"[v]oluntary Communism
can exist and, if successful, flourish under Anarchy."* So, apparently,
**some** kinds of communism are compatible with anarchism after all!
Victor Yarrows, likewise, pointed to *"two different schools"* of
communists, those who support *"voluntary Communism, which they intend
to reach by the Anarchistic method"* and those who *"plot the forcible
suppression of the entire system"* of private property. Only the former
was *"voluntary or Anarchistic Communism."* [**The Individualist
Anarchists**, pp. 89-90, p. 94, p. 95 and p. 96]

This, it should be noted, is more than enough to disprove any claims
that genuine anarchists cannot be communists.

So, the question is whether communist-anarchists are in favour of
forcing people to be communists. If their communism is based on
voluntary association then, according to the Individualist Anarchists
themselves, it is a form of anarchism. Unsurprisingly, we discover that
communist-anarchists have long argued that their communism was voluntary
in nature and that working people who did not desire to be communists
would be free not to be.

This position can be found in Kropotkin, from his earliest writings to
his last. Thus we discover him arguing that an anarchist revolution
*"would take care not to touch the holding of the peasant who cultivates
it himself . . . without wage labour. But we would expropriate all land
that was not cultivated by the hands of those who at present possess the
land."* This was compatible with communism because libertarian
communists aimed at *"the complete expropriation of all those who have
the means of exploiting human beings; the return to the community of the
nation of everything that in the hands of anyone can be used to exploit
others."* Following Proudhon's analysis, private property was different
from individual possession and as long as *"social wealth remains in the
hands of the few who possess it today"* there would be exploitation.
Instead, the aim was to see such social wealth currently monopolised by
the capitalist class *"being placed, on the day of the revolution, at
the free disposition of all the workers."* This would *"create the
situation where each person may live by working freely, without being
forced to sell his work and his liberty to others."* [**Words of a
Rebel**, p. 214, pp. 207-8, p. 207 and p. 208] If someone desired to
work outside of the commune, then that was perfectly compatible with
this aim.

This position was followed in later works. The *"scope of
Expropriation,"* Kropotkin argued was clear and would only *"apply to
everything that enables any man -- be he financier, mill-owner, or
landlord -- to appropriate the product of others' toil."* Thus only
those forms of property based on wage labour would be expropriated. In
terms of housing, the same general rule applies (*"the expropriation of
dwellings contains the whole social revolution"*). Kropotkin explicitly
discusses the man who *"by dint of privation has contrived to buy a
house just large enough to hold his family. And we are going to deprive
him of his hard-earned happiness, to turn him into the street! Certainly
not . . . Let him work in his little garden, too."* Anarchist-communism
*"will make the lodger understand that he need not pay his former
landlord any more rent. Stay where you are, but rent free."* [**The
Conquest of Bread**, p. 61, p. 95, pp. 95-6 and p. 96]

Which, incidentally, was **exactly** the same position as Tucker (see
[section G.1.2](secG1.html#secg12)) and so Kropotkin's analysis of the
land monopoly was identical:

> *"when we see a peasant who is in possession of just the amount of
> land he can cultivate, we do not think it reasonable to turn him off
> his little farm. He exploits nobody, and nobody would have the right
> to interfere with his work. But if he possesses under the capitalist
> law more than he can cultivate himself, we consider that we must not
> give him the right of keeping that soil for himself, leaving it
> uncultivated when it might be cultivated by others, or of making
> others cultivate it for his benefit."* [**Act for Yourselves**, p.
> 104]

For Kropotkin, communism *"must be the work of all, a natural growth, a
product of the constructive genius of the great mass. Communism cannot
be imposed from above; it could not live even for a few months if the
constant and daily co-operation of all did not uphold it. It must be
free."* [**Anarchism**, p. 140]

Malatesta agreed. Anarchism, he stressed, *"cannot be imposed, both on
moral grounds in regard to freedom, as well as because it is impossible
to apply 'willy nilly' a regime of justice for all. It cannot be imposed
on a minority by a majority. Neither can it be imposed by a majority on
one or more minorities."* Thus *"anarchists who call themselves
communists"* do so *"not because they wish to impose their particular
way of seeing things on others"* but because *"they are convinced, until
proved wrong, that the more human beings are joined in brotherhood, and
the more closely they co-operate in their efforts for the benefit of all
concerned, the greater is the well-being and freedom which each can
enjoy."* *Imposed communism,"* he stressed, *"would be the most
detestable tyranny that the human mind could conceive. And free and
voluntary communism is ironical if one has not the right and the
possibility to live in a different regime, collectivist, mutualist,
individualist -- as one wishes, always on condition that there is no
oppression or exploitation of others."* He agreed with Tucker that
*"State communism, which is authoritarian and imposed, is the most
hateful tyranny that has ever afflicted, tormented and handicapped
mankind."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 21, p. 34, p.
103 and p. 34]

Therefore, arguing that the land and machinery should be common property
does **not** preclude individuals possessing it independently of
communes as both are rooted in individual possession (or "occupancy and
use") rather than private property. The key anarchist difference between
property and possession explains any perceived contradiction in the
communist position. Thus we find Kropotkin arguing that a
communist-anarchist society is one *"without having the soil, the
machinery, the capital in short, in the hands of private owners. We all
believe that free organisations of workers would be able to carry on
production on the farm and on the factory, as well, and probably much
better, than it is conducted now under the individual ownership of the
capitalist."* The commune *"shall take into possession of all the soil,
the dwelling-houses, the manufactures, the mines and the means of
communication."* [**Act for Yourselves**, p. 103 and p. 104]

This in no way contradicts his argument that the individuals will not be
forced to join a commune. This is because the aim of anarchist-communism
is, to quote another of Kropotkin's works, to place *"the product reaped
or manufactured at the disposal of all, leaving to each the liberty to
consume them as he pleases in his own home."* [**The Place of Anarchism
in the Evolution of Socialist Thought**, p. 7] Thus individual ownership
meant individual ownership of resources used by others rather than
individual possession of resources which individuals used. This can be
seen from his comment that *"some poor fellow"* who *"has contrived to
buy a house just large enough to hold his family"* would not be
expropriated by the commune (*"by all means let him stay there"*) while
also asserting *"[w]ho, then, can appropriate for himself the tiniest
plot of ground in such a city, without committing a flagrant
injustice?"* [**Conquest of Bread**, p. 90]

Kropotkin's opposition to private appropriation of land can only be
understood in context, namely from his discussion on the *"abolition of
rent"* and the need for *"free dwellings"*, i.e. the end of landlordism.
Kropotkin accepted that land could and would be occupied for personal
use -- after all, people need a place to live! In this he followed
Proudhon, who also argued that *"Land cannot be appropriated"* (Chapter
3, part 1 of **What is Property?**). For the French anarchist, the land
*"is limited in amount"* and so *"it ought not to be appropriated"*
(*"let any living man dare change his right of territorial possession
into the right of property, and I will declare war upon him, and wage it
to the death!"*). This meant that *"the land is indispensable to our
existence, -- consequently a common thing, consequently insusceptible of
appropriation."* Overall, *"labour has no inherent power to appropriate
natural wealth."* [**What is Property?**, p. 106, p. 107 and p. 116]
Proudhon, it is well known, supported the use of land (and other
resources) for personal use. How, then, can he argue that the *"land
cannot be appropriated"*? Is Proudhon subject to the same contradiction
as Kropotkin? Of course not, once we take into account the fundamental
difference between private property and possession, appropriation and
use which underlies both individualist **and** communist anarchism. As
Malatesta argued:

> *"Communism is a free agreement: who doesn't accept it or maintain it
> remains outside of it . . . Everyone has **the right to land, to the
> instruments of production** and all the advantages that human beings
> can enjoy in the state of civilisation that humanity has reached. If
> someone does not want to accept a communist life and the obligations
> that it supposes, it is their business. They and those of a like mind
> will come to an agreement . . . [They] will have **the same rights as
> the communists** over the natural wealth and accumulated products of
> previous generations . . . I have always spoken of free agreement, of
> free communism. How can there be liberty without a possible
> alternative?"* [our emphasis, **At the café**, pp. 69-70]

Compare this to individualist anarchist Stephen Byington's comment that
*"[t]hose who wish to unite in the communistic enjoyment of their labour
will be free to do so; those who wish to hold the products of their
labour as private property will be equally free to do so."* [quoted by
Wm. Gary Kline, **The Individualist Anarchists: A Critique of
Liberalism**, p. 93] The similarities are as obvious as between
Proudhon's and Kropotkin's arguments.

The same, it must be stressed, can be said of the *"Chicago Anarchists"*
whom Tucker labelled as authoritarians. Thus we find Albert Parsons, for
example, denouncing that kind of private property which allows
exploitation to happen. The key problem was that *"the necessary means
for the existence of all has been appropriated and monopolised by a few.
The land, the implements of production and communication, the resources
of life, are now held as private property, and its owners exact tribute
from the propertyless"* (*"Wealth is power"*). The aim of
communist-anarchism was to ensure the *"[f]ree access to the means of
production [which] is the natural right of every man able and willing to
work."* This implied that *"[a]ll organisation will be voluntary with
the sacred right forever reserved for each individual 'to think and to
rebel.'"* This meant that as far as the *"final outcome"* of social
change was involved *"many disciples of anarchism believe [it] will be
communism -- the common possession of the resources of life and the
productions of united labour. No anarchist is compromised by this
statement, who does not reason out the future outlook in this way."*
[**Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Scientific Basis**, p. 97, p. 99, p. 96
,p. 174 and pp. 174-5] This did not exclude mutualism or individualist
anarchism:

> *"Many expedients will be tried by which a just return may be awarded
> the worker for his exertions. The time check or labour certificate,
> which will be honoured at the store-houses hour for hour, will no
> doubt have its day. But the elaborate and complicated system of
> book-keeping this would necessitate, the impossibility of balancing
> one man's hour against another's with accuracy, and the difficulty in
> determining how much more one man owed natural resources, condition,
> and the studies and achievements of past generations, than did
> another, would, we believe, prevent this system from obtaining a
> thorough and permanent establishment. The mutual banking system . . .
> may be in operation in the future free society. Another system, more
> simple . . . appears the most acceptable and likely to prevail.
> Members of the groups . . . if honest producers . . . will be honoured
> in any other group they may visit, and given whatever is necessary for
> their welfare and comfort."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 175]

As we discuss in [section G.4](secG4.html), this was the same conclusion
that Voltairine de Cleyre reached three decades later. This was rooted
in a similar analysis of property as Proudhon and Tucker, namely
*"possession"* or *"occupancy and use"*: *"The workshops will drop into
the hands of the workers, the mines will fall to the miners, and the
land and all other things will be controlled by those who posses and use
them. There will be, there can then be no title to anything aside from
its possession and use."* The likes of Parsons supported communism was
not because of an opposition between "communism" and "occupancy and use"
but rather, like Kropotkin, because of *"the utter impossibility of
awarding to each an exact return for the amount of labour performed will
render absolute communism a necessity sooner or later."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 105 and p. 176] So while capitalism *"expropriates the masses for the
benefit of the privileged class . . . socialism teaches how all may
possess property . . . [and] establish a universal system of
co-operation, and to render accessible to each and every member of the
human family the achievements and benefits of civilisation which, under
capitalism, are being monopolised by a privileged class."* [August
Spies, contained in Parsons, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 63-4]

All of which indicates that Tucker did not really understand
communist-anarchism when he argued that communism is *"the force which
compels the labourer to pool his product with the products of all and
forbids him to sell his labour or his products."* [**Instead of a
Book**, p. 400] Rather, communist-anarchists argue that communism must
be free and voluntary. In other words, a communist-anarchist society
would not "forbid" anything as those who are part of it must be in
favour of communism for it to work. The option of remaining outside the
communist-anarchist society is there, as (to requote Kropotkin)
expropriation would *"apply to everything that enables any man [or
woman] . . . to appropriate the product of others' toil."* [**The
Conquest of Bread**, p. 61] Thus communist-anarchism would "forbid"
exactly what Individualist Anarchism would "forbid" -- property, not
possession (i.e. any form of "ownership" not based on "occupancy and
use").

Tucker, at times, admits that this is the case. For example, he once
noted that *"Kropotkin says, it is true, that he would allow the
individual access to the land; but he proposes to strip him of capital
entirely, and as he declares a few pages further on that without capital
agriculture is impossible, it follows that such access is an empty
privilege not at all equivalent to the liberty of individual
production."* [quoted by George Woodcock and Ivan Avakumovic, **The
Anarchist Prince**, p. 279] However, as two biographers of Kropotkin
note, Tucker *"partly misinterprets his opponent, as when he suggests
that the latter's idea of communist anarchism would **prevent** the
individual from working on his own if he wished (a fact which Kropotkin
always explicitly denied, since the basis of his theory was the
voluntary principle)."* [Woodcock and Avakumovic, **Op. Cit.**, p. 280]
To quote Kropotkin himself:

> *"when we see a Sheffield cutler, or a Leeds clothier working with
> their own tools or handloom, we see no use in taking the tools or the
> handloom to give to another worker. The clothier or cutler exploit
> nobody. But when we see a factory whose owners claim to keep to
> themselves the instruments of labour used by 1,400 girls, and
> consequently exact from the labour of these girls . . . profit . . .
> we consider that the people . . . are fully entitled to take
> possession of that factory and to let the girls produce . . . for
> themselves and the rest of the community . . . and take what they need
> of house room, food and clothing in return."* [**Act for Yourselves**,
> p. 105]

So Kropotkin argued that a communist-anarchist revolution would **not**
expropriate the tools of self-employed workers who exploited no-one.
Malatesta also argued that in an anarchist society *"the peasant [is
free] to cultivate his piece of land, alone if he wishes; free is the
shoe maker to remain at his last or the blacksmith in his small forge."*
Thus these two very famous communist-anarchists also supported
"property" but they are recognised as obviously socialists. This
apparent contradiction is resolved when it is understood that for
communist-anarchists (like all anarchists) the abolition of property
does not mean the end of possession and so *"would not harm the
independent worker whose real title is possession and the work done"*
unlike capitalist property. [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 103] Compare
this with Yarros' comment that *"[s]mall owners would not suffer from
the application of the 'personal use' principle, while large owners, who
have come into possession of the landed property, or the capital with
which they purchased the landed property, by means that equal liberty
could not sanction, would have no principle to base any protest on."*
[**Liberty**, no. 197, p. 2] In other words, **all** anarchists (as we
argue in [section B.3](secB3.html)) oppose private property but support
possession (we return to this issue in [section
I.6.2](secI6.html#seci62) as it is an all too common fallacy).

G.2.2 Is communist-anarchism violent?
-------------------------------------

Having shown that communist-anarchist is a valid form of anarchism even
in terms of individualist anarchism in the [last
section](secG2.html#secg22), it is now necessary to discuss the issue of
methods, i.e., the question of revolution and violence. This is related
to the first objection, with Tucker arguing that *"their Communism is
another State, while my voluntary cooperation is not a State at all. It
is a very easy matter to tell who is an Anarchist and who is not. Do you
believe in any form of imposition upon the human will by force?"*
[**Liberty**, no. 94, p. 4] However, Tucker was well aware that the
state imposed its will on others by force and so the question was
whether revolution was the right means of ending its oppression.

To a large degree, discussion on the question of revolution was clouded
by the fact it took place during the height of the *"propaganda by the
deed"* period in anarchist history (see [section
A.2.18](secA2.html#seca218)). As George Woodcock noted, a *"cult of
violence . . . marked and marred"* the IWPA and alienated the
individualist anarchists. [**Anarchism**, p. 393] Johann Most was the
focus for much of this rhetoric (see Paul Avrich's **The Haymarket
Tragedy**, particularly the chapter entitled *"Cult of Dynamite"*).
However, the reason why talk of dynamite found an audience had nothing
to do with anarchism but rather because of the violence regularly
directed against striking workers and unions. As we discuss more fully
in [section G.3.1](secG3.html#secg31), strikes were habitually repressed
by violence (by the state or by the employer's private police). The
massive 1877 strike wave, for example, saw the **Chicago Times** urge
the use of hand grenades against strikers while employers organised
*"private guards and bands of uniformed vigilantes"* which *"roamed the
streets, attacking and dispersing groups of workers.* Business leaders
concluded that *"the chief lesson of the strike as the need for a
stronger apparatus of repression"* and presented the city of Chicago
with two Gatling guns to aid that task. *"The erection of government
armouries in the centres of American cities dates from this period."*
This repression and the vitriolic ruling class rhetoric used *"set a
pattern for the future and fuelled the hatreds and passions without
which the Haymarket tragedy would not have occurred."* [Paul Avrich,
**The Haymarket Tragedy**, p. 33 and p. 35]

Given this general infatuation with dynamite and violence which this
state and employer violence provoked, the possibility for
misunderstanding was more than likely (as well as giving the enemies of
anarchism ample evidence to demonise it while allowing the violence of
the system they support to be downplayed). Rather than seeing
communist-anarchists as thinking a revolution was the product of mass
struggle, it was easy to assume that by revolution they meant acts of
violence or terrorism conducted by a few anarchists on behalf of
everyone else (this false perspective is one which Marxists to this day
tend to repeat when dismissing anarchism). In such a situation, it is
easy to see why so many individualist anarchists thought that a small
group of anarchists sought to impose communism by means of violence.
However, this was not the case. According to Albert Parsons, the
communist-anarchists argued that the working class *"will be driven to
use [force] in self-defence, in self-preservation against those who are
degrading, enslaving and destroying them."* [**The Autobiographies of
the Haymarket Martyrs**, p. 46] As August Spies put it, *"[t]o charge us
with an attempt to overthrow the present system on or about May 4th, and
then establish anarchy, is too absurd a statement, I think, even for a
political office-holder to make . . . Only mad men could have planned
such a brilliant scheme."* Rather, *"we have predicted from the lessons
history teaches, that the ruling classes of to-day would no more listen
to the voice of reason than their predecessors; that they would attempt
by brute force to stay the wheel of progress."* [contained in Parsons,
**Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Scientific Basis**, p. 55] Subsequent
events have proven that Spies and Parsons had a point!

Thus arguments about violence should not result in the assumption that
the individualist anarchists were pacifists as the subject usually is
not violence as such but rather assassinations and attempts of
minorities to use violence to create "anarchy" by destroying the state
on behalf of the general population. *"To brand the policy of terrorism
and assassination as immoral is ridiculously weak,"* argued Tucker.
*"**Liberty** does not assume to set any limit on the right of an
invaded individual to choose his own methods of defence. The invader,
whether an individual or a government forfeits all claim to
consideration from the invaded. This truth is independent of the
character of the invasion."* This meant that the *"right to resist
oppression by violence is beyond doubt. But its exercise would be unwise
unless the suppression of free thought, free speech, and a free press
were enforced so stringently that all other means of throwing it off had
become hopeless."* Ultimately, though, the *"days of armed revolution
have gone by. It is too easily put down."* [**Instead of a Book**, p.
430, p. 439 and p. 440]

Except for a small group of hard-core insurrectionists, few social
anarchists think that violence should be the first recourse in social
struggle. The ultra-revolutionary rhetoric associated with the 1883-6
period is not feature of the anarchist movement in general and so
lessons have been learned. As far as strategy goes, the tactics
advocated by social anarchists involve the same ones that individualist
anarchists support, namely refusal of obedience to all forms of
authority. This would include workplace, rent and tax strikes,
occupations, protests and such like. Violence has always been seen as
the last option, to be used only in self-defence (or, sometimes, in
revenge for greater acts of violence by oppressors). The problem is that
any effective protest will result in the protesters coming into conflict
with either the state or property owners. For example, a rent strike
will see the agents of the property owner trying to evict tenants, as
would a workers strike which occupied the workplace. Similarly, in the
Seattle protests in 1999 the police used force against the non-violent
protesters blocking the roads long before the Black Bloc started
breaking windows (which is, in itself, non-violent as it was directed
against corporate property, not people -- unlike the police action).
Unless the rebels simply did what they were told, then any non-violent
protest could become violent -- but only because private property
ultimately rests on state violence, a fact which becomes obvious when
people refuse to acknowledge it and its privileges (*"There is only one
law for the poor, to wit: Obey the rich."* [Parsons, **Op. Cit.**, p.
97]). Thus Adolph Fischer, one of the Haymarket Martyrs:

> "Would a peaceful solution of the social question be possible, the
> anarchists would be the first ones to rejoice over it.
> "But is it not a fact that on occasion of almost every strike the
> minions of the institutions of private property -- militia, police,
> deputy sheriffs; yes, even federal troops -- are being called to the
> scenes of conflict between capital and labour, in order to protect the
> interests of capital? . . . What peaceful means should the toilers
> employ? There is, for example, the strike? If the ruling classes want
> to enforce the 'law' they can have every striker arrested and punished
> for 'intimidation' and conspiracy. A strike can only be successful if
> the striking workingmen prevent their places being occupied by others.
> But this prevention is a crime in the eyes of the law. Boycott? In
> several states the 'courts of justice' have decided that the boycott
> is a violation of the law, and in consequence thereof, a number of
> boycotts have had the pleasure of examining the inner construction of
> penitentiaries 'for 'conspiracy' against the interests of capital."
> [**The Autobiographies of the Haymarket Martyrs**, pp. 85-6]

Some individualist anarchists did agree with this position. Dyer Lum,
for example, *"supported revolutionary violence on practical and
historical grounds. Practically speaking, Lum did not believe that 'wage
slavery' could be ended by non-violence because capitalists would surely
use force to resist."* [Frank H. Brooks, *"Ideology, Strategy, and
Organization: Dyer Lum and the American Anarchist Movement"*, pp. 57-83,
**Labor History**, vol. 34, No. 1, p. 71] Spooner's rhetoric could be as
violent sounding as Johann Most at his worse and he called upon the
subjects of the British Empire to rise in revolt (see his pamphlet
**Revolution**). Equally, many social anarchists are pacifists or
believe that anarchism can come about by means of reform and not
revolution. Thus the reform/revolution divide does not quite equal the
individualist/social anarchist divide, although it is fair to say that
most individualist anarchists were and are reformists.

So, it must be stressed that most individualist anarchists did not
oppose revolution **as such**. Rather they considered it as both
unlikely to succeed and unnecessary. They rejected revolutionary
expropriation *"not because we deem such expropriation unjust, invasive,
criminal, but solely because we are we are convinced that there is a
better, safer, and wiser way for labour to pursue with a view to
emancipation."* With mutual banks, they argued, it became possible *"for
labour to gradually lift itself into the position to command its full
share of wealth, and absorb in the shape of wages all that is now
alienated from it in the forms of profit, interest proper, and monopoly
rent."* [Yarrows, **Liberty**, no. 171, p. 5] As such, their aims were
the same as communist-anarchism (namely to end exploitation of labour
and the abolition of the state) but their means were different. Both,
however, were well aware that the capitalism could not be ended by
political action (i.e., voting). *"That the privileged class"*, argued
William Bailie *"will submit to expropriation, even if demanded at the
ballot-box, is a delusion possible only to him who knows not the actual
situation confronting the people of this country."* [*"The Rule of the
Monopolists"*, **Liberty**, no. 368, p. 4]

However, there was one area of life that was excluded from their
opposition to expropriation: the land. As Yarros put it, *"the
Anarchists' position on the land question, which involves the
dispossession of present landlords and the entire abolition of the
existing system of land tenure . . . They wish to expropriate the
landlords, and allow the landless to settle on land which does not now
belong to them."* This *"[o]ne exception . . . we are compelled to
make"* involved *"believ[ing] that the landless **will**, individually
and for the purpose of occupying ownership, take possession of the land
not personally occupied and used by landlord, and **will** protect each
other in the possession of such lands against any power hostile to
them."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 171, p. 4 and p. 5]

Yet as subsequent history has shown, landlords are just as likely to
organise and support violent counter-revolutionary movements in the face
of land reform as are industrial capitalists. Both sections of the
capitalist class supported fascists like Mussolini, Franco and Pinochet
in the face of even moderate attempts at expropriation by either
reformist governments or the peasants themselves. So as the history of
land reform shows, landlords are more than willing to turn to death
squads and fascism to resist it. To suggest that squatting land would
provoke less capitalist violence than, say, expropriating workplaces
simply cannot be supported in the light of 20th century history. The
choice, then, is simply to allow the landlords and capitalists to keep
their property and try to but it back from them or use political or
revolutionary means to expropriate them. Communist-anarchists thought
that the mutual banks would not work and so supported expropriation by
means of a mass revolt, a social revolution.

As such, communist-anarchists are not revolutionaries by choice but
rather because they do not think capitalism can be reformed away nor
that the ruling class will freely see their power, property and
privileges taken from them. They reject the mutualist and individualist
anarchist suggestion that mutual banks could provide enough credit to
compete capitalism away and, even if it could, the state would simply
outlaw it. This perspective does **not** imply, as many enemies of
anarchist suggest, that social anarchists always seek to use violence
but rather that we are aware that the state and capitalists will use
violence against any effective protest. So, the methods social
anarchists urge -- strikes, occupations, protests, and so forth -- are
all inherently non-violent but resistance by the state and capitalist
class to these acts of rebellion often results in violence (which is
dutifully reported as violence by the rebels, not the powerful, in the
media). That the capitalist class will use violence and force to
maintain its position *"is demonstrated in every strike which threatens
their power; by every lock-out, by every discharge; by every
black-list."* [Parsons, **Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Scientific
Basis**, p. 105] Ultimately, the workings of capitalism itself provokes
resistance to it. Even if no anarchist participated in, or help
organise, strikes and protests they would occur anyway and the state
would inevitably intervene to defend "law and order" and "private
property" -- as the history of every class system proves. So
communist-anarchism does not produce the class war, the class war
produces communist-anarchism.

In addition, Tucker thought that a violent revolution would not succeed
for without an awareness of anarchist ideals in the general public, the
old system would soon return. *"If government should be abruptly and
entirely abolished tomorrow,"* he argued, *"there would probably ensue a
series of physical conflicts about land and many other things, ending in
reaction and a revival of the old tyranny."* [**Instead of a Book**, p.
329] Almost all revolutionary anarchists would agree with his analysis
(see [section A.2.16](secA2.html#seca216)). Such anarchists have always
seen revolution as the end of a long process of self-liberation and
self-education through struggle. All anarchists reject the idea that all
that was required was to eliminate the government, by whatever means,
and the world would be made right. Rather, we have seen anarchism as a
social movement which, like anarchy itself, requires the participation
of the vast majority to be viable. Hence anarchist support for unions
and strikes, for example, as a means of creating more awareness of
anarchism and its solutions to the social question (see [section
J.1](secJ1.html)). This means that communist-anarchists do not see
revolution as imposing anarchism, but rather as an act of
self-liberation by a people sick of being ruled by others and act to
free themselves of tyranny.

So, in summary, in terms of tactics there is significant overlap between
the strategies advocated by both social and individualist anarchists.
The key difference is that the former do not think that the latter's
mutual banks make expropriation unnecessary while the individualist
anarchists think that expropriation of capital would provoke the state
into attacking and it would be unlikely that the rebels would win. Both,
however, can agree that violence should only be used in self-defence and
that for most of the time it is not required as other forms of
resistance are far more effective.

G.2.3 Does communist-anarchism aim to destroy individuality?
------------------------------------------------------------

Then there is the desirability of communism as such. A. H. Simpson
argued that *"Anarchism is egoism; Communism is altruism"* and altruism
in any form will involve *"the duty of the individual to sacrifice
himself to God, the State, the community, the 'cause' of anything,
superstition that always makes for tyranny. This idea, whether under
Theocracy or Communism, will result in the same thing -- always
authority."* He did, though, argue that in a free society people who
*"desire to have their individuality submerged in the crowd"* would be
free to set up their own communes. [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p.
92 and p. 94] This flows from Joshua Warren's experiences on Robert
Owen's co-operative community **New Harmony** and the conclusions he
drew from its collapse. Warren essentially began the individualist
anarchist tradition by concluding that any sort of collective emphasis
was bound to fail because it prevented people from sufficiently
addressing individual concerns, since supposed collective concerns would
inevitably take their place. The failure of these communities was rooted
in a failure to understand the need for individual self-government.
Thus, for Warren, it *"seemed that the differences of opinion, tastes,
and purposes **increased** just in proportion to the demand for
conformity"* and so it *"appeared that it was nature's own inherent law
of diversity that had conquered us . . . Our 'united interests' were
directly at war with the individualities of persons and circumstances."*
[quoted by George Woodcock, **Anarchism**, p. 390] Thus, property within
the limits of occupancy and use, and within an economy dominated by the
cost principle or some close equivalent, had to be a necessary
protection for the individual from both the potential tyranny of the
group (communism) and from inequalities in wealth (capitalism).

In return, communist-anarchists would agree. *"Phalansteries,* argued
Kropotkin, *"are repugnant to millions of human beings."* While most
people feel *"the necessity of meeting his [or her] fellows for the
pursue of common work . . . it is not so for the hours of leisure"* and
such communities *"do not take this into account."* Thus a commune
system does not imply communal living (although such arrangements *"can
please some"*). Rather it was a case of *"isolated apartments . . .
Isolation, alternating with time spent in society, is the normal desire
of human nature."* [**The Conquest of Bread**, pp. 123-4] Kropotkin in
his discussion on why intentional communities like that of Owen's failed
repeated many of Warren's points and stressed that they were based on
the authoritarian spirit and violated the need for individual liberty,
isolation and diversity (see his **Small Communal Experiments and Why
They Fail**). The aim of communist-anarchism is to create a communist
society based on individual liberty and freely joined functional groups.
It does not aim to burden individuals with communal issues beyond those
required by said groupings. Thus self-managed communities involve
managing only those affairs which truly rest in joint needs, with the
interests of individuals and other groups only being discussed if they
are harming others and other means of resolving disputes have failed.
Whether this can actually happen, of course, will be discovered in a
free society. If it did not, the communist-anarchists would be the first
to seek alternative economic and social arrangements which guaranteed
liberty.

It should also go without saying that no communist-anarchist sought a
system by which individuals would have their personality destroyed. As
Kropotkin stressed:

> *"Anarchist Communism maintains that most valuable of all conquests --
> individual liberty -- and moreover extends it and gives it a solid
> basis -- economic liberty -- without which political liberty is
> delusive; it does not ask the individual who has rejected god, god the
> king, and god the parliament, to give himself unto himself a god more
> terrible than any of the preceding -- god the Community, or to
> abdicate upon its alter his independence, his will, his tastes, and to
> renew the vow of asceticism which he formally made before the
> crucified god. It says to him, on the contrary, 'No society is free so
> long as the individual is not so! Do not seek to modify society by
> imposing upon it an authority which shall make everything right; if
> you do you will fail . . . abolish the conditions which allow some to
> monopolise the fruit of labour of others.'"* [**The Place of Anarchism
> in Socialistic Evolution**, pp. 14-5]

Of course, denying that communist-anarchists seek such a regime is not
the same as saying that such a regime would not be created by accident.
Unsurprisingly, communist-anarchists have spent some time arguing that
their system would not be subject to such a degeneration as its members
would be aware of the danger and act to stop it (see, for example,
[section I.5.6](secI5.html#seci56)). The key to understanding
communist-anarchism is to recognise that it is based on free access. It
does not deny an individual (or even a group of individuals) the ability
to work their own land or workplace, it simply denies them the ability
to exclude others from it unless they agree to be their servant first.
The sharing of the products of labour is considered as the means to
reduce even more any authority in society as people can swap workplaces
and communities with ease, without worrying about whether they can put
food on their table or not.

Of course, there is slight irony to Simpson's diatribe against communism
in that it implicitly assumes that private property is not a god and
that individuals should respect it regardless of how it impacts on them
and their liberty. Would it not be altruism of the worse kind if working
class people did not simply take the land and capital they need to
survive rather than sell their labour and liberty to its owners? So why
exclude private property (even in a modified form) from individualist
anarchist scorn? As we argue in [section G.6](secG6.html) this was Max
Stirner's position and, fundamentally, the communist-anarchist one too.
Communist-anarchists oppose private property as it generates
relationships of authority and these harm those subject to them and, as
a consequence, they argue that it is in the **self**-interest of the
individuals so oppressed to expropriate private property and share the
whole world.

The issue of sharing and what it implied also caused some individualist
anarchists to oppose it. Henry Appleton argued that *"all communism
rests upon an artificial attempt to level things, as against a social
development resting upon untrammelled individual sovereignty."* The
*"true Anarchist . . . is opposed to all manner of artificial levelling
machines. How pitiful the ignorance which accuses him of wanting to
level everything, when the very integral thought of Anarchism is opposed
to levelling!"* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 89] However, as we
have indicated in [section A.2.5](secA2.html#seca25), all genuine
anarchists, **including communist-anarchists**, are opposed to making or
treating people as if they were identical. In fact, the goal of
communist-anarchism has always been to ensure and protect the natural
diversity of individuals by creating social conditions in which
individuality can flourish. The fundamental principle of communism is
the maxim ***"from each according to their abilities, to each according
to their needs."*** There is nothing there about *"levelling"* or (which
amounts to the same thing), *"equality of outcome."* To make an obvious
point: *"If one person need medical treatment and another is more
fortunate, they are not to be granted an equal amount of medical care,
and the same is true of other human needs.* Hence Chomsky talks of the
*"authentic left"* who recognise that individuals *"will differ in their
aspirations, their abilities, and their personal goals"* and seek a
society which allows that diversity to fully flourish. [**The Chomsky
Reader**, p. 191 and p. 192] In the words of Rudolf Rocker:

> *"a far greater degree of economic equality . . . would . . . be no
> guarantee against political and social oppression. Economic equality
> alone is not social liberation. It is just this which Marxism and all
> the other schools of authoritarian Socialism have never understood.
> Even in prison, in the cloister, or in the barracks one finds a fairly
> high degree of economic equality, as all the inmates are provided with
> the same dwelling, the same food, the same uniform, and the same tasks
> . . . [this was] the vilest despotism . . . the human being was merely
> the automation of a higher will, on whose decisions he had not the
> slightest influence. It was not without reason that Proudhon saw in a
> 'Socialism' without freedom the worst form of slavery. The urge for
> social justice can only develop properly and be effective, when it
> grows out of man's sense of personal freedom and is based on that. In
> other words **Socialism will be free, or it will not be at all**. In
> its recognition of this lies the genuine and profound justification
> for the existence of Anarchism."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 14]

Therefore, anarchists *"demand the abolition of all economic monopolies
and the common ownership of the soil and all other means of production,
the use of which must be available to all without distinction; for
personal and social freedom is conceivable only on the basis of equal
economic advantages for everybody.* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 11] As Kropotkin
stressed, anarchists recognise that there are two types of communism,
libertarian and authoritarian and *"our communism, is not that of the
authoritarian school: it is anarchist communism, communism without
government, free communism. It is a synthesis of the two chief aims
pursued by humanity since the dawn of its history -- economic freedom
and political freedom."* It is based on *"everybody, contributing for
the common well-being to the full extent of his [or her] capacities . .
. enjoy[ing] also from the common stock of society to the fullest
possible extent of his [or her] needs."* Thus it is rooted in individual
tastes and diversity, on *"putting the wants of the individual **above**
the valuation of the services he [or she] has rendered, or might render,
to society."* Thus communism was *"the best basis for individual
development and freedom"* and so *"the full expansion of man's
faculties, the superior development of what is original in him, the
greatest fruitfulness of intelligences, feeling and will."* It would
ensure the *"most powerful development of individuality, of individual
originality."* The *"most powerful development of individuality, of
individual originality . . . can only be produced when the first needs
of food and shelter are satisfied"* and this was why *"communism and
anarchism"* are *"a necessary complement to one another."*
[**Anarchism**, p. 61, p. 59, p. 60 and p. 141]

So, communist-anarchists would actually agree with individualist
anarchists like Simpson and oppose any notion of *"levelling"*
(artificial or otherwise). The aim of libertarian communism is to
increase diversity and individuality, **not** to end it by imposing an
abstract equality of outcome or of consumption that would utter ignore
individual tastes or preferences. Given that communist-anarchists like
Kropotkin and Malatesta continually stressed this aspect of their ideas,
Simpson was simply confusing libertarian and authoritarian forms of
communism for polemical effect rather than presenting a true account of
the issues at hand.

A firmer critique of communist-anarchism can be found when Tucker argued
that *"Kropotkinian anarchism means the liberty to eat, but not to cook;
to drink, but not to brew; to wear, but not to spin; to dwell, but not
to build; to give, but not to sell or buy; to think, but not to print;
to speak, but not to hire a hall; to dance, but not to pay the
fiddler."* [quoted by George Woodcock and Ivan Avakumovic, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 279] Yet even this contains a distortion, as it is clear that
communist-anarchism is based on the assumption that members of a
communist society **would** have to contribute (if physically able, of
course) to the common resources in order to gain access to them. The
notion that Kropotkin thought that a communist society would only take
into account *"to each according to their needs"* while ignoring *"from
each according to their abilities"* seems hard to square with his
published arguments. While it is true that individual contributions
would not be exactly determined, it is false to suggest that
communist-anarchism ignores the obvious truism that in order to consume
you first need to produce. Simply put, if someone seeks to live off the
work of others in a free society those within it would be asked to leave
and provide for themselves. By their actions, they have shown that they
do not want to live in a communist commune and those who do wish to live
as communists would feel no particular need to provide for those who do
not (see [section I.4.14](secI4.html#seci414)).

This can be seen when Tucker quoted **Freedom** saying that *"in the
transitional revolutionary period communities and individuals may be
obliged in self-defence to make it their rule that 'He who will not work
neither shall he eat.' It is not always possible for us to act up to our
principles and . . . expediency may force us to confine our Communism to
those who are willing to be our brothers and equals."* Somewhat
incredibly, Tucker stated *"I am not quite clear as to the meaning of
this, and would ask to be enlightened on the question whether those
objectionable individuals are to be let alone to live in their own way,
or whether the State Socialistic plan would be pursued in dealing with
them."* [**Liberty**, no. 149, p. 1] Clearly, his anti-communism got in
the way of any attempt to build bridges or acknowledge that
communist-anarchists had no desire (as noted above) to force people to
be communists nor to have the "communism" of those unwilling (rather
than unable) to contribute imposed on them!

G.2.4 What other reasons do individualists give for rejecting communist-anarchism?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The other differences are not as major. Some individualist anarchists
took umbrage because the communist-anarchists predicted that an
anarchist society would take a communal form, so prescribing the future
development of a free society in potentially authoritarian ways. As
James Martin summarised, it was Tucker's *"belief that 'in all
subsequent social co-operation no manner of organisation or combination
whatsoever shall be binding upon any individual without his consent,'
and to decide in advance upon a communal structure violated this maxim
from the start."* [**Men Against the State**, p. 222] Others took
umbrage because the communist-anarchists refused to spell out in
sufficient detail exactly how their vision would work.

Communist-anarchists reply in four main ways. Firstly, the individualist
anarchists themselves predicted roughly how they thought a free society
would look and function, namely one on individual ownership of
production based around mutual banks. Secondly, communist-anarchists
presented any vision as one which was consistent with libertarian
principles, i.e., their suggestions for a free society was based on
thinking about the implication of anarchist principles in real life.
There seemed little point in advocating anarchism if any future society
would be marked by authority. To not discuss how a free society could
work would result in authoritarian solutions being imposed (see [section
I.2.1](secI2.html#seci21)). Thirdly, they were at pains to link the
institutions of a free society to those already being generated within
capitalism but in opposition to its hierarchical nature (see [section
I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23)). Fourthly, presenting more than a sketch
would be authoritarian as it is up to a free people to create their own
society and solve their problems themselves (see [section
I.2](secI2.html)).

Clearly, A. H. Simpson was wrong when he asserted that
communist-anarchists argued thusly: *"Abolish private property by
instituting compulsory Communism, and the State will go."* No
communist-anarchist has ever argued for compulsory communism. Somewhat
ironically, Simpson went on to argue that *"difference between Communism
and Anarchy is plainly observable in their methods. Abolish the State .
. . that bulwark of the robber system . . . says the Anarchist. Abolish
private property, the source of all evil and injustice, parent of the
State, says the Communist."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 92]
Yet communist-anarchists do **not** subscribe to the position of
abolishing private property first, **then** the state. As we note when
refuting the opposite assertion by Marxists in [section
H.2.4](secH2.html#sech24), anarchists like Kropotkin and Malatesta
followed Bakunin in arguing that **both** needed to be abolished at the
same time. Kropotkin, for example, did not divide economic and political
issues, for him it was a case of *"the political and economic principles
of Anarchism."* [**Anarchism**, p. 159]

This unity of economic and political aspects of anarchism exists within
Individualist Anarchism too, but it is hidden by the unfortunately
tendency of its supporters of discussing certain forms of private
property as state enforced monopolies. So to a large degree many of the
disagreements between the two schools of anarchism were rooted in
semantics. Thus we find William Bailie arguing that the
anarchist-communist *"assumption that rent and interest are due to
private property is not proven"* as *"both rent and interest are the
result of monopoly, of restricted individual liberty."* [**Liberty**,
no. 261, p. 1] In other words, rent is caused because the state enforces
property rights which the individualist anarchists disagree with. Thus
when individualist anarchists argue they seek to get rid of the state,
they **also** mean the end of capitalist property rights (particularly
in land). That this can lead to confusion is obvious as, in the usual
sense of the word, rent **is** caused by private property. The
communists-anarchists, in contrast, generally used the term "private
property" and "property" in the same way that Proudhon used it in 1840,
namely property which allows its owner to exploit the labour of another.
As such, they had no problem with those who laboured by themselves on
their own property.

The lack of a market in communist-anarchism led some individualist
anarchists like William Bailie to argue that it *"ignores the necessity
for any machinery to adjust economic activities to their ends."* Either
its supporters *"exalt a chaotic and unbalanced condition"* or they will
produce an *"insufferable hierarchy."* [**The Individualist
Anarchists**, p. 116] Thus, to use modern terms, either
communist-anarchists embrace central planning or their system simply
cannot produce goods to meet demand with over-production of unwanted
goods and under-production of desired ones. Needless to say,
communist-anarchists argue that it is possible to bring the demand and
production of goods into line without requiring centralised planning
(which would be inefficient and a dire threat to individual freedom --
Kropotkin's arguments against state capitalism were proved right in
Soviet Russia). It would require a system of horizontal links between
self-managed workplaces and the transmission of appropriate information
to make informed decisions (see [section I](secIcon.html) for a
discussion of some possibilities).

Another objection to communist-anarchism was raised by Proudhon during
his debates with the state communists of his time who also raised the
slogan *"from each according to their abilities, to each according to
their needs."* For Proudhon, wages in the sense of payment for labour
would still exist in a anarchist society. This was because of two main
reasons. Firstly, rewarding labour for its actual work done would be a
great incentive in ensuring that it was efficiently done and meet the
consumers requirements. Secondly, he considered communism as being
potentially authoritarian in that society would determine what an
individual should contribute and consume. As he put it:

> "Who then shall determine the capacity? who shall be the judge of the
> needs?
>
> "You say that my capacity is 100: I maintain that it is only 90. You
> add that my needs are 90: I affirm that they are 100. There is a
> difference between us of twenty upon needs and capacity. It is, in
> other words, the well-known debate between **demand** and **supply**.
> Who shall judge between the society and me?
>
> "If the society persists, despite my protests, I resign from it, and
> that is all there is to it. The society comes to an end from lack of
> associates.
>
> "If, having recourse to force, the society undertakes to compel me; if
> it demands from me sacrifice and devotion, I say to it: Hypocrite! you
> promised to deliver me from being plundered by capital and power; and
> now, in the name of equality and fraternity, in your turn, you plunder
> me. Formerly, in order to rob me, they exaggerated my capacity and
> minimised my needs. They said that products cost me so little, that I
> needed so little to live! You are doing the same thing. What
> difference is there then between fraternity and the wage system?"
> [**The General Idea of the Revolution**, pp. 96-7]

Yet even here Proudhon shows the libertarian communist solution to this
possible problem, namely free association. If there were a conflict
between individuals within a free commune in terms of their
contributions and consumption then the individual is free to leave (and,
conversely, the commune is free to expel an individual). Said
individuals can seek another communist commune and join it or,
conversely, work for themselves in their present location. Ultimately,
free association means the freedom **not** to associate and libertarian
communism is rooted in that truism. Thus, communist-anarchists would
agree with the French anarchism when he *"conclude[d] that a single
association can never include all the workmen in one industry, nor all
industrial corporations, nor, **a fortiori**, a nation of 36 millions of
men; therefore that the principle of association does not offer the
required solution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 85] Like Proudhon,
communist-anarchists base their anarchism on federations of associations
and communes, with these federations and associations formed as and when
they were required for joint activity. Thus the federation of communist
communes and workplaces would play a similar role as Proudhon's
*"agro-industrial federation,"* namely to end *"wage labour or economic
servitude"* and *"to protect"* against *"capitalist and financial
feudalism, both within them and from the outside"* as well as ensuring
*"increasing equality"* and the *"application of application on the
largest possible scale of the principles of mutualism"* and *"economic
solidarity."* [**The Principle of Federation**, p. 70 and p. 71]

The key difference, of course, between Proudhon's mutualism and
Kropotkin's communism was (as latter stressed) that the former supported
payment for labour in terms of money or labour-cheques while the latter
argued that this would be a modification of the wages system rather than
its total abolition. Yet by divorcing payment for labour from its
consumption, Proudhon argued that communism, like monopoly, made it
difficult to determine exactly the costs involved in producing goods.
The French anarchist argued that there was no way of knowing the real
cost of anything produced outside the market. This could be seen from
monopolies within capitalism:

> *"How much does the tobacco sold by the administration cost? How much
> is it worth? You can answer the first of these questions: you need
> only call at the first tobacco shop you see. But you can tell me
> nothing about the second, because you have no standard of comparison
> and are forbidden to verify by experiment the items of cost of
> administration…. Therefore the tobacco business, made into a monopoly,
> necessarily costs society more than it brings in; it is an industry
> which, instead of subsisting by its own product, lives by subsidies."*
> [**System of Economical Contradictions**, pp. 232-3]

Communist-anarchists reply by noting that the price of something is not
independent of the degree of monopoly of an industry and so natural
barriers to competition can skew prices. Equally, competition can be a
race to the bottom and that competitors can undermine their own working
conditions and enjoyment of life in order to gain an advantage (or, more
often, simply survive) on the market. As we argue in [section
I.1.3](secI13.html#seci13), markets have a tendency to undermine
equality and solidarity and, over time, erode the basis of a free
society.

As an aside, Proudhon's argument has obvious similarities with von
Mises' much later attack on communism which is usually called the
"socialist calculation argument" (see [section
I.1.1](secI1.html#seci11)). As discussed in [section
I.1.2](secI1.html#seci12), von Mises' argument was question begging in
the extreme and our critique of that applies equally to Proudhon's
claims. As such, communist-anarchists argue that market prices usually
do **not** reflect the real costs (in terms of their effects on
individuals, society and the planet's ecology) -- even those prices
generated by non-capitalist markets. Moreover, due to Proudhon's
opposition to rent and interest, his own argument could be turned
against mutualism and individualist anarchism as followers of von Mises
have done. Without rent and interest, they argue, there is no way of
identifying how much land or credit is worth and so resource use will be
inefficient. Of course, this assumes that capitalist definitions of
efficiency and "cost" are the only valid ones which is not the case. So,
arguing that markets are required to correctly value goods and services
is a two-edged sword, argue communist-anarchists.

One of the joys of Proudhon is that he provides material to critique
both Kropotkin's communist-anarchism **and** Tucker's individualist
anarchism for while opposed to communism he was equally opposed to wage
labour, as we indicate in [section G.4.2](secG4.html#secg42) (as such,
those who quote Proudhon's attacks on communism but fail to note his
attacks on wage slavery are extremely dishonest). Under mutualism, there
would not be wage labour. Rather than employers paying wages to workers,
workers would form co-operatives and pay themselves a share of the
income they collectively produced. As Robert Graham put it, *"[t]hat
both Tucker and Bakunin could claim Proudhon as their own illustrates
the inherent ambiguity and elusiveness of his thought . . . With his
death, that synthesis broke down into its conflicting parts."*
[*"Introduction"*, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, **The General idea of the
Revolution**, p. xxxi] Social anarchism emphasised the self-management,
associational and federalist aspects of Proudhon's ideas along with his
critique of private property while individualist anarchism tended to
stress his support for possession, "wages" (i.e., labour income),
competition and markets.

G.2.5 Do most anarchists agree with the individualists on communist-anarchism?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No, far from it. Most anarchists in the late nineteenth century
recognised communist-anarchism as a genuine form of anarchism and it
quickly replaced collectivist anarchism as the dominant tendency.

So few anarchists found the individualist solution to the social
question or the attempts of some of them to excommunicate social
anarchism from the movement convincing. Across the world, including in
America itself, communist anarchism became the bulk of the movement
(social anarchism is the *"mainstream of anarchist theory"* and in the
*"historical anarchist movement"* where anarcho-communism and
anarcho-syndicalism have been *"predominating."* [John Clark, **The
Anarchist Moment**, p. 143]). That is still the situation to this day,
with individualist anarchism being a small part of the movement (again,
it mostly exists in America and, to an even lesser degree, Britain).
Moreover, with the notable exception of Johann Most, most leading
communist-anarchists refused to respond in kind and recognised
individualist anarchism as a form of anarchism (usually one suited to
conditions in pre-industrial America). Kropotkin, for example, included
Individualist Anarchism in his 1911 account of Anarchism for the
**Encyclopaedia Britannica** as well as his pamphlet **Modern Science
and Anarchism**.

It should also be stressed that not all individualist anarchists
followed Tucker's lead in refusing to call communist anarchism a form of
anarchism. Joseph Labadie, Dyer Lum and Voltairine de Cleyre (when she
was an individualist), for example, recognised the likes of Albert and
Lucy Parsons, Kropotkin, Goldman and Berkman as fellow anarchists even
if they disagreed with some of their methods and aspects of their
preferred solution to the social problem. For Labadie, *"[o]ne may want
liberty to advance the interests of Communism, another to further the
cause of individualism"* and so nothing can *"stand in the way of
uniting with other Anarchists who believe in Communism to get more
liberty"* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 260 and p. 262] Today,
few (if any) individualist anarchists try to excommunicate other
anarchists from the movement, thankfully leaving the diatribes and
sectarianism of a few individuals in the nineteenth century where they
belong.

Suffice to say, an account of anarchism which excluded social anarchism
would be a very short work indeed and, unsurprisingly, all serious
accounts of anarchism concentrate on social anarchism, its thinkers and
its organisations. Which, unfortunately, ensures that the diversity and
richness of individualist anarchism is somewhat lost, as are its social
roots and context (which, in turn, allows some academics to confuse
individualist anarchism with "anarcho"-capitalism based on a superficial
analysis of words like "property" and "markets"). This predominance of
social anarchism is reflected in the movements journals.

While some of its admirers stress that **Liberty** was the longest
lasting American anarchist paper, in fact a social anarchist paper has
that claim to fame. **Fraye Arbeter Shtime** (**The Free Voice of
Labour**) was a Yiddish language anarchist periodical which was first
published in 1890 and lasted until 1977. This was followed by the
Italian anarchist paper **L'Adunata dei Refrattari** which was published
between 1922 and 1971. So when James Martin stated that **Liberty** was
*"the longest-lived of any radical periodical of economic or political
nature in the nation's history"* in 1953 he was wrong. [**Men Against
the State**, p. 208] In terms of the English language, the London based
communist-anarchist journal **Freedom** has existed (in various forms)
from 1886 and so beats any claim made for **Liberty** as being the
longest lasting English language anarchist journal by several decades.
The anarcho-syndicalist **Black Flag**, another British based journal,
began publication in 1971 and was still being published over 30 years
later. As far as the longest running US-based anarchist journal, that
title now goes to the social anarchist magazine **Anarchy: A Journal of
Desire Armed** which was founded in 1980 and is still going strong. This
is, we stress, not to diminish **Liberty** and its achievement but
simply to put it into the context of the wider movement and the fact
that, outside of America, social anarchism **is** the anarchist movement
(and even within America, social anarchism was and is the bulk of it).

In summary, then, while individualist anarchism opposed
communist-anarchism much of this opposition was rooted in
misunderstandings and, at times, outright distortion. Once these are
corrected, it becomes clear that both schools of anarchism share
significant ideas in common. This is unsurprisingly, given the impact of
Proudhon on both of them as well as their common concerns on the social
question and participation in the labour and other popular movements. As
both are (libertarian) socialists inspired by many of the same
intellectual and social influences, this should come as no surprise.
That a few individualist and communist anarchists tried to deny those
common influences should not blind us to them or the fact that both
schools of anarchism are compatible.

Ultimately, though, anarchism should be wide enough and generous enough
to include both communist and individualist anarchism. Attempts to
excommunicate one or the other seem petty given how much each has in
common and, moreover, given that both are compatible with each other as
both are rooted in similar perspectives on possession, capitalist
property rights and voluntary association. Once the differences in
terminology are understood, the differences are not impossible to
reconcile.
