G.1 Are individualist anarchists anti-capitalist?
=================================================

To answer this question, it is necessary to first define what we mean by
capitalism and socialism. While there is a tendency for supporters of
capitalism (and a few socialists!) to equate it with the market and
private property, this is not the case. It is possible to have both and
not have capitalism (as we discuss in [section G.1.1](secG1.html#secg11)
and [section G.1.2](secG1.html#secg12), respectively). Similarly, the
notion that "socialism" means, by definition, state ownership and/or
control, or that being employed by the state rather than by private
capital is "socialism" is distinctly wrong. While some socialists have,
undoubtedly, defined socialism in precisely such terms, socialism as a
historic movement is much wider than that. As Proudhon put it,
*"[m]odern Socialism was not founded as a sect or church; it has seen a
number of different schools."* [**Selected Writings of Pierre-Joseph
Proudhon**, p. 177]

As Proudhon, Bakunin, Kropotkin and Tucker all stressed, anarchism is
one of those schools. For Kropotkin, anarchism was *"the no-government
system of socialism."* [**Anarchism**, p. 46] Likewise, for Tucker,
there were *"two schools of socialistic thought"*, one of which
represented authority and the other liberty, namely *"State Socialism
and Anarchism."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, pp. 78-9] It was
*"not Socialist Anarchism against Individualist Anarchism, but of
Communist Socialism against Individualist Socialism."* [Tucker,
**Liberty**, no. 129, p. 2] As one expert on Individualist Anarchism
noted, Tucker *"looked upon anarchism as a branch of the general
socialist movement."* [James J. Martin, **Men Against the State**, pp.
226-7] Thus we find Individualist anarchist Victor Yarros, like Tucker,
talking about *"the position and teachings of the Anarchistic
Socialists"* when referring to his ideas. [**Liberty**, no. 98, p. 5]

Part of problem is that in the 20th century, the statist school of
socialism prevailed both within the labour movement (at least in English
speaking countries or until fascism destroyed it in mainland Europe and
elsewhere) and within the revolutionary movement (first as social
democracy, then as Communism after the Russian Revolution). This lead,
it should be noted, to anarchists not using the term "socialist" to
describe their ideas as they did not want to be confused with either
reformed capitalism (social democracy) or state capitalism (Leninism and
Stalinism). As anarchism was understood as being inherently
anti-capitalist, this did not become an issue until certain right-wing
liberals started calling themselves "anarcho"-capitalists (somewhat
ironically, these liberals joined with the state socialists in trying to
limit anarchism to anti-statism and denying their socialist
credentials). Another part of the problem is that many, particularly
those in America, derive their notion of what socialism is from
right-wing sources who are more than happy to agree with the Stalinists
that socialism **is** state ownership. This is case with
right-"libertarians", who rarely study the history or ideas of socialism
and instead take their lead from such fanatical anti-socialists as
Ludwig von Mises and Murray Rothbard. Thus they equate socialism with
social democracy or Leninism/Stalinism, i.e. with state ownership of the
means of life, the turning of part or the whole working population into
employees of the government or state regulation and the welfare state.
In this they are often joined by social democrats and Marxists who seek
to excommunicate all other kinds of socialism from the anti-capitalist
movement.

All of which leads to some strange contradictions. If "socialism" **is**
equated to state ownership then, clearly, the individualist anarchists
are not socialists but, then, neither are the social anarchists! Thus if
we assume that the prevailing socialism of the 20th century defines what
socialism is, then quite a few self-proclaimed socialists are not, in
fact, socialists. This suggests that socialism cannot be limited to
state socialism. Perhaps it would be easier to define "socialism" as
restrictions on private property? If so, then, clearly, social
anarchists are socialists but then, as we will prove, so are the
individualist anarchists!

Of course, not all the individualist anarchists used the term
"socialist" or "socialism" to describe their ideas although many did.
Some called their ideas Mutualism and explicitly opposed socialism
(William Greene being the most obvious example). However, at root the
ideas were part of the wider socialist movement and, in fact, they
followed Proudhon in this as he both proclaimed himself a socialist
while also attacking it. The apparent contradiction is easily explained
by noting there are two schools of socialism, state and libertarian.
Thus it is possible to be both a (libertarian) socialist and condemn
(state) socialist in the harshest terms.

So what, then, is socialism? Tucker stated that *"the bottom claim of
Socialism"* was *"that labour should be put in possession of its own,"*
that *"the natural wage of labour is its product"* and *"interest, rent,
and profit . . . constitute the trinity of usury."* [**The Individualist
Anarchists**, p. 78 and p. 80] This definition also found favour with
Kropotkin who stated that socialism *"in its wide, generic, and true
sense"* was an *"effort to **abolish** the exploitation of labour by
capital."* [**Anarchism**, p. 169] For Kropotkin, anarchism was
*"brought forth by the same critical and revolutionary protest which
gave rise to Socialism in general"*, socialism aiming for *"the negation
of Capitalism and of society based on the subjection of labour to
capital."* Anarchism, unlike other socialists, extended this to oppose
*"what constitutes the real strength of Capitalism: the State and its
principle supports."* [**Environment and Evolution**, p. 19] Tucker,
similarly, argued that Individualist anarchism was a form of socialism
and would result in the *"emancipation of the workingman from his
present slavery to capital."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 323]

The various schools of socialism present different solutions to this
exploitation and subjection. From the nationalisation of capitalist
property by the state socialists, to the socialisation of property by
the libertarian communists, to the co-operatives of mutualism, to the
free market of the individualist anarchists, all are seeking, in one way
or the other, to ensure the end of the domination and exploitation of
labour by capital. The disagreements between them all rest in whether
their solutions achieve this aim and whether they will make life worth
living and enjoyable (which also explains why individualist and social
anarchists disagree so much!). For anarchists, state socialism is little
more than state **capitalism**, with a state monopoly replacing
capitalist monopolies and workers being exploited by one boss (the
state) rather than many. So all anarchists would agree with Yarrows when
he argued that *"[w]hile **State** Socialism removes the disease by
killing the patient, **no**-State Socialism offers him the means of
recovering strength, health, and vigour."* [**Liberty**, no. 98, p. 5]

So, why are the individualist anarchists anti-capitalists? There are two
main reasons.

Firstly, the Individualist Anarchists opposed profits, interest and rent
as forms of exploitation (they termed these non-labour incomes
***"usury"***, but as Tucker stressed usury was *"but another name for
the exploitation of labour."* [**Liberty**, no. 122, p. 4]). To use the
words of Ezra Heywood, the Individualist Anarchists thought *"Interest
is theft, Rent Robbery, and Profit Only Another Name for Plunder."*
[quoted by Martin Blatt, *"Ezra Heywood & Benjamin Tucker,"*, pp. 28-43,
**Benjamin R. Tucker and the Champions of Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton
and Sullivan (eds.), p. 29] Non-labour incomes are merely *"different
methods of levying tribute for the use of capital."* Their vision of the
good society was one in which *"the usurer, the receiver of interest,
rent and profit"* would not exist and Labour would *"secure its natural
wage, its entire product."* [Tucker, **The Individualist Anarchists**,
p. 80, p. 82 and p. 85] This would also apply to dividends, *"since no
idle shareholders could continue in receipt of dividends were it not for
the support of monopoly, it follows that these dividends are no part of
the proper reward of ability."* [Tucker, **Liberty**, no. 282, p. 2]

In addition, as a means of social change, the individualists suggested
that activists start *"inducing the people to steadily refuse the
payment of rents and taxes."* [**Instead of a Book** pp. 299-300] These
are hardly statements with which capitalists would agree. Tucker, as
noted, also opposed interest, considering it usury (exploitation and a
*"crime"*) pure and simple and one of the means by which workers were
denied the full fruits of their labour. Indeed, he looked forward to the
day when *"any person who charges more than cost for any product [will]
. . . be regarded very much as we now regard a pickpocket."* This
*"attitude of hostility to usury, in any form"* hardly fits into the
capitalist mentality or belief system. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 155] Similarly,
Ezra Heywood considered profit-taking *"an injustice which ranked second
only to legalising titles to absolute ownership of land or
raw-materials."* [James J. Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 111] Opposition to
profits, rent or interest is hardly capitalistic -- indeed, the reverse.

Thus the Individualist Anarchists, like the social anarchists, opposed
the exploitation of labour and desired to see the end of capitalism by
ensuring that labour would own what it produced. They desired a society
in which there would no longer be capitalists and workers, only workers.
The worker would receive the full product of his/her labour, so ending
the exploitation of labour by capital. In Tucker's words, a free society
would see *"each man reaping the fruits of his labour and no man able to
live in idleness on an income from capital"* and so society would
*"become a great hive of Anarchistic workers, prosperous and free
individuals"* combining *"to carry on their production and distribution
on the cost principle."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 276]

Secondly, the Individualist Anarchists favoured a new system of land
ownership based on ***"occupancy and use."*** So, as well as this
opposition to capitalist usury, the individualist anarchists also
expressed opposition to capitalist ideas on property (particularly
property in land). J.K. Ingalls, for example, considered that *"the
private domination of the land"* originated in *"usurpation only,
whether of the camp, the court or the market. Whenever such a domination
excludes or deprives a single human being of his equal opportunity, it
is a violation, not only of the public right, and of the social duty,
but of the very principle of law and morals upon which property itself
is based."* [quoted by Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 148f] As Martin
comments, for Ingalls, *"[t]o reduce land to the status of a commodity
was an act of usurpation, enabling a group to 'profit by its relation to
production' without the expenditure of labour time."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
148] These ideas are identical to Proudhon's and Ingalls continues in
this Proudhonian *"occupancy and use"* vein when he argues that
possession *"remains **possession**, and can never become **property**,
in the sense of absolute dominion, except by positive statue [i.e. state
action]. Labour can only claim **occupancy**, and can lay no claim to
more than the usufruct."* Current property ownership in land were
created by *"forceful and fraudulent taking"* of land, which *"could
give no justification to the system."* [quoted by Martin, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 149]

The capitalist system of land ownership was usually termed the ***"land
monopoly"***, which consisted of *"the enforcement by government of land
titles which do not rest upon personal occupancy and cultivation."*
Under anarchism, individuals would *"no longer be protected by their
fellows in anything but personal occupancy and cultivation of land"* and
so *"ground rent would disappear."* [Tucker, **The Individualist
Anarchists**, p. 85] This applied to what was on the land as well, such
as housing:

> *"If a man exerts himself by erecting a building on land which
> afterward, by the operation of the principle of occupancy and use,
> rightfully becomes another's, he must, upon demand of the subsequent
> occupant, remove from this land the results of his self-exertion, or,
> failing so to do, sacrifice his property therein."* [**Liberty**, no.
> 331, p. 4]

This would apply to both the land and what was on it. This meant that
*"tenants would not be forced to pay . . . rent"* nor would landlords
*"be allowed to seize their property."* This, as Tucker noted, was a
complete rejection of the capitalist system of property rights and saw
anarchism being dependent on *"the Anarchistic view that occupancy and
use should condition and limit landholding becom[ing] the prevailing
view."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 162 and p. 159] As Joseph
Labadie put it, socialism includes any theory *"which has for its object
the **changing of the present status of property** and the relations one
person or class holds to another. In other words, any movement which has
for its aim the changing of social relations, of companionships, of
associations, of powers of one class over another class, is Socialism."*
[our emphasis, **Liberty**, no. 158, p. 8] As such, both social and
individualist anarchists are socialists as both aimed at changing the
present status of property.

It should also be noted here that the individualist anarchist ideal that
competition in banking would drive interest to approximately zero is
their equivalent to the social anarchist principle of free access to the
means of life. As the only cost involved would be an administration
charge which covers the labour involved in running the mutual bank, all
workers would have access to "capital" for (in effect) free. Combine
this with "occupancy and use" in terms of land use and it can be seen
that both individualist and social anarchists shared a common aim to
make the means of life available to all without having to pay a tribute
to an owner or be dependent on a ruling capitalist or landlord class.

For these reasons, the Individualist Anarchists are clearly
anti-capitalist. While an Individualist Anarchy would be a market
system, it would not be a capitalist one. As Tucker argued, the
anarchists realised *"the fact that one class of men are dependent for
their living upon the sale of their labour, while another class of men
are relieved of the necessity of labour by being legally privileged to
sell something that is not labour. . . . And to such a state of things I
am as much opposed as any one. But the minute you remove privilege. . .
every man will be a labourer exchanging with fellow-labourers . . . What
Anarchistic-Socialism aims to abolish is usury . . . it wants to deprive
capital of its reward."* As noted above, the term *"usury,"* for Tucker,
was simply a synonym for *"the exploitation of labour."* [**Instead of a
Book**, p. 404 and p. 396]

The similarities with social anarchism are obvious. Like them, the
individualist anarchists opposed capitalism because they saw that
profit, rent and interest were all forms of exploitation. As
communist-anarchist Alexander Berkman noted, *"[i]f the worker would get
his due -- that is, the things he produces or their equivalent -- where
would the profits of the capitalist come from? If labour owned the
wealth it produced, there would be no capitalism."* Like social
anarchists they opposed usury, to have to pay purely for access/use for
a resource. It ensured that a *"slice of their daily labour is taken
from [the workers] for the privilege of **using** these factories"*
[**What is Anarchism?**, p. 44 and p. 8] For Marx, abolishing interest
and interest-bearing capital *"means the abolition of capital and of
capitalist production itself."* [**Theories of Surplus Value**, vol. 3,
p. 472] A position, incidentally, also held by Proudhon who maintained
that *"reduction of interest rates to vanishing point is itself a
revolutionary act, because it is destructive of capitalism."* [quoted by
Edward Hyams, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon: His Revolutionary Life, Mind and
Works**, p. 188] Like many socialists, Individualist Anarchists used the
term "interest" to cover all forms of surplus value: *"the use of
money"* plus *"house-rent, dividends, or share of profits"* and having
to *"pay a tax to somebody who owns the land."* *"In doing away with
interest, the cause of inequality in material circumstances will be done
away with."* [John Beverley Robinson, **The Individualist Anarchists**,
pp. 144-5]

Given that Individualist Anarchism aimed to abolish interest along with
rent and profit it would suggest that it is a socialist theory.
Unsurprisingly, then, Tucker agreed with Marx's analysis on capitalism,
namely that it lead to industry concentrating into the hands of a few
and that it robbed workers of the fruits of the toil (for Francis Tandy
it was a case of *"the Marxian theory of surplus value, upon which all
Socialistic philosophy -- whether State or Anarchistic -- is necessarily
based"* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 312, p. 3]). Tucker quoted a leading
Marxist's analysis of capitalism and noted that *"Liberty endorses the
whole of it, excepting a few phrases concerning the nationalisation of
industry and the assumption of political power by working people."*
However, he was at pains to argue that this analysis was first expounded
by Proudhon, *"that the tendency and consequences of capitalistic
production . . . were demonstrated to the world time and time again
during the twenty years preceding the publication of 'Das Kapital'"* by
the French anarchist. This included *"the historical persistence of
class struggles in successive manifestations"* as well as *"the theory
that labour is the source and measure of value."* *"Call Marx, then, the
father of State socialism, if you will,"* argued Tucker, *"but we
dispute his paternity of the general principles of economy on which all
schools of socialism agree."* [**Liberty**, no. 35, p. 2]

This opposition to profits, rent and interest as forms of exploitation
and property as a form of theft clearly makes individualist anarchism
anti-capitalist and a form of (libertarian) socialism. In addition, it
also indicates well the common ground between the two threads of
anarchism, in particular their common position to capitalism. The social
anarchist Rudolf Rocker indicates well this common position when he
argues:

> *"it is difficult to reconcile personal freedom with the existing
> economic system. Without doubt the present inequality of economic
> interests and the resulting class conflicts in society are a continual
> danger to the freedom of the individual . . . [T]he undisturbed
> natural development of human personality is impossible in a system
> which has its root in the shameless exploitation of the great mass of
> the members of society. One cannot be free either politically or
> personally so long as one is in economic servitude of another and
> cannot escape from this condition. This was recognised by men like
> Godwin, Warren, Proudhon, Bakunin, [and women like Goldman and de
> Cleyre, we must add!] and many others who subsequently reached the
> conviction that the domination of man over man will not disappear
> until there is an end of the exploitation of man by man."*
> [**Nationalism and Culture**, p. 167]

There are other, related, reasons why the individualist anarchists must
be considered left-wing libertarians rather than right-wing ones. Given
their opposition to non-labour income, they saw their proposals as
having egalitarian implications. As regards equality, we discover that
they saw their ideas as promoting it. Thus we find Tucker arguing that
that the *"happiness possible in any society that does not improve upon
the present in the matter of distribution of wealth, can hardly be
described as beatific."* He was clearly opposed to *"the inequitable
distribution of wealth"* under capitalism and equally clearly saw his
proposals as a means of reducing it substantially. The abolition of
those class monopolies which create interest, rent and profit would
reduce income and wealth inequalities substantially. However, there was
*"one exception, and that a comparatively trivial one"*, namely economic
rent (the natural differences between different bits of land and
individual labour). This *"will probably remain with us always. Complete
liberty will very much lessen it; of that I have no doubt . . . At the
worst, it will be a small matter, no more worth consideration in
comparison with the liberty than the slight disparity that will always
exist in consequence of inequalities of skill."* [*"Why I am an
Anarchist"*, pp. 132-6, **Man!**, M. Graham (ed.), pp. 135-6] Another
individualist anarchist, John Beverley Robinson, agreed:

> *"When privilege is abolished, and the worker retains all that he
> produces, then will come the powerful trend toward equality of
> material reward for labour that will produce substantial financial and
> social equality, instead of the mere political equality that now
> exists."* [**Patterns of Anarchy**, pp. 278-9]

As did Lysander Spooner, who pointed out that the *"wheel of fortune, in
the present state of things, is of such enormous diameter"* and *"those
on its top are on so showy a height"* wjile *"those underneath it are in
such a pit of debt, oppression, and despair."* He argued that under his
system *"fortunes could hardly be represented by a wheel; for it would
present no such height, no such depth, no such irregularity of motion as
now. It should rather be represented by an extended surface, varied
somewhat by inequalities, but still exhibiting a general level,
affording a safe position for all, and creating no necessity, for either
force or fraud, on the part of anyone to secure his standing."* Thus
Individualist anarchism would create a condition *"neither of poverty,
nor riches; but of moderate competency -- such as will neither enervate
him by luxury, nor disable him by destitution; but which will at once
give him and opportunity to labour, (both mentally and physically) and
stimulate him by offering him all the fruits of his labours."* [quoted
by Stephan L. Newman, **Liberalism at Wit's End**, p. 72 and p. 73]

As one commentator on individualist anarchism, Wm. Gary Kline, correctly
tsummarised:

> *"Their proposals were designed to establish true equality of
> opportunity . . . and they expected this to result in a society
> without great wealth or poverty. In the absence of monopolistic
> factors which would distort competition, they expected a society of
> largely self-employed workmen with no significant disparity of wealth
> between any of them since all would be required to live at their own
> expense and not at the expense of exploited fellow human beings."*
> [**The Individualist Anarchists: A Critique of Liberalism**, pp.
> 103-4]

Hence, like social anarchists, the Individualist Anarchists saw their
ideas as a means towards equality. By eliminating exploitation,
inequality would soon decrease as wealth would no longer accumulate in
the hands of the few (the owners). Rather, it would flow back into the
hands of those who produced it (i.e. the workers). Until this occurred,
society would see *"[o]n one side a dependent class of wage-workers and
on the other a privileged class of wealth-monopolisers, each become more
and more distinct from the other as capitalism advances."* This has
*"resulted in a grouping and consolidation of wealth which grows apace
by attracting all property, no matter by whom produced, into the hands
of the privileged, and hence property becomes a social power, an
economic force destructive of rights, a fertile source of injustice, a
means of enslaving the dispossessed."* [William Ballie, **The
Individualist Anarchists**, p. 121]

Moreover, like the social anarchists, the Individualist Anarchists were
aware that the state was not some neutral machine or one that exploited
all classes purely for its own ends. They were aware that it was a
vehicle of **class rule,** namely the rule of the capitalist class over
the working class. Spooner thought that that *"holders of this monopoly
[of the money supply] now rule and rob this nation; and the government,
in all its branches, is simply their tool"* and that *"the employers of
wage labour . . . are also the monopolists of money."* [Spooner, **A
Letter to Grover Cleveland**, p. 42 and p. 48] Tucker recognised that
*"capital had so manipulated legislation"* that they gained an advantage
on the capitalist market which allowed them to exploit labour. [**The
Individualist Anarchists**, pp. 82-3] He was quite clear that the state
was a **capitalist** state, with *"Capitalists hav[ing] placed and kept
on the statute books all sorts of prohibitions and taxes"* to ensure a
"free market" skewed in favour of themselves. [**Instead of a Book**, p.
454] A.H. Simpson argued that the Individualist Anarchist *"knows very
well that the present State . . . is simply the tool of the
property-owning class."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 92] Thus
both wings of the anarchist movement were united in their opposition to
capitalist exploitation and their common recognition that the state was
a tool of the capitalist class, used to allow them to exploit the
working class.

Tucker, like other individualist anarchists, also supported labour
unions, and although he opposed violence during strikes he recognised
that it was caused by frustration due to an unjust system. Indeed, like
social anarchists, he considered *"the labourer in these days [as] a
soldier. . . His employer is . . . a member of an opposing army. The
whole industrial and commercial world is in a state of internecine war,
in which the proletaires are massed on one side and the proprietors on
the other."* The cause of strikes rested in the fact that *"before . . .
strikers violated the equal liberty of others, their own right to
equality of liberty had been wantonly and continuously violated"* by the
capitalists using the state, for the *"capitalists . . . in denying [a
free market] to [the workers] are guilty of criminal invasion."*
[**Instead of a Book**, p. 460 and p. 454] *"With our present economic
system,"* Tucker stressed, *"almost every strike is just. For what is
justice in production and distribution? That labour, which creates all,
shall have **all.**"* [**Liberty**, no. 19, p. 1]

Another important aspects of unions and strikes were that they
represented both a growing class consciousness and the ability to change
society. *"It is the power of the great unions to paralyse industry and
**ignore** the government that has alarmed the political burglars,"*
argued Victor Yarrows. This explained why unions and strikes were
crushed by force as *"the State can have no rival, say the plutocrats,
and the trades unions, with the sympathetic strike and boycott as
weapons, are becoming too formidable."* Even defeated strikes were
useful as they ensured that *"the strikers and their sympathisers will
have acquired some additional knowledge of the essential nature of the
beast, government, which plainly has no other purpose at present than to
protect monopoly and put down all opposition to it."* *"There is such a
thing as the solidarity of labour,"* Yarrows went on, *"and it is a
healthy and encouraging sign that workmen recognise the need of mutual
support and co-operation in their conflict with monopoly and its
official and unofficial servants. Labour has to fight government as well
as capital, 'law and order' as well as plutocracy. It cannot make the
slightest movement against monopoly without colliding with some sort of
'authority', Federal, State, or municipal."* The problem was that the
unions *"have no clear general aims and deal with results rather than
causes."* [**Liberty**, no. 291, p. 3]

This analysis echoed Tucker's, who applauded the fact that *"[a]nother
era of strikes apparently is upon us. In all trades and in all sections
of the country labour is busy with its demands and its protests. Liberty
rejoices in them. They give evidence of life and spirit and hope and
growing intelligence. They show that the people are beginning to know
their rights, and, knowing, dare to maintain them. Strikes, whenever and
wherever inaugurated, deserve encouragement from all true friends of
labour."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 19, p. 1] Even failed strikes were useful,
for they exposed *"the tremendous and dangerous power now wielded by
capital."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 39, p. 1] The *"capitalists and their
tools, the legislatures, already begin to scent the impending dangers of
trades-union socialism and initiatory steps are on foot in the
legislatures of several states to construe labour combinations as
conspiracies against commerce and industry, and suppress them by law."*
[**Op. Cit.**, no. 22, p. 3]

Some individualist anarchists, like Dyer Lum and Joseph Labadie, were
union organisers while Ezra Heywood *"scoffed at supporters of the
status quo, who saw no evidence of the tyranny on the part of capital,
and who brought up the matter of free contract with reference to
labourers. This argument was no longer valid. Capital controlled land,
machinery, steam power, waterfalls, ships, railways, and above all,
money and public opinion, and was in a position to wait out
recalcitrancy at its leisure."* [Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 107] For Lum,
*"behind the capitalist . . . privilege stands as support"* and so
social circumstances matter. *"Does liberty exist,"* he argued, *"where
rent, interest, and profit hold the employee in economic subjection to
the legalised possessor of the means of life? To plead for individual
liberty under the present social conditions, to refuse to abate one jot
of control that legalised capital has over individual labour, and to
assert that the demand for restrictive or class legislation comes only
from the voluntary associations of workmen [i.e., trade unions] is not
alone the height of impudence, but a barefaced jugglery of words."*
[**Liberty**, no. 101, p. 5]

Likewise, Tucker advocated and supported many other forms of non-violent
direct action as well as workplace strikes, such as boycotts and rent
strikes, seeing them as important means of radicalising the working
class and creating an anarchist society. However, like social anarchists
the Individualist Anarchists did not consider labour struggle as an end
in itself -- they considered reforms (and discussion of a *"fair wage"*
and *"harmony between capital and labour"*) as essentially
*"conservative"* and would be satisfied with no less than *"the
abolition of the monopoly privileges of capital and interest-taking, and
the return to labour of the full value of its production."* [Victor
Yarros, quoted by Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 206f]

Therefore, it is clear that both social and Individualist Anarchists
share much in common, including an opposition to capitalism. The former
may have been in favour of free exchange but between equally situated
individuals. Only given a context of equality can free exchange be
considered to benefit both parties equally and not generate growing
inequalities which benefit the stronger of the parties involved which,
in turn, skews the bargaining position of those involved in favour of
the stronger (also see [section F.3](secF3.html)).

It is unsurprising, therefore, that the individualist anarchists
considered themselves as socialists. Like Proudhon, they desired a
(libertarian) socialist system based on the market but without
exploitation and which rested on possession rather than capitalist
private property. With Proudhon, only the ignorant or mischievous would
suggest that such a system was capitalistic. The Individualist
Anarchists, as can be seen, fit very easily into Kropotkin's comments
that *"the anarchists, in common with all socialists . . . maintain that
the now prevailing system of private ownership in land, and our
capitalist production for the sake of profits, represent a monopoly
which runs against both the principles of justice and the dictates of
utility."* [**Anarchism**, p. 285] While they rejected the
communist-anarchist solution to the social question, they knew that such
a question existed and was rooted in the exploitation of labour and the
prevailing system of property rights.

So why is Individualist Anarchism and Proudhon's mutualism socialist?
Simply because they opposed the exploitation of labour by capital and
proposed a means of ending it. The big debate between social and
individualist anarchists is revolves around whether the other school can
**really** achieve this common goal and whether its proposed solution
would, in fact, secure meaningful individual liberty for all.

G.1.1 What about their support of the free market?
--------------------------------------------------

Many, particularly on the "libertarian"-right, would dismiss claims that
the Individualist Anarchists were socialists. By their support of the
"free market" the Individualist Anarchists, they would claim, show
themselves as really supporters of capitalism. Most, if not all,
anarchists would reject this claim. Why is this the case?

This because such claims show an amazing ignorance of socialist ideas
and history. The socialist movement has had a many schools, many of
which, but not all, opposed the market and private property. Given that
the right "libertarians" who make such claims are usually not well
informed of the ideas they oppose (i.e. of socialism, particularly
**libertarian** socialism) it is unsurprising they claim that the
Individualist Anarchists are not socialists (of course the fact that
many Individualist Anarchists argued they **were** socialists is
ignored). Coming from a different tradition, it is unsurprising they are
not aware of the fact that socialism is not monolithic. Hence we
discover right-"libertarian" guru von Mises claiming that the *"essence
of socialism is the entire elimination of the market."* [**Human
Action**, p. 702] This would have come as something of a surprise to,
say, Proudhon, who argued that *"[t]o suppress competition is to
suppress liberty itself."* [**The General Idea of the Revolution**, p.
50] Similarly, it would have surprised Tucker, who called himself a
socialist while supporting a freer market than von Mises ever dreamt of.
As Tucker put it:

> *"**Liberty** has always insisted that Individualism and Socialism are
> not antithetical terms; that, on the contrary, the most perfect
> Socialism is possible only on condition of the most perfect
> Individualism; and that Socialism includes, not only Collectivism and
> Communism, but also that school of Individualist Anarchism which
> conceives liberty as a means of destroying usury and the exploitation
> of labour."* [**Liberty**, no. 129, p. 2]

Hence we find Tucker calling his ideas both *"Anarchistic Socialism"*
and *"Individualist Socialism"* while other individualist anarchists
have used the terms *"free market anti-capitalism"* and *"free market
socialism"* to describe the ideas.

The central fallacy of the argument that support for markets equals
support for capitalism is that many self-proclaimed socialists are not
opposed to the market. Indeed, some of the earliest socialists were
market socialists (people like Thomas Hodgskin and William Thompson,
although the former ended up rejecting socialism and the latter became a
communal-socialist). Proudhon, as noted, was a well known supporter of
market exchange. German sociologist Franz Oppenheimer expounded a
similar vision to Proudhon and called himself a *"liberal socialist"* as
he favoured a free market but recognised that capitalism was a system of
exploitation. [*"Introduction"*, **The State**, p. vii] Today, market
socialists like David Schweickart (see his **Against Capitalism** and
**After Capitalism**) and David Miller (see his **Market, State, and
community: theoretical foundations of market socialism**) are expounding
a similar vision to Proudhon's, namely of a market economy based on
co-operatives (albeit one which retains a state). Unfortunately, they
rarely, if ever, acknowledge their debt to Proudhon (needless to say,
their Leninist opponents do as, from their perspective, it damns the
market socialists as not being real socialists).

It could, possibly, be argued that these self-proclaimed socialists did
not, in fact, understand what socialism "really meant." For this to be
the case, **other**, more obviously socialist, writers and thinkers
would dismiss them as not being socialists. This, however, is not the
case. Thus we find Karl Marx, for example, writing of *"the socialism of
Proudhon."* [**Capital**, vol. 1, p. 161f] Engels talked about Proudhon
being *"the Socialist of the small peasant and master-craftsman"* and of
*"the Proudhon school of Socialism."* [Marx and Engels, **Selected
Works**, p. 254 and p. 255] Bakunin talked about Proudhon's *"socialism,
based on individual and collective liberty and upon the spontaneous
action of free associations."* He considered his own ideas as
*"Proudhonism widely developed and pushed right to these, its final
consequences"* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 100 and p.
198] For Kropotkin, while Godwin was *"first theoriser of Socialism
without government -- that is to say, of Anarchism"* Proudhon was the
second as he, *"without knowing Godwin's work, laid anew the foundations
of Anarchism."* He lamented that *"many modern Socialists"* supported
*"centralisation and the cult of authority"* and so *"have not yet
reached the level of their two predecessors, Godwin and Proudhon."*
[**Evolution and Environment**, pp. 26-7] These renown socialists did
not consider Proudhon's position to be in any way anti-socialist
(although, of course, being critical of whether it would work and its
desirability if it did). Tucker, it should be noted, called Proudhon
*"the father of the Anarchistic school of Socialism."* [**Instead of a
Book**, p. 381] Little wonder, then, that the likes of Tucker considered
themselves socialists and stated numerous times that they were.

Looking at Tucker and the Individualist anarchists we discover that
other socialists considered them socialists. Rudolf Rocker stated that
*"it is not difficult to discover certain fundamental principles which
are common to all of them and which divide them from all other varieties
of socialism. They all agree on the point that man be given the full
reward of his labour and recognise in this right the economic basis of
all personal liberty. They all regard the free competition of individual
and social forces as something inherent in human nature . . . They
answered the socialists of other schools who saw in **free competition**
one of the destructive elements of capitalist society that the evil lies
in the fact we have too little rather than too much competition, since
the power of monopoly has made competition impossible."* [**Pioneers of
American Freedom**, p. 160] Malatesta, likewise, saw many schools of
socialism, including *"anarchist or authoritarian, mutualist or
individualist."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 95]

Adolph Fischer, one of the Haymarket Martyrs and contemporary of Tucker,
argued that *"every anarchist is a socialist, but every socialist is not
necessarily an anarchist. The anarchists are divided into two factions:
the communistic anarchists and the Proudhon or middle-class
anarchists."* The former *"advocate the communistic or co-operative
method of production"* while the latter *"do not advocate the
co-operative system of production, and the common ownership of the means
of production, the products and the land."* [**The Autobiographies of
the Haymarket Martyrs**, p. 81] However, while not being communists
(i.e. aiming to eliminate the market), he obviously recognised the
Individualists Anarchists as fellow socialists (we should point out that
Proudhon **did** support co-operatives, but they did not carry this to
communism as do most social anarchists -- as is clear, Fischer means
communism by the term *"co-operative system of production"* rather than
co-operatives as they exist today and Proudhon supported -- see [section
G.4.2](secG4.html#secg42)).

Thus claims that the Individualist Anarchists were not "really"
socialists because they supported a market system cannot be supported.
The simple fact is that those who make this claim are, at best, ignorant
of the socialist movement, its ideas and its history or, at worse,
desire, like many Marxists, to write out of history competing socialist
theories. For example, Leninist David McNally talks of the
*"anarcho-socialist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"* and how Marx combated
*"Proudhonian socialism"* before concluding that it was
*"non-socialism"* because it has *"wage-labour and exploitation."*
[**Against the Market**, p. 139 and p. 169] Of course, that this is not
true (even in a Marxist sense) did not stop him asserting it. As one
reviewer correctly points out, *"McNally is right that even in market
socialism, market forces rule workers' lives"* and this is *"a serious
objection. But it is not tantamount to capitalism or to wage labour"*
and it *"does not have exploitation in Marx's sense (i.e., wrongful
expropriation of surplus by non-producers)"* [Justin Schwartz, **The
American Political Science Review**, Vol. 88, No. 4, p. 982] For Marx,
as we noted in [section C.2](secC2.html), commodity production only
becomes capitalism when there is the exploitation of wage labour. This
is the case with Proudhon as well, who differentiated between possession
and private property and argued that co-operatives should replace
capitalist firms. While their specific solutions may have differed (with
Proudhon aiming for a market economy consisting of artisans, peasants
and co-operatives while Marx aimed for communism, i.e. the abolition of
money via state ownership of capital) their analysis of capitalism and
private property were identical -- which Tucker consistently noted (as
regards the theory of surplus value, for example, he argued that
*"Proudhon propounded and proved [it] long before Marx advanced it."*
[**Liberty**, no. 92, p. 1])

As Tucker argued, *"the fact that State Socialism . . . has overshadowed
other forms of Socialism gives it no right to a monopoly of the
Socialistic idea."* [**Instead of a Book**, pp. 363-4] It is no surprise
that the authoritarian left and "libertarian" right have united to
define socialism in such a way as to eliminate anarchism from its ranks
-- they both have an interest in removing a theory which exposes the
inadequacies of their dogmas, which explains how we can have both
liberty **and** equality and have a decent, free and just society.

There is another fallacy at the heart of the claim that markets and
socialism do not go together, namely that all markets are capitalist
markets. So another part of the problem is that the same word often
means different things to different people. Both Kropotkin and Lenin
said they were "communists" and aimed for "communism." However, it does
not mean that the society Kropotkin aimed for was the same as that
desired by Lenin. Kropotkin's communism was decentralised, created and
run from the bottom-up while Lenin's was fundamentally centralised and
top-down. Similarly, both Tucker and the Social-Democrat (and leading
Marxist) Karl Kautsky called themselves a "socialist" yet their ideas on
what a socialist society would be like were extremely different. As J.W.
Baker notes, *"Tucker considered himself a socialist . . . as the result
of his struggle against 'usury and capitalism,' but anything that
smelled of 'state socialism' was thoroughly rejected."* [*"Native
American Anarchism,"* pp. 43-62, **The Raven**, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 60]
This, of course, does not stop many "anarcho"-capitalists talking about
"socialist" goals as if all socialists were Stalinists (or, at best,
social democrats). In fact, "socialist anarchism" has included (and
continues to include) advocates of truly free markets as well as
advocates of a non-market socialism which has absolutely nothing in
common with the state capitalist tyranny of Stalinism. Similarly, they
accept a completely ahistorical definition of "capitalism," so ignoring
the massive state violence and support by which that system was created
and is maintained.

The same with terms like "property" and the "free market," by which the
"anarcho"-capitalist assumes the individualist anarchist means the same
thing as they do. We can take land as an example. The individualist
anarchists argued for an ***"occupancy and use"*** system of "property"
(see [next section](secG1.html#secg12) for details). Thus in their "free
market," land would not be a commodity as it is under capitalism and so
under individualist anarchism absentee landlords would be considered as
aggressors (for under capitalism they use state coercion to back up
their collection of rent against the actual occupiers of property).
Tucker argued that local defence associations should treat the occupier
and user as the rightful owner, and defend them against the aggression
of an absentee landlord who attempted to collect rent. An
"anarcho"-capitalist would consider this as aggression **against** the
landlord and a violation of "free market" principles. Such a system of
"occupancy and use" would involve massive violations of what is
considered normal in a capitalist "free market." Equally, a market
system which was based on capitalist property rights in land would
**not** be considered as genuinely free by the likes of Tucker.

This can be seen from Tucker's debates with supporters of laissez-faire
capitalism such as Auberon Herbert (who, as discussed in [section
F.7.2](secF7.html#secf72), was an English minimal statist and sometimes
called a forerunner of "anarcho"-capitalism). Tucker quoted an English
critic of Herbert, who noted that *"When we come to the question of the
ethical basis of property, Mr. Herbert refers us to 'the open market'.
But this is an evasion. The question is not whether we should be able to
sell or acquire 'in the open market' anything which we rightfully
possess, but how we come into rightful possession."* [**Liberty**, no.
172, p. 7] Tucker rejected the idea *"that a man should be allowed a
title to as much of the earth as he, in the course of his life, with the
aid of all the workmen that he can employ, may succeed in covering with
buildings. It is occupancy **and** use that Anarchism regards as the
basis of land ownership, . . . A man cannot be allowed, merely by
putting labour, to the limit of his capacity and beyond the limit of his
person use, into material of which there is a limited supply and the use
of which is essential to the existence of other men, to withhold that
material from other men's use; and any contract based upon or involving
such withholding is as lacking in sanctity or legitimacy as a contract
to deliver stolen goods."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 331, p. 4]

In other words, an individualist anarchist would consider an
"anarcho"-capitalist "free market" as nothing of the kind and vice
versa. For the former, the individualist anarchist position on
"property" would be considered as forms of regulation and restrictions
on private property and so the "free market." The individualist
anarchist would consider the "anarcho"-capitalist "free market" as
another system of legally maintained privilege, with the free market
distorted in favour of the wealthy. That capitalist property rights were
being maintained by private police would not stop that regime being
unfree. This can be seen when "anarcho"-capitalist Wendy McElroy states
that *"radical individualism hindered itself . . . Perhaps most
destructively, individualism clung to the labour theory of value and
refused to incorporate the economic theories arising within other
branches of individualist thought, theories such as marginal utility.
Unable to embrace statism, the stagnant movement failed to adequately
comprehend the logical alternative to the state -- a free market."*
[*"Benjamin Tucker, **Liberty**, and Individualist Anarchism"*, pp.
421-434, **The Independent Review**, vol. II, No. 3, p. 433] Therefore,
rather than being a source of commonality, individualist anarchism and
"anarcho"-capitalism actually differ quite considerably on what counts
as a genuinely free market.

So it should be remembered that "anarcho"-capitalists at best agree with
Tucker, Spooner, et al on fairly vague notions like the "free market."
They do not bother to find out what the individualist anarchists meant
by that term. Indeed, the "anarcho"-capitalist embrace of different
economic theories means that they actually reject the reasoning that
leads up to these nominal "agreements." It is the "anarcho"-capitalists
who, by rejecting the underlying economics of the mutualists, are forced
to take any "agreements" out of context. It also means that when faced
with obviously anti-capitalist arguments and conclusions of the
individualist anarchists, the "anarcho"-capitalist cannot explain them
and are reduced to arguing that the anti-capitalist concepts and
opinions expressed by the likes of Tucker are somehow "out of context."
In contrast, the anarchist can explain these so-called "out of context"
concepts by placing them into the context of the ideas of the
individualist anarchists and the society which shaped them.

The "anarcho"-capitalist usually admits that they totally disagree with
many of the essential premises and conclusions of the individualist
anarchist analyses (see [next section](secG3.html)). The most basic
difference is that the individualist anarchists rooted their ideas in
the labour theory of value while the "anarcho"-capitalists favour
mainstream marginalist theory. It does not take much thought to realise
that advocates of socialist theories and those of capitalist ones will
naturally develop differing notions of what is and what should be
happening within a given economic system. One difference that **has** in
fact arisen is that the notion of what constitutes a "free market" has
differed according to the theory of value applied. Many things can be
attributed to the workings of a "free" market under a capitalist
analysis that would be considered symptoms of economic unfreedom under
most socialist driven analyses.

This can be seen if you look closely at the case of Tucker's comments
that anarchism was simply *"consistent Manchesterianism."* If this is
done then a simple example of this potential confusion can be found.
Tucker argued that anarchists *"accused"* the Manchester men *"of being
inconsistent,"* that while being in favour of laissez faire for *"the
labourer in order to reduce his wages"* they did not believe *"in
liberty to compete with the capitalist in order to reduce his usury."*
[**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 83] To be consistent in this case
is to be something other -- and more demanding in terms of what is
accepted as "freedom" -- than the average Manchesterian (i.e. a
supporter of "free market" capitalism). By *"consistent Manchesterism"*,
Tucker meant a laissez-faire system in which class monopolies did not
exist, where capitalist private property in land and intellectual
property did not exist. In other words, a free market purged of its
capitalist aspects. Partisans of the capitalist theory see things
differently, of course, feeling justified in calling many things "free"
that anarchists would not accept, and seeing "constraint" in what the
anarchists simply thought of as "consistency." This explains both his
criticism of capitalism **and** state socialism:

> *"The complaint of the Archist Socialists that the Anarchists are
> bourgeois is true to this extent and no further -- that, great as is
> their detestation for a bourgeois society, they prefer its partial
> liberty to the complete slavery of State Socialism."* [*"Why I am an
> Anarchist"*, pp. 132-6, **Man!**, M. Graham (ed.), p. 136]

It should be clear that a "free market" will look somewhat different
depending on your economic presuppositions. Ironically, this is
something "anarcho"-capitalists implicitly acknowledge when they admit
they do not agree with the likes of Spooner and Tucker on many of their
key premises and conclusions (but that does not stop them claiming --
despite all that -- that their ideas are a modern version of
individualist anarchism!). Moreover, the "anarcho"-capitalist simply
dismisses all the reasoning that got Tucker there -- that is like trying
to justify a law citing Leviticus but then saying "but of course all
that God stuff is just absurd." You cannot have it both ways. And, of
course, the "anarcho"-capitalist support for non-labour based economics
allow them to side-step (and so ignore) much of what anarchists --
communists, collectivists, individualists, mutualists and syndicalists
alike -- consider authoritarian and coercive about "actually existing"
capitalism. But the difference in economic analysis is critical. No
matter what they are called, it is pretty clear that individualist
anarchist standards for the freedom of markets are far more demanding
than those associated with even the freest capitalist market system.

This is best seen from the development of individualist anarchism in the
20th century. As historian Charles A. Madison noted, it *"began to
dwindle rapidly after 1900. Some of its former adherents joined the more
aggressive communistic faction . . . many others began to favour the
rising socialist movement as the only effective weapon against
billion-dollar corporations."* [*"Benjamin R. Tucker: Individualist and
Anarchist,"* pp. 444-67, **The New England Quarterly**, Vol. 16, No. 3,
pp. p. 464] Other historians have noted the same. *"By 1908,"* argued
Eunice Minette Schuster *"the industrial system had fastened its claws
into American soil"* and while the *"Individualist Anarchists had
attempted to destroy monopoly, privilege, and inequality, originating in
the lack of opportunity"* the *"superior force of the system which they
opposed . . . overwhelmed"* them. Tucker left America in 1908 and those
who remained *"embraced either Anarchist-Communism as the result of
governmental violence against the labourers and their cause, or
abandoned the cause entirely."* [**Native American Anarchism**, p. 158,
pp. 159-60 and p. 156] While individualist anarchism did not entirely
disappear with the ending of **Liberty**, social anarchism became the
dominant trend in America as it had elsewhere in the world.

As we note in [section G.4](secG4.html), the apparent impossibility of
mutual banking to eliminate corporations by economic competition was one
of the reasons Voltairine de Cleyre pointed to for rejecting
individualist anarchism in favour of communist-anarchism. This problem
was recognised by Tucker himself thirty years after **Liberty** had been
founded. In the postscript to a 1911 edition of his famous essay *"State
Socialism and Anarchism"*, he argued that when he wrote it 25 years
earlier *"the denial of competition had not effected the enormous
concentration of wealth that now so gravely threatens social order"* and
so while a policy of mutual banking might have stopped and reversed the
process of accumulation in the past, the way now was *"not so clear."*
This was because the tremendous capitalisation of industry now made the
money monopoly a convenience, but no longer a necessity. Admitted
Tucker, the *"trust is now a monster which . . . even the freest
competition, could it be instituted, would be unable to destroy"* as
*"concentrated capital"* could set aside a sacrifice fund to bankrupt
smaller competitors and continue the process of expansion of reserves.
Thus the growth of economic power, producing as it does natural barriers
to entry from the process of capitalist production and accumulation, had
resulted in a situation where individualist anarchist solutions could no
longer reform capitalism away. The centralisation of capital had
*"passed for the moment beyond their reach."* The problem of the trusts,
he argued, *"must be grappled with for a time solely by forces political
or revolutionary,"* i.e., through confiscation either through the
machinery of government *"or in denial of it."* Until this *"great
levelling"* occurred, all individualist anarchists could do was to
spread their ideas as those trying to *"hasten it by joining in the
propaganda of State Socialism or revolution make a sad mistake indeed."*
[quoted by James J. Martin, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 273-4]

In other words, the economic power of *"concentrated capital"* and
*"enormous concentration of wealth"* placed an insurmountable obstacle
to the realisation of anarchy. Which means that the abolition of usury
and relative equality were considered **ends** rather than side effects
for Tucker and if free competition could not achieve these then such a
society would **not** be anarchist. If economic inequality was large
enough, it meant anarchism was impossible as the rule of capital could
be maintained by economic power alone without the need for extensive
state intervention (this was, of course, the position of revolutionary
anarchists like Bakunin, Most and Kropotkin in the 1870s and onwards
whom Tucker dismissed as not being anarchists).

Victor Yarros is another example, an individualist anarchist and
associate of Tucker, who by the 1920s had abandoned anarchism for social
democracy, in part because he had become convinced that economic
privilege could not be fought by economic means. As he put it, the most
*"potent"* of the *"factors and forces [which] tended to undermine and
discredit that movement"* was *"the amazing growth of trusts and
syndicates, of holding companies and huge corporations, of chain banks
and chain stores."* This *"gradually and insidiously shook the faith of
many in the efficacy of mutual banks, co-operative associations of
producers and consumers, and the competition of little fellows.
Proudhon's plan for a bank of the people to make industrial loans
without interest to workers' co-operatives, or other members, seemed
remote and inapplicable to an age of mass production, mechanisation,
continental and international markets."* [*"Philosophical Anarchism: Its
Rise, Decline, and Eclipse"*, pp. 470-483, **The American Journal of
Sociology**, vol. 41, no. 4, p. 481]

If the individualist anarchists shared the "anarcho"-capitalist position
or even shared a common definition of "free markets" then the *"power of
the trusts"* would simply not be an issue. This is because
"anarcho"-capitalism does not acknowledge the existence of such power,
as, by definition, it does not exist in capitalism (although as noted in
[section F.1](secF1.html) Rothbard himself proved critics of this
assertion right). Tucker's comments, therefore, indicate well how far
individualist anarchism actually is from "anarcho"-capitalism. The
"anarcho"-capitalist desires free markets no matter their result or the
concentration of wealth existing at their introduction. As can be seen,
Tucker saw the existence of concentrations of wealth as a problem and a
hindrance towards anarchy. Thus Tucker was well aware of the dangers to
individual liberty of inequalities of wealth and the economic power they
produce. Equally, if Tucker supported the "free market" above all else
then he would not have argued this point. Clearly, then, Tucker's
support for the "free market" cannot be abstracted from his fundamental
principles nor can it be equated with a "free market" based on
capitalist property rights and massive inequalities in wealth (and so
economic power). Thus individualist anarchist support for the free
market does not mean support for a **capitalist** "free market."

In summary, the "free market" as sought by (say) Tucker would not be
classed as a "free market" by right-wing "libertarians." So the term
"free market" (and, of course, "socialism") can mean different things to
different people. As such, it would be correct to state that **all**
anarchists oppose the "free market" by definition as all anarchists
oppose the **capitalist** "free market." And, just as correctly,
"anarcho"-capitalists would oppose the individualist anarchist "free
market," arguing that it would be no such thing as it would be
restrictive of property rights (**capitalist** property rights of
course). For example, the question of resource use in an individualist
society is totally different than in a capitalist "free market" as
landlordism would not exist. This is a restriction on capitalist
property rights and a violation of a capitalist "free market." So an
individualist "free market" would not be considered so by right-wing
"libertarians" due to the substantial differences in the rights on which
it would be based (with no right to capitalist private property being
the most important).

All this means that to go on and on about individualist anarchism and it
support for a free market simply misses the point. No one denies that
individualist anarchists were (and are) in favour of a "free market" but
this did not mean they were not socialists nor that they wanted the same
kind of "free market" desired by "anarcho"-capitalism or that has
existed under capitalism. Of course, whether their economic system would
actually result in the abolition of exploitation and oppression is
another matter and it is on this issue which social anarchists disagree
with individualist anarchism **not** whether they are socialists or not.

G.1.2 What about their support of "private property"?
-----------------------------------------------------

The notion that because the Individualist Anarchists supported "private
property" they supported capitalism is distinctly wrong. This is for two
reasons. Firstly, private property is not the distinctive aspect of
capitalism -- exploitation of wage labour is. Secondly, and more
importantly, what the Individualist Anarchists meant by "private
property" (or "property") was distinctly different than what is meant by
theorists on the "libertarian"-right or what is commonly accepted as
"private property" under capitalism. Thus support of private property
does not indicate a support for capitalism.

On the first issue, it is important to note that there are many
different kinds of private property. If quoting Karl Marx is not **too**
out of place:

> "Political economy confuses, on principle, two very different kinds of
> private property, one of which rests on the labour of the producer
> himself, and the other on the exploitation of the labour of others. It
> forgets that the latter is not only the direct antithesis of the
> former, but grows on the former's tomb and nowhere else.
>
> "In Western Europe, the homeland of political economy, the process of
> primitive accumulation is more of less accomplished . . .
>
> "It is otherwise in the colonies. There the capitalist regime
> constantly comes up against the obstacle presented by the producer,
> who, as owner of his own conditions of labour, employs that labour to
> enrich himself instead of the capitalist. The contradiction of these
> two diametrically opposed economic systems has its practical
> manifestation here in the struggle between them." [**Capital**, vol.
> 1, p. 931]

So, under capitalism, *"property turns out to be the right, on the part
of the capitalist, to appropriate the unpaid labour of others, or its
product, and the impossibility, on the part of the worker, of
appropriating his own product."* In other words, property is not viewed
as being identical with capitalism. *"The historical conditions of
[Capital's] existence are by no means given with the mere circulation of
money and commodities. It arises only when the owner of the means of
production and subsistence finds the free worker available on the
market, as the seller of his own labour-power."* Thus wage-labour, for
Marx, is the necessary pre-condition for capitalism, **not** "private
property" as such as *"the means of production and subsistence, while
they remain the property of the immediate producer, are not capital.
They only become capital under circumstances in which they serve at the
same time as means of exploitation of, and domination over, the
worker."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 730, p. 264 and p. 938]

For Engels, *"[b]efore capitalistic production"* industry was *"based
upon the private property of the labourers in their means of
production"*, i.e., *"the agriculture of the small peasant"* and *"the
handicrafts organised in guilds."* Capitalism, he argued, was based on
capitalists owning *"**social** means of production only workable by a
collectivity of men"* and so they *"appropriated . . . the product of
the **labour of others**."* Both, it should be noted, had also made this
same distinction in the **Communist Manifesto**, stating that *"the
distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of property
generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property."* Artisan and
peasant property is *"a form that preceded the bourgeois form"* which
there *"is no need to abolish"* as *"the development of industry has to
a great extent already destroyed it."* This means that communism
*"derives no man of the power to appropriate the products of society;
all that it does is to deprive him of the power to subjugate the labour
of others by means of such appropriation."* [Marx and Engels, **Selected
Works**, p. 412, p. 413, p. 414, p. 47 and p. 49]

We quote Marx and Engels simply because as authorities on socialism go,
they are ones that right-"libertarians" (or Marxists, for that matter)
cannot ignore or dismiss. Needless to say, they are presenting an
identical analysis to that of Proudhon in **What is Property?** and,
significantly, Godwin in his **Political Justice** (although, of course,
the conclusions drawn from this common critique of capitalism were
radically different in the case of Proudhon). This is, it must be
stressed, simply Proudhon's distinction between property and possession
(see [section B.3.1](secB3.html#secb31)). The former is theft and
despotism, the latter is liberty. In other words, for genuine
anarchists, "property" is a ***social relation*** and that a key element
of anarchist thinking (both social and individualist) was the need to
redefine that relation in accord with standards of liberty and justice.

So what right-"libertarians" do when they point out that the
individualist anarchists supported property is to misunderstand the
socialist critique of capitalism. They, to paraphrase Marx, confuse two
very different kinds of "property," one of which rests on the labour of
the producers themselves and the other on the exploitation of the labour
of others. They do not analyse the social relationships between people
which the property in question generates and, instead, concentrate on
**things** (i.e. property). Thus, rather than being interested in people
and the relationships they create between themselves, the
right-"libertarian" focuses on property (and, more often than not, just
the word rather than what the word describes). This is a strange
position for someone seeking liberty to take, as liberty is a product of
social interaction (i.e. the relations we have and create with others)
and not a product of things (property is not freedom as freedom is a
relationship between people, not things). They confuse property with
possession (and vice versa).

In pre-capitalist social environments, when property is directly owned
by the producer, capitalist defences of private property can be used
against it. Even John Locke's arguments in favour of private property
could be used against capitalism. As Murray Bookchin makes clear
regarding pre-capitalist society:

> *"Unknown in the 1640s, the non-bourgeois aspects of Locke's theories
> were very much in the air a century and a half later . . . [In an
> artisan/peasant society] a Lockean argument could be used as
> effectively against the merchants . . . to whom the farmers were
> indebted, as it could against the King [or the State]. Nor did the
> small proprietors of America ever quite lose sight of the view that
> attempts to seize their farmsteads and possessions for unpaid debts
> were a violation of their 'natural rights,' and from the 1770s until
> as late as the 1930s they took up arms to keep merchants and bankers
> from dispossessing them from land they or their ancestors had wrestled
> from 'nature' by virtue of their own labour. The notion that property
> was sacred was thus highly elastic: it could be used as effectively by
> pre-capitalist strata to hold on to their property as it could by
> capitalists strata to expand their holdings."* [**The Third
> Revolution**, vol. 1, pp. 187-8]

The individualist anarchists inherited this perspective on property and
sought means of ending the transformation of American society from one
where labour-property predominated into one where capitalist private
property (and so exploitation) predominated. Thus their opposition to
state interference in the economy as the capitalists were using the
state to advance this process (see [section F.8.5](secF8.html#secf85)).

So artisan and co-operative property is not capitalist. It does not
generate relationships of exploitation and domination as the worker owns
and controls their own means of production. It is, in effect, a form of
socialism (a *"petit bourgeois"* form of socialism, to use the typical
insulting Marxist phrase). Thus support for "private property" need not
mean support for capitalism (as shown, for example, by the Individualist
Anarchists). To claim otherwise is to ignore the essential insight of
socialism and totally distort the socialist case against capitalism.

To summarise, from an anarchist (and Marxist) perspective capitalism is
**not** defined by "property" as such. Rather, it is defined by private
property, property which is turned into a means of exploiting the labour
of those who use it. For most anarchists, this is done by means of wage
labour and abolished by means of workers' associations and
self-management (see [next section](secG1.html#secg13) for a discussion
of individualist anarchism and wage labour). To use Proudhon's
terminology, there is a fundamental difference between property and
possession.

Secondly, and more importantly, what the Individualist Anarchists meant
by "private property" (or "property") was distinctly different than what
is meant by supporters of capitalism. Basically, the "libertarian" right
exploit, for their own ends, the confusion generated by the use of the
word "property" by the likes of Tucker to describe a situation of
"possession." Proudhon recognised this danger. He argued that *"it is
proper to call different things by different names, if we keep the name
'property' for the former [individual possession], we must call the
latter [the domain of property] robbery, repine, brigandage. If, on the
contrary, we reserve the name 'property' for the latter, we must
designate the former by the term **possession** or some other
equivalent; otherwise we should be troubled with an unpleasant
synonym."* [**What is Property?**, p. 373] Unfortunately Tucker, who
translated this work, did not heed Proudhon's words of wisdom and called
possession in an anarchist society by the word "property" (but then,
neither did Proudhon in the latter part of his life!)

Looking at Tucker's arguments, it is clear that the last thing Tucker
supported was capitalist property rights. For example, he argued that
*"property, in the sense of individual possession, is liberty"* and
contrasted this with capitalist property. [**Instead of a Book**, p.
394] That his ideas on "property" were somewhat different than that
associated with right-"libertarian" thinkers is most clearly seen with
regards to land. Here we discover him advocating *"occupancy and use"*
and rejecting the "right" of land owners to bar the landless from any
land they owned but did not **personally** use. Rent was *"due to that
denial of liberty which takes the shape of land monopoly, vesting titles
to land in individuals and associations which do not use it, and thereby
compelling the non-owning users to pay tribute to the non-using owners
as a condition of admission to the competitive market."* Anarchist
opposition of rent did *"not mean simply the freeing of unoccupied land.
It means the freeing of all land not occupied **by the owner.** In other
words, it means land ownership limited by occupancy and use."* [Tucker,
**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 130 and p. 155] This would result
in a *"system of occupying ownership . . . accompanied by no legal power
to collect rent."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 325]

A similar position was held by John Beverley Robinson. He argued that
there *"are two kinds of land ownership, proprietorship or property, by
which the owner is absolute lord of the land, to use it or to hold it
out of use, as it may please him; and possession, by which he is secure
in the tenure of land which he uses and occupies, but has no claim upon
it at all if he ceases to use it."* Moreover, *"[a]ll that is necessary
to do away with Rent is to away with absolute property in land."*
[**Patterns of Anarchy**, p. 272] Joseph Labadie, likewise, stated that
*"the two great sub-divisions of Socialists"* (anarchists and State
Socialists) both *"agree that the resources of nature -- land, mines,
and so forth -- should not be held as private property and subject to
being held by the individual for speculative purposes, that use of these
things shall be the only valid title, and that each person has an equal
right to the use of all these things. They all agree that the present
social system is one composed of a class of slaves and a class of
masters, and that justice is impossible under such conditions."* [**What
is Socialism?**]

Thus the Individualist Anarchists definition of "property" differed
considerably from that of the capitalist definition. As they themselves
acknowledge. Robinson argued that *"the only real remedy is a change of
heart, through which land using will be recognised as proper and
legitimate, but land holding will be regarded as robbery and piracy."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 273] Tucker, likewise, indicated that his ideas on
"property" were not the same as existing ones when he argued that *"the
present system of land tenure should be changed to one of occupancy and
use"* and that *"no advocate of occupancy-and-use tenure of land
believes that it can be put in force, until as a theory it has been as
generally . . . seen and accepted as the prevailing theory of ordinary
private property."* [**Occupancy and Use verses the Single Tax**] Thus,
for Tucker, anarchism is dependent on *"the Anarchistic view that
occupancy and use should condition and limit landholding becom[ing] the
prevailing view."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 159]

Based on this theory of "property" Tucker opposed landlords and rent,
arguing that anarchy *"means the freeing of all land not occupied **by
the owner**"* that is, *"land ownership limited by occupancy and use."*
He extended this principle to housing, arguing that *"Anarchic
associations"* would *"not collect your rent, and might not even evict
your tenant"* and *"tenants would not be forced to pay you rent, nor
would you be allowed to seize their property. The Anarchic Associations
would look upon your tenants very much as they would look upon your
guests."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 155 and p. 162] In fact, individualist
anarchism would *"accord the actual occupant and user of land the right
to that which is upon the land, who left it there when abandoning the
land."* [Tucker, **Liberty**, no. 350, p. 4]

In the case of land and housing, almost all Individualist Anarchists
argued that the person who lives or works on it (even under lease) would
be regarded *"as the occupant and user of the land on which the house
stands, and as the owner of the house itself,"* that is they become
*"the owner of both land and house as soon as he becomes the occupant."*
[Tucker, **Occupancy and Use Versus the Single Tax**] For Tucker,
occupancy and use was *"the Anarchistic solution of the land question"*
as it allowed free access to land to all, to be *"enjoyed by the
occupant without payment of tribute to a non-occupant."* This applied to
what was on the land as well, for if A builds a house, and rents it to
B, who lives or works in it under the lease then Tucker would *"regard B
as the occupant and user of the land on which the house stands, and as
**the owner of the house itself.**"* [**Liberty**, no. 308, p. 4]

Needless to say, the individualist anarchists were just as opposed to
that mainstay of modern capitalism, the corporation. For Greene
corporations *"disarrange our social organisation, and make the just
distribution of the products of labour impossible."* [quoted by Wm. Gary
Kline, **The Individualist Anarchists: A Critique of Liberalism**, p.
94] While opposing state attempts to limit trusts (it did not get to the
root of the problem which lay in class privilege), Tucker took it for
granted that *"corporate privileges are in themselves a wrong."* [**The
Individualist Anarchists**, p. 129] Given that "occupancy and use"
applies to what is on the land, it logically follows that for those
workplaces with absentee owners (i.e., owners who hire managers to run
them) then these are abandoned by their owners. By the "occupancy and
use" criteria, the land and what is on it reverts to those actually
using them (i.e., the workers in question). Corporations and
shareowners, in other words, are extremely unlikely to exist in
individualist anarchism.

Hence to claim that the Individualist Anarchists supported capitalist
property rights is false. As can be seen, they advocated a system which
differed significantly to the current system, indeed they urged the
restriction of property rights to a form of possession. Unfortunately,
by generally using the term "property" to describe this new system of
possession they generated exactly the confusion that Proudhon foretold.
Sadly, right-"libertarians" use this confusion to promote the idea that
the likes of Tucker supported capitalist property rights and so
capitalism. As Tucker argued, *"[d]efining it with Proudhon as the sum
total of legal privileges bestowed upon the holder wealth,
[individualist anarchism] agrees with Proudhon that property is robbery.
But using the word in the commoner acceptation, as denoting the labour's
individual possession of his product or of his proportional share of the
joint product of himself and others, [it] holds that property is
liberty."* [**Liberty**, no. 122, p. 4]

If, as it is sometimes suggested, the difference between a right
"libertarian" is that they despise the state because it hinders the
freedom of property while left libertarians condemn it because it is a
bastion of property, it is worthwhile to note two important facts.
Firstly, that individualist anarchism condemns the state because it
protects the land monopoly, i.e., capitalist property rights in land and
what is on it, rather than a system of "occupancy and use." Secondly,
that all schools of anarchist oppose capitalism because it is based on
the exploitation of labour, an exploitation which the state protects.
Hence de Cleyre: *"I wish a sharp distinction made between the legal
institution of property, and property in the sense that what a man
definitely produces by his own labour is his own."* The inequality and
oppressions of capitalism are *"the inevitable result of the whole
politico-economic lie that man can be free and the institution of
property continue to exist."* [**Exquisite Rebel**, p. 297] Given this,
given these bastions of property against which the both the
individualist and social anarchists turn their fire, it is obvious that
both schools are left libertarians.

For these reasons it is clear that just because the Individualist
Anarchists supported (a form of) "property" does not mean they are
capitalists. After all, as we note in the [section G.2](secG2.html)
communist-anarchists recognise the necessity of allowing individuals to
own and work their own land and tools if they so desire yet no one
claims that they support "private property." Equally, that many of the
Individualist Anarchists used the term "property" to describe a system
of possession (or *"occupancy-and-use"*) should not blind us to the
non-capitalist nature of that "property." Once we move beyond looking at
the words they used to what they meant by those words we clearly see
that their ideas are distinctly different from those of supporters of
capitalism. In fact, they share a basic commonality with social
anarchism (*"Property will lose a certain attribute which sanctifies it
now. The absolute ownership of it -- 'the right to use or abuse' will be
abolished -- and possession, use, will be the only title."* [Albert R.
Parsons, **Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Scientific Basis**, p. 173]).
This should be unsurprising given the influence of Proudhon on both
wings of the movement.

As Malatesta noted, recognising the *"the right of workers to the
products of their own labour,"* demanding *"the abolition of interest"*
and *"the division of land and the instruments of labour among those who
wish to use them"* would be *"a socialist school different from
[communist-anarchism], but it is still socialism."* It would be a
*"mutualist"* socialism. [**At the Caf**, p. 54 and p. 56] In other
words, property need not be incompatible with socialism. It all depends
on the type of property being advocated.

G.1.3 What about their support for wage labour?
-----------------------------------------------

As we have argued in [section A.2.8](secA2.html#seca28) and elsewhere, a
consistent anarchist must oppose wage labour as this is a form of
hierarchical authority. While social anarchism has drawn this logical
conclusion from anarchist principles, individualist anarchism has not.
While many of its supporters have expressed opposition to wage labour
along with other forms hierarchical organisation, some (like Tucker) did
not. The question is whether supporting wage labour disqualifies them
from the socialist movement or not.

Within individualist anarchism, there are two different positions on
this matter. Some of them clearly opposed wage labour as inherently
exploitative and saw their socio-economic ideas as a means of ending it.
Others argued that it was not wage labour **as such** which was the
problem and, as a consequence, they did not expect it to disappear under
anarchy. So opposition to exploitation of labour was a universal thread
in Individualist Anarchist thought, as it was in the social anarchist
movement. However, opposition to wage slavery was a common, but not
universal, thread within the individualist anarchist tradition. As we
discuss in [section G.4](secG4.html), this is one of the key reasons why
social anarchists reject individualist anarchism, arguing that this
makes it both inconsistent in terms of general anarchist principles as
well in the principles of individualist anarchism.

Voltairine de Cleyre in her overview of anarchism put the difference in
terms of individualist anarchism and mutualist anarchism. As she put it,
the *"extreme individualists"* held that the *"essential institutions of
Commercialism are in themselves good, and are rendered vicious merely by
the interference by the State."* This meant *"the system of employer and
employed, buying and selling, banking, and all the other essential
institutions of Commercialism"* would exist under their form of
anarchism. Two key differences were that property in land would be
modified so that it could be *"held by individuals or companies for such
time and in such allotments as they use only"* and that *"wages would
rise to the full measure of the individual production, and forever
remain there"* as *"bosses would be hunting for men rather than men
bosses."* In other words, land would no longer owned as under capitalism
and workers would no longer be exploited as profit, interest and rent
could not exist and the worker would get the full product of his or her
labour in wages. In contrast, mutualist anarchism *"is a modification of
the program of Individualism, laying more emphasis upon organisation,
co-operation and free federation of the workers. To these the trade
union is the nucleus of the free co-operative group, which will obviate
the necessity of an employer . . . The mutualist position on the land
question is identical with that of the Individualists."* The *"material
factor which accounts for such differences as there are between
Individualists and Mutualists"* was due to the former being intellectual
workers and so *"never know[ing] directly the oppressions of the large
factory, nor mingled with workers' associations. The Mutualists had;
consequently their leaning towards a greater Communism."*
[*"Anarchism"*, **Exquisite Rebel**, p. 77 and p. 78]

Next, we must clarify what is meant by ***"wage labour"*** and the
related term ***"wages system."*** They are not identical. Marx, for
example, corrected the Gotha Programme's *"abolition of the wage
system"* by saying *"it should read: system of wage labour"* (although
that did not stop him demanding *"the ultimate abolition of the wages
system"* elsewhere). [Marx and Engels, **Selected Works**, p. 324 and p.
226] The difference lies in whether there is communism (distribution
according to need) or socialism (distribution according to work done),
as in Marx's (in)famous difference between a lower and higher phase of
communism. It is the difference between a distribution of goods based on
deeds and one based on needs and Kropotkin famous polemic *"The
collectivist Wages System"* rests on it. He argued that the wages system
was based on *"renumeration to each according to the time spent in
producing, while taking into account the productivity of his labour"*.
In other words: *"To each according to his deeds."* [**The Conquest of
Bread**, p. 162 and p. 167] Such a wages system could exist in different
forms. Most obviously, and the focus of Kropotkin's critique, it could
be a regime where the state owned the means of production and paid its
subjects according to their labour (i.e., state socialism). It could
also refer to a system of artisans, peasants and co-operatives which
sold the product of their labour on a market or exchanged their goods
with others based on labour-time notes (i.e., associational socialism).

This should not be confused with wage labour, in which a worker sells
their labour to a boss. This results in a hierarchical social
relationship being created in which the worker is the servant of the
employer. The employer, as they own the labour of the worker, also keeps
the product of said labour and as we argued in [section
C.2](secC2.html), this places the boss is in a position to get the
worker to produce more than they get back in wages. In other words, wage
labour is based on oppression and can result in exploitation as the
bosses control both the production process (i.e., the labour of the
workers) and the goods it produces. It is this which explains socialist
opposition to wage labour -- it is the means by which labour is
exploited under capitalism (anarchist opposition to wage labour includes
this but also extends it to include its denial of freedom to those
subject to workplace hierarchy).

So for the purposes of this discussion ***"wage labour"*** refers to
hierarchical social relationships **within** production while ***"wages
system"*** refers to how goods are distributed once they are produced.
Thus you can have a wages system without wage labour but not wage labour
without a wages system. Communist-anarchists aim for the abolition of
both wage labour and the wages system while mutualist-anarchists only
aim to get rid of the first one.

The problem is that the terms are sometimes mixed up, with "wages" and
"wages system" being confused with "wage labour." This is the case with
the nineteenth century American labour movement which tended to use the
term "wages system" to refer to wage labour and the expression
*"abolition of the wages system"* to refer to the aim of replacing
capitalism with a market system based on producer co-operatives. This is
reflected in certain translations of Proudhon. Discussing the
*"workmen's associations"* founded in France during the 1848 revolution,
Proudhon noted that *"the workmen, in order to dispense with middlemen .
. . , capitalists, etc., . . . have had to work a little more, and get
along with less wages."* So he considered workers associations as paying
"wages" and so, obviously, meant by "wages" labour income, **not** wage
labour. The term "wage labour" was translated as "wages system," so we
find Proudhon arguing that the *"workmen's associations"* are *"a
protest against the wage system"* and a *"denial of the rule of
capitalists."* Proudhon's aim was *"Capitalistic and proprietary
exploitation, stopped everywhere, the wage system abolished, equal and
just exchange guaranteed."* [**The General Idea of the Revolution**, pp.
89-90, p. 98 and p. 281] This has been translated as *"Capitalist and
landlord exploitation halted everywhere, wage-labour abolished."*
[quoted by John Ehrenberg, **Proudhon and his Age**, p. 116]

We are sorry to belabour this point, but it is essential for
understanding the anarchist position on wage labour and the differences
between different schools of socialism. So before discussing the
relation of individualist anarchism to wage labour we needed to clarify
what is meant by the term, particularly as some people use the term
wages to mean any kind of direct payment for labour and so wage labour
is sometimes confused with the wages system. Similarly, the terms wage
labour and wages systems are often used interchangeably when, in fact,
they refer to different things and abolition the wages system can mean
different things depending on who is using the expression.

So after this unfortunately essential diversion, we can now discuss the
position of individualist anarchism on wage labour. Unfortunately, there
is no consistent position on this issue within the tradition. Some
follow social anarchism in arguing that a free society would see its
end, others see no contradiction between their ideas and wage labour. We
will discuss each in turn.

Joshua King Ingalls, for example, praised attempts to set up communities
based on libertarian principles as *"a demonstration . . . that none
need longer submit to the tyranny and exactions of the swindler and
speculator in the products of others toil. The example would be speedily
followed by others who would break away from the slavery of wages, and
assert their independence of capital."* [*"Method of Transition for the
Consideration of the True Friends of Human Rights and Human Progress,"*
**Spirit of the Age**, Vol. I, No. 25, pp. 385-387] The *"present
relation of 'Capital and Labor' is . . . really a mixed relation between
contract and status; held by fiction of law as one of 'freedom of
contract,' while it retains potentially all the essential features of
serfdom. Industrially and economically, the relation is substantially
the same as that which existed between the chattel and his owner, and
the serf and his lord."* Ingalls pointed to *"the terrible fear of being
'out of a job,' which freedom of contract means to a wage-worker."*
[*"Industrial Wars and Governmental Interference,"* **The Twentieth
Century**, September 6, 1894, pp. 11-12] *"To reward capital,"* he
argued, *"is a direct inversion of natural right, as the right of man
must be acknowledged paramount to that of property . . . Any system,
securing a premium to capital, however small, must result in the want,
degradation and servitude of one class, and in bestowing unearned wealth
and power upon another."* [*"Man and Property, their Rights and
Relations,"* **Spirit of the Age**, vol. I, no. 8, pp. 114-116] Like
Proudhon, he recognised that joint productive activity resulted in an
output greater than that possible by the same number of people working
in isolation, an output monopolised by those who owned the workplace or
land in question:

> *"That the operation of any wealth increasing enterprise is
> co-operative needs only stating . . . and its logic in division of the
> product of the conjoint labour, can only be frustrated by the fiction
> that the worker has contracted away his share of the increase by
> accepting wages. But, being dispossessed of his common right to land,
> and to opportunity to use the common materials and forces, he can make
> no equitable contract and cannot be lawfully thus concluded . . . The
> only pretence which prevents this distribution, is the plea that the
> worker in accepting wages, has tacitly contracted away his share of
> the increase, has made a sale of his interest. Even this subterfuge
> fails logically however, whenever the operators reduce the rate of
> compensation without the full concurrence of the co-operative workers,
> and their just claim to joint ownership obtains again. It is
> altogether too late, to urge that this is a mere matter of exchange;
> so much money, so much labour-; and that the operator may lay off and
> take on whom he pleases. It never was, as economists teach, a matter
> of exchange, but one of co-operative endeavour."* [*"Industrial Wars
> and Governmental Interference,"* **The Twentieth Century**, September
> 6, 1894, pp. 11-12]

Unsurprisingly given this analysis he saw the need to replace wage
labour (which he called *"false and immoral"*) with a better system:
*"the adoption of honesty in our useful industries, and a reciprocal
system of exchange, would unfold a grand and universal cooperative
movement, seems so clear to me."* [*"The Wage Question"*, **The American
Socialist**, Vol. 2, No. 38, p. 298] This would result in a boost to
economic activity:

> *"No one, say they, will do anything but for profits. But the man who
> works for wages has no profits; and is not only destitute of this
> stimulus, but his labour product is minus the profits of the
> capitalist, landlord, and forestaller. A rational economy would seem
> to require, that if any one received extra inducement to act, it
> should be that one who did the most labourious and repulsive work. It
> is thus seen, that while exorbitant profits afford an unnatural
> stimulus, in mere wages we have an inadequate motive to action."*
> [*"Labor, Wages, And Capital. Division Of Profits Scientifically
> Considered"*, **Brittan's Quarterly Journal**, No. I, pp. 66-79]

The land monopoly was *"the foundation of class dominion and of poverty
and industrial subjection."* [quoted by Bowman N. Hall, *"Joshua K.
Ingalls, American Individualist: Land Reformer, Opponent of Henry George
and Advocate of Land Leasing, Now an Established Mode",* pp. 383-96,
**American Journal of Economics and Sociology**, Vol. 39, No. 4, p. 387]
Without access to land, people would have no option to sell their
liberty to others and, as such, the abolition of slavery and wage labour
were related:

> *"The right to life involves the right to land to live and labour
> upon. Commercial ownership of land which enables one to exclude
> another from it, and thus enforces involuntary idleness, is as
> destructive of human freedom as ownership of the person, enforcing
> involuntary service . . . Liberation of the slaves would bring their
> labour in more direct competition with our over-crowded and poorly
> paid wage-workers. I did not offer this as a reason against the
> abolition of chattel slavery, but as a reason why the friends of
> emancipation from chattel slavery should unite with the friends for
> the emancipation of the wage worker, by restoring him the right to
> land, for the production of the means of life . . . The real issue was
> between the rights of labour and the rights of ownership."* [quoted by
> Bowman N. Hall, **Op. Cit.**, p. 385]

This analysis was a common theme in pre-civil war libertarian circles.
As historian James J. Martin noted, *"[t]o men like Warren and Evens
chattel slavery was merely one side of a brutal situation, and although
sympathetic with its opponents, refused to take part in the struggle
[against slavery] unless it was extended to a wholesale attack on what
they termed 'wage slavery' in the states where Negro slavery no longer
existed."* [**Men Against the State**, p. 81] Such a view, we may add,
was commonplace in radical working class journals and movements of the
time. Thus we find George Henry Evans (who heavily influenced
Individualist Anarchists like Warren and Ingalls with the ideas of land
reform based on *"occupancy and use"*) writing:

> *"I was formally, like yourself, sir, a very warm advocate of the
> abolition of (black) slavery. This was before I saw that there was
> white slavery. Since I saw this, I have materially changed my views as
> to the means of abolishing Negro slavery. I now see clearly, I think,
> that to give the landless black the privilege of changing masters now
> possessed by the landless white, would hardly be a benefit to him in
> exchange for his surety of support in sickness and old age, although
> he is in a favourable climate."* [quoted by Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p.
> 81f]

Ingalls, likewise, *"considered the only 'intelligent' strike [by
workers as] one which would be directed against wage work altogether."*
For Lysander Spooner, liberty meant that the worker was entitled to
*"all the fruits of his own labour"* and argued that this *"might be
feasible"* only when *"every man [was] own employer or work for himself
in a direct way, since working for another resulted in a portion being
diverted to the employer."* [Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 153 and p. 172] To
quote Spooner:

> *"When a man knows that he is to have **all** the fruits of his
> labour, he labours with more zeal, skill, and physical energy, than
> when he knows -- as in the case of one labouring for wages -- that a
> portion of the fruits of his labour are going to another. . . In order
> that each man may have the fruits of his own labour, it is important,
> as a general rule, that each man should be his own employer, or work
> directly for himself, and not for another for wages; because, in the
> latter case, a part of the fruits of his labour go to his employer,
> instead of coming to himself . . . That each man may be his own
> employer, it is necessary that he have materials, or capital, upon
> which to bestow his labour."* [**Poverty: Its Illegal Causes and Legal
> Cure**, p. 8]

Wage labour had a negative impact on those subject to it in terms of
their personal development. *"The mental independence of each individual
would be greatly promoted by his pecuniary independence,"* Spooner
argued. *"Freedom of thought, and the free utterance of thought, are, to
a great degree, suppressed . . . by their dependence upon the will and
favour of others, for that employment by which they must obtain their
daily bread. They dare not investigate, or if they investigate, dare not
freely avow and advocate those moral, social, religious, political, and
economical truths, which alone calm rescue them from their degradation,
lest they should thereby sacrifice their bread by stirring the jealousy
of those out whom they are dependent, and who derive their power,
wealth, and consequence from the ignorance and servitude of the poor."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 54] As we argued in [section B.1](secB1.html), all
forms of hierarchy (including wage labour) distorts the personality and
harms the individual psychologically.

Spooner argued that it was state restrictions on credit and money (the
*"money monopoly"* based on banks requiring specie to operate) as the
reason why people sell themselves to others on the labour market. As he
put it, *"a monopoly of money . . . . put[s] it wholly out of the power
of the great body of wealth-producers to hire the capital needed for
their industries; and thus compel them . . . -- by the alternative of
starvation -- to sell their labour to the monopolists of money . . .
[who] plunder all the producing classes in the prices of their labour."*
Spooner was well aware that it was capitalists who ran the state (*"the
employers of wage labour . . . are also the monopolists of money"*). In
his ideal society, the *"amount of money capable of being furnished . .
. is so great that every man, woman, and child. . . could get it, and go
into business for himself, or herself -- either singly, or in
partnerships -- and be under no necessity to act as a servant, or sell
his or her labour to others. All the great establishments, of every
kind, now in the hands of a few proprietors, but employing a great
number of wage labourers, would be broken up; for few, or no persons,
who could hire capital, and do business for themselves, would consent to
labour for wages for another."* [**A Letter to Grover Cleveland**, p.
20, p. 48 and p. 41]

As Eunice Minette Schuster noted, Spooner's *"was a revolt against the
industrial system"*, a *"**return** to **pre-industrial** society."* He
*"would destroy the factory system, wage labour . . . by making every
individual a small capitalist, an independent producer"* and *"turn the
clock of time backwards, not forward."* This position seems to have been
a common one, for *"the early American Individualists aimed to return .
. . to an economic system where everyone would be a small, independent
proprietor."* [**Native American Anarchism**, p. 148, pp. 151-2 and p.
157] As another commentator on individualist anarchism also noted, *"the
dominant vision of the future was obviously that of a relatively modest
scale of production . . . underpinned by individual, self-employed
workers"* and so the individualist anarchists *"expected a society of
largely self-employed workmen with no significant disparity of wealth
between any of them."* [Wm. Gary Kline **The Individualist Anarchists**,
p. 95 and p. 104]

This is not to say that all the individualist anarchists ignored the
rise of large scale industrial production. Far from it. Tucker, Greene
and Lum all recognised that anarchism had to adjust to the industrial
system and proposed different solutions for it. Greene and Lum followed
Proudhon and advocated co-operative production while Tucker argued that
mutual banks could result in a non-exploitative form of wage labour
developing.

William Greene pronounced that *"[t]here is no device of the political
economists so infernal as the one which ranks labour as a commodity,
varying in value according to supply and demand . . . To speak of labour
as merchandise is treason; for such speech denies the true dignity of
man . . . Where labour is merchandise in fact . . . there man is
merchandise also, whether in England or South Carolina."* This meant
that, *"[c]onsidered from this point of view, the price of commodities
is regulated not by the labour expended in their production, but by the
distress and want of the labouring class. The greater the distress of
the labourer, the more willing will he be to work for low wages, that
is, the higher will be the price he is willing to give for the
necessaries of life. When the wife and children of the labourer ask for
bread, and he has none to give them, then, according to the political
economists, is the community prosperous and happy; for then the rate of
wages is low, and commodities command a high price in labour."*
[**Mutual Banking**, pp. 49-50 and p. 49]

Greene's alternative was co-operation in production, consumption and
exchange. *"The triple formula of practical mutualism"*, he argued, was
*"the associated workshop"* for production, the *"protective union
store"* for consumption and the *"the Mutual Bank"* for exchange. All
three were required, for *"the Associated Workshop cannot exist for a
single day without the Mutual Bank and the Protective Union Store."*
Without mutual banking, the productive co-operatives would not survive
as it would not gain access to credit or at a high rate (*"How do you
advance the cause of labour by putting your associated neck under the
heel of capital? Your talk about 'the emancipation of labour' is wind
and vapour; labour cannot be emancipated by any such process."*) Thus
the *"Associated Workshop ought to be an organisation of personal
credit. For what is its aim and purpose? Is it not the emancipation of
the labourer from all dependence upon capital and capitalists?"* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 37, p. 34, p. 35 and p. 34] The example of the Mondragon
co-operative complex in the Basque country confirms the soundness of
Greene's analysis.

Here we see a similar opposition to the commodification of labour (and
so labourers) within capitalism that also marks social anarchist
thought. As Rocker notes, Greene *"emphasised more strongly the
**principle of association** than did Josiah Warren and more so than
Spooner had done."* He had a *"strong sympathy for the **principle of
association.** In fact, the theory of Mutualism is nothing less that
co-operative labour based on the cost principle."* He also *"rejected .
. . the designation of labour as a **commodity**"* and *"constantly
endeavoured to introduce his ideas into the youthful labour movement . .
. so as to prevent the social problem being regarded by labour as only a
question of wages."* [**Pioneers of American Freedom**,, p. 108, p. 109,
pp. 111-2 and p. 112] This support for producers' associations alongside
mutual banks is identical to Proudhon's ideas -- which is unsurprising
as Greene was a declared follower of the French anarchist. Martin also
indicates Greene's support for co-operation and associative labour and
its relation to the wider labour movement:

> *"Coming at a time when the labour and consumer groups were
> experimenting with 'associated workshops' and 'protective union
> stores,' Greene suggested that the mutual bank be incorporated into
> the movement, forming what he called 'complementary units of
> production, consumption, and exchange . . . the triple formula of
> practical mutualism.'"* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 134-5]

Dyer Lum was another individualist anarchist who opposed wage labour and
supported co-operative production. Like Greene, Lum took an active part
in the labour movement and was a union organiser. As he put it, the
Knights of Labor aimed to work for the *"abolishment of the
wage-system"* as well as the right of life requiring the right to the
means of living. Dyer, while rejecting their infatuation with political
action, had *"the fullest sympathy"* for their aims and supported their
economic measures. [**Liberty**, no. 82, p. 7] Unsurprisingly, as one
historian notes, *"Lum began to develop an ideology that centred on the
labour reformers' demand: 'The Wage System must go!'"* He joined *"the
ideological path of labour reformers who turned to a radicalised
laissez-faire explanation of wage slavery."* [Frank H. Brooks,
*"Ideology, Strategy, and Organization: Dyer Lum and the American
Anarchist Movement"*, pp. 57-83, **Labor History**, vol. 34, No. 1, p.
63 and p. 67] Like the communist-anarchists of the IWPA, for Lum trade
unions were both the means of fighting capitalism and the way to abolish
wage labour:

> "Anarchists in Chicago tended to be much more sympathetic to class
> organisation, specifically unions, because they had many contacts to
> local unions and the Knights of Labor. The issue was not resolved at
> the founding conference of the IWPA, but the Chicago anarchists did
> manage to get a resolution passed stating that 'we view in trades
> unions based upon progressive principles -- the abolition of the
> wages-system -- the corner-stone of a better society structure than
> the present one.'
> "Lum agreed wholeheartedly with this resolution, particularly the
> phrase 'abolition of the wages-system.' This phrase not only confirmed
> the ideological link between anarchism and labour reform, but also
> paralleled similar language in the declaration of principles of the
> Knights of Labor. By 1886, Lum had joined the Knights and he urged
> other anarchists, particularly individualists, to support their
> struggles. Lum continued to be involved with organised labour for the
> next seven years, seeing unions as a practical necessity in the
> struggle against class politics and state repression." [Brooks, **Op.
> Cit.**, pp. 70-1]

However, *"[d]espite the similarity between the evolution of Lum's
strategy and that of the revolutionary anti-statist socialists in the
IWPA, his analysis of 'wage slavery' was considerably more
individualistic."* [Brooks, **Op. Cit.**, p. 66] Lum saw it as resulting
primarily from state interference in the economy which reduced the
options available to working class people. With a genuine free market
based on free land and free credit workers would work for themselves,
either as independent producers or in co-operatives (*"where capital
seeks labour . . . where authority dissolves under the genial glow of
liberty, and necessity for wage-labour disappears."* [Dyer D. Lum,
contained in Albert Parsons, **Anarchism**, p. 153]). Thus a key element
of *"Lum's anarchism was his mutualist economics, an analysis of 'wage
slavery' and a set of reforms that would 'abolish the wage system.'"*
[Brooks, **Op. Cit.**, p. 71] Voltairine de Cleyre, in her individualist
anarchist days, concurred with her mentor Lum, arguing for a *"complete
international federation of labour, whose constituent groups shall take
possession of land, mines, factories, all the instruments of production,
issue their own certificates of exchange, and, in short, conduct their
own industry without regulative interference from law-makers or
employers."* [**The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**, p. 6]

European individualist anarchists, it should be noted had a similar
perspective. As mentioned in [section A.3.1](secA3.html#seca31),
Frenchman E. Armand argued that *"ownership of the means of production
and free disposal of his produce"* was *"the quintessential guarantee of
the autonomy of the individual"* but only as long as *"the proprietor
does not transfer it to someone else or reply upon the services of
someone else in operating it."* [*"Mini-Manual of the Anarchist
Individualist"*, pp. 145-9, **Anarchism**, Robert Graham (ed.), p. 147]
Another French individualist anarchist, Ernest Lesigne, argued that in a
free society, *"there should be no more proletaires"* as *"everybody"*
would be *"proprietor."* This would result in *"The land to the
cultivator. The mine to the miner. The tool to the labourer. The product
to the producer."* [quoted approvingly by Tucker, **Instead of a Book**,
p. 17 and p. 18] Lesigne considered *"co-operative production"* as *"a
solution to the great problem of social economy, -- the delivery of
products to the consumer at cost"* and as a means of producers to
*"receive the value of your product, of your effort, without having to
deal with a mass of hucksters and exploiters."* [**The Individualist
Anarchists**, p. 123]

In other words, many individualist anarchists envisioned a society
without wage labour and, instead, based upon peasant, artisan and
associated/co-operative labour (as in Proudhon's vision). In other
words, a **non**-capitalist society or, more positively, a (libertarian)
socialist one as the workers' own and control the means of production
they use. Like social anarchists, they opposed capitalist exploitation,
wage slavery and property rights. However, not all individualist
anarchists held this position, a notable exception being Benjamin Tucker
and many of his fellow contributors of **Liberty**. Tucker asserted
against the common labour movement and social anarchist equation of
capitalism with wage slavery that *"[w]ages is not slavery. Wages is a
form of voluntary exchange, and voluntary exchange is a form of
Liberty."* [**Liberty**, no. 3, p. 1]

The question how is, does this support of wage labour equate to support
for capitalism? The answer to that depends on whether you see such a
system as resulting in the exploitation of labour. If socialism is, to
requote Kropotkin, *"understood in its wide, generic, and true sense"*
as *"an effort to **abolish** the exploitation of labour by capital"*
then even those Individualist Anarchists who support wage labour must be
considered as socialists due to their opposition to usury. It is for
this reason we discover Rudolf Rocker arguing that Stephan P. Andrews
was *"one of the most versatile and significant exponents of libertarian
socialism"* in the USA in spite of his belief that *"the specific cause
of the economic evil [of capitalism] is founded not on the existence of
the wage system"* but, rather, on the exploitation of labour, *"on the
unjust compensation of the worker"* and the usury that *"deprives him of
a part of his labour."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 85 and pp. 77-8] His
opposition to exploitation meant he was a socialist, an opposition which
individualist anarchism was rooted in from its earliest days and the
ideas of Josiah Warren:

> *"The aim was to circumvent the exploitation inherent in capitalism,
> which Warren characterised as a sort of 'civilised cannibalism,' by
> exchanging goods on co-operative rather than supply and demand
> principles."* [J.W. Baker, *"Native American Anarchism,"* pp. 43-62,
> **The Raven**, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 51]

So should not be implied that the term socialist is restricted simply to
those who oppose wage labour. It should be noted that for many
socialists, wage labour is perfectly acceptable -- as long as the state
is the boss. As Tucker noted, State Socialism's *"principle plank"* is
*"the confiscation of **all** capital by the State"*, so stopping *"the
liberty of those non-aggressive individuals who are thus prevented from
carrying on business for themselves or assuming relations between
themselves as employer and employee if they prefer, and who are obliged
to become employees of the State against their will."* [**Instead of a
Book**, p. 378] Of course, such a position is not a very good form of
socialism which is why anarchists have tended to call such schemes
state-capitalism (an analysis which was confirmed once the Soviet Union
was created, incidentally). If state bureaucrats own and control the
means of production, it would not come as too great a surprise if they,
like private bosses, did so to maximise their incomes and minimise that
of their employees.

Which explains why the vast majority of anarchists do not agree with
Tucker's position. Individualist anarchists like Tucker considered it as
a truism that in their society the exploitation of labour could not
exist. Thus even if some workers did sell their liberty, they would
still receive the full product of their labour. As Tucker put it, *"when
interest, rent and profit disappear under the influence of free money,
free land, and free trade, it will make no difference whether men work
for themselves, or are employed, or employ others. In any case they can
get nothing but that wage for their labour which free competition
determines."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 274] Whether this could actually happen
when workers sell their liberty to an employer is, of course, where
other anarchists disagree. The owner of a workplace does not own simply
his (labour) share of the total product produced within it. He (and it
usually is a he) owns everything produced while workers get their wages.
The employer, therefore, has an interest in getting workers to produce
as much as they can during the period they are employed. As the future
price of the commodity is unknown, it is extremely unlikely that workers
will be able to accurately predict it and so it is unlikely that their
wages will always equal the cost price of the product. As such, the
situation that an individual worker would get his "natural" wage would
be unlikely and so they would be exploited by their employer. At best,
it could be argued that in the long run wages will rise to that level
but, as Keynes noted, in the long run we are all dead and Tucker did not
say that the free market would end exploitation eventually. So
individual ownership of large-scale workplaces would not, therefore, end
exploitation.

In other words, if (as Tucker argued) individualist anarchism desires
*"[n]ot to abolish wages, but to make **every** man dependent upon wages
and to secure every man his **whole** wages"* then this, logically, can
only occur under workers control. We discuss this in more detail in
[section G.4.1](secG4.html#secg41), where we also indicate how social
anarchists consider Tucker's position to be in a basic contradiction to
anarchist principles. Not only that, as well as being unlikely to ensure
that labour received its full product, it also contradicts his own
principle of ***"occupancy and use"***. As such, while his support for
non-exploitative wage labour does not exclude him from the socialist
(and so anarchist) movement, it does suggest an inconsistent anarchism,
one which can (fortunately) be easily made consistent by bringing it
fully in line with its own stated ideals and principles.

Finally, we must note that there is a certain irony in this, given how
keenly Tucker presented himself as a follower of Proudhon. This was
because Proudhon agreed with Tucker's anarchist opponents, arguing
continually that wage labour needed to be replaced by co-operative
production to end exploitation and oppression in production. Proudhon
and his followers, in the words of one historian, thought workers
*"should be striving for the abolition of salaried labour and capitalist
enterprise."* This was by means of co-operatives and their *"perspective
was that of artisan labour . . . The manager/employer (patron) was a
superfluous element in the production process who was able to deny the
worker just compensation for his labour merely by possessing the capital
that paid for the workshop, tools, and materials."* [Julian P. W.
Archer, **The First International in France, 1864-1872**, p. 45] As
Frank H. Brooks put it, *"Lum drew from the French anarchist Proudhon .
. . a radical critique of classical political economy and . . . a set of
positive reforms in land tenure and banking . . . Proudhon paralleled
the native labour reform tradition in several ways. Besides suggesting
reforms in land and money, Proudhon urged producer cooperation."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 72] We discuss this aspect of Proudhon's ideas in [section
G.4.2](secG4.html#secg42).

So, to conclude, it can be seen that individualist anarchists hold two
positions on wage labour. Some are closer to Proudhon and the mainstream
anarchist tradition than others while a few veer extremely close to
liberalism. While all are agreed that their system would end the
exploitation of labour, some of them saw the possibility of a
non-exploitative wage labour while others aimed for artisan and/or
co-operative production to replace it. Suffice to say, while few social
anarchists consider non-exploitative wage labour as being very likely it
is the opposition to non-labour income which makes individualist
anarchism socialist (albeit, an inconsistent and flawed version of
libertarian socialism).

G.1.4 Why is the social context important in evaluating Individualist Anarchism?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When reading the work of anarchists like Tucker and Warren, we must
remember the social context of their ideas, namely the transformation of
America from a pre-capitalist to a capitalist society. The individualist
anarchists, like other socialists and reformers, viewed with horror the
rise of capitalism and its imposition on an unsuspecting American
population, supported and encouraged by state action (in the form of
protection of private property in land, restricting money issuing to
state approved banks using specie, government orders supporting
capitalist industry, tariffs, suppression of unions and strikes, and so
on). In other words, the individualist anarchists were a response to the
social conditions and changes being inflicted on their country by a
process of *"primitive accumulation"* (see [section F.8](secF8.html)).

The non-capitalist nature of the early USA can be seen from the early
dominance of self-employment (artisan and peasant production). At the
beginning of the 19th century, around 80% of the working (non-slave)
male population were self-employed. The great majority of Americans
during this time were farmers working their own land, primarily for
their own needs. Most of the rest were self-employed artisans,
merchants, traders, and professionals. Other classes -- employees (wage
workers) and employers (capitalists) in the North, slaves and planters
in the South -- were relatively small. The great majority of Americans
were independent and free from anybody's command -- they owned and
controlled their means of production. Thus early America was,
essentially, a pre-capitalist society. However, by 1880, the year before
Tucker started **Liberty**, the number of self-employed had fallen to
approximately 33% of the working population. Now it is less than 10%.
[Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis, **Schooling in Capitalist America**,
p. 59] As the US Census described in 1900, until about 1850 *"the bulk
of general manufacturing done in the United States was carried on in the
shop and the household, by the labour of the family or individual
proprietors, with apprentice assistants, as contrasted with the present
system of factory labour, compensated by wages, and assisted by power."*
[quoted by Jeremy Brecher and Tim Costello, **Common Sense for Hard
Times**, p. 35] Thus the post-civil war period saw *"the factory system
become general. This led to a large increase in the class of unskilled
and semi-skilled labour with inferior bargaining power. Population
shifted from the country to the city . . . It was this milieu that the
anarchism of Warren-Proudhon wandered."* [Eunice Minette Schuster,
**Native American Anarchism**, pp. 136-7]

It is **only** in this context that we can understand individualist
anarchism, namely as a revolt against the destruction of working-class
independence and the growth of capitalism, accompanied by the growth of
two opposing classes, capitalists and proletarians. This transformation
of society by the rise of capitalism explains the development of
**both** schools of anarchism, social and individualist. *"American
anarchism,"* Frank H. Brooks argues, *"like its European counterpart, is
best seen as a nineteenth century development, an ideology that, like
socialism generally, responded to the growth of industrial capitalism,
republican government, and nationalism. Although this is clearest in the
more collectivistic anarchist theories and movements of the late
nineteenth century (Bakunin, Kropotkin, Malatesta, communist anarchism,
anarcho-syndicalism), it also helps to explain anarchists of early- to
mid-century such as Proudhon, Stirner and, in America, Warren. For all
of these theorists, a primary concern was the 'labour problem' -- the
increasing dependence and immiseration of manual workers in
industrialising economies."* [*"Introduction"*, **The Individualist
Anarchists**, p. 4]

The Individualist Anarchists cannot be viewed in isolation. They were
part of a wider movement seeking to stop the capitalist transformation
of America. As Bowles and Ginitis note, this *"process has been far from
placid. Rather, it has involved extended struggles with sections of U.S.
labour trying to counter and temper the effects of their reduction to
the status of wage labour."* The rise of capitalism *"marked the
transition to control of work by nonworkers"* and *"with the rise of
entrepreneurial capital, groups of formerly independent workers were
increasingly drawn into the wage-labour system. Working people's
organisations advocated alternatives to this system; land reform,
thought to allow all to become an independent producer, was a common
demand. Worker co-operatives were a widespread and influential part of
the labour movement as early as the 1840s . . . but failed because
sufficient capital could not be raised."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 59 and p.
62] It is no coincidence that the issues raised by the Individualist
Anarchists (land reform via *"occupancy-and-use"*, increasing the supply
of money via mutual banks and so on) reflect these alternatives raised
by working class people and their organisations. Little wonder Tucker
argued that:

> *"Make capital free by organising credit on a mutual plan, and then
> these vacant lands will come into use . . . operatives will be able to
> buy axes and rakes and hoes, and then they will be independent of
> their employers, and then the labour problem will solved."* [**Instead
> of a Book**, p. 321]

Thus the Individualist Anarchists reflect the aspirations of working
class people facing the transformation of an society from a
pre-capitalist state into a capitalist one. Changing social conditions
explain why Individualist Anarchism must be considered socialistic. As
Murray Bookchin noted:

> *"Th[e] growing shift from artisanal to an industrial economy gave
> rise to a gradual but major shift in socialism itself. For the
> artisan, socialism meant producers' co-operatives composed of men who
> worked together in small shared collectivist associations, although
> for master craftsmen it meant mutual aid societies that acknowledged
> their autonomy as private producers. For the industrial proletarian,
> by contrast, socialism came to mean the formation of a mass
> organisation that gave factory workers the collective power to
> expropriate a plant that no single worker could properly own. These
> distinctions led to two different interpretations of the 'social
> question' . . . The more progressive craftsmen of the nineteenth
> century had tried to form networks of co-operatives, based on
> individually or collectively owned shops, and a market knitted
> together by a moral agreement to sell commodities according to a 'just
> price' or the amount of labour that was necessary to produce them.
> Presumably such small-scale ownership and shared moral precepts would
> abolish exploitation and greedy profit-taking. The class-conscious
> proletarian . . . thought in terms of the complete socialisation of
> the means of production, including land, and even of abolishing the
> market **as such**, distributing goods according to needs rather than
> labour . . . They advocated **public** ownership of the means of
> production, whether by the state or by the working class organised in
> trade unions."* [**The Third Revolution**, vol. 2, p. 262]

So, in this evolution of socialism we can place the various brands of
anarchism. Individualist anarchism is clearly a form of artisanal
socialism (which reflects its American roots) while communist anarchism
and anarcho-syndicalism are forms of industrial (or proletarian)
socialism (which reflects its roots in Europe). Proudhon's mutualism
bridges these extremes, advocating as it does artisan socialism for
small-scale industry and agriculture and co-operative associations for
large-scale industry (which reflects the state of the French economy in
the 1840s to 1860s). With the changing social conditions in the US, the
anarchist movement changed too, as it had in Europe. Hence the rise of
communist-anarchism in addition to the more native individualist
tradition and the change in Individualist Anarchism itself:

> *"Green emphasised more strongly the **principle of association** than
> did Josiah Warren and more so than Spooner had done. Here too
> Proudhon's influence asserts itself. . . In principle there is
> essentially no difference between Warren and Proudhon. The difference
> between them arises from a dissimilarity of their respective
> environments. Proudhon lived in a country where the sub-division of
> labour made co-operation in social production essential, while Warren
> had to deal with predominantly small individual producers. For this
> reason Proudhon emphasised the **principle of association** far more
> than Warren and his followers did, although Warren was by no means
> opposed to this view."* [Rudolf Rocker, **Pioneers of American
> Freedom**, p. 108]

As noted in [section A.3](secA3.html), Voltairine de Cleyre subscribed
to a similar analysis, as does another anarchist, Peter Sabatini, more
recently:

> "The chronology of anarchism within the United States corresponds to
> what transpired in Europe and other locations. An organised anarchist
> movement imbued with a revolutionary collectivist, then communist,
> orientation came to fruition in the late 1870s. At that time, Chicago
> was a primary centre of anarchist activity within the USA, due in part
> to its large immigrant population. . .
> "The Proudhonist anarchy that Tucker represented was largely
> superseded in Europe by revolutionary collectivism and
> anarcho-communism. The same changeover occurred in the US, although
> mainly among subgroups of working class immigrants who were settling
> in urban areas. For these recent immigrants caught up in tenuous
> circumstances within the vortex of emerging corporate capitalism, a
> revolutionary anarchy had greater relevancy than go slow mutualism."
> [**Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy**]

Murray Bookchin argued that the development of communist-anarchism
*"made it possible for anarchists to adapt themselves to the new working
class, the industrial proletariat, . . . This adaptation was all the
more necessary because capitalism was now transforming not only European
[and American] society but the very nature of the European [and
American] labour movement itself."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 259] In other
words, there have been many schools of socialism, all influenced by the
changing society around them. As Frank H. Brooks notes, *"before
Marxists monopolised the term, socialism, was a broad concept, as indeed
Marx's critique of the 'unscientific' varieties of socialism in the
**Communist Manifesto** indicated. Thus, when Tucker claimed that the
individualist anarchism advocated in the pages of **Liberty** was
socialist, he was not engaged in obfuscation or rhetorical bravado."*
[*"Libertarian Socialism"*, pp. 75-7, **The Individualist Anarchists**,
p. 75]

Looking at the society in which their ideas developed (rather than
ahistorically projecting modern ideas backward) we can see the socialist
core of Individualist Anarchism. It was, in other words, an un-Marxian
form of socialism (as was mutualism and communist-anarchism). Thus, to
look at the Individualist Anarchists from the perspective of "modern
socialism" (say, communist-anarchism or Marxism) means to miss the
point. The social conditions which produced Individualist Anarchism were
substantially different from those existing today (and those which
produced communist-anarchism and Marxism) and so what was a possible
solution to the *"social problem"* **then** may not be one suitable
**now** (and, indeed, point to a different kind of socialism than that
which developed later). Moreover, Europe in the 1870s was distinctly
different than America (although, of course, the USA **was** catching
up). For example, there was still vast tracks of unclaimed land (once
the Native Americans had been removed, of course) available to workers.
In the towns and cities, artisan production *"remained important . . .
into the 1880s"* [David Montgomery, **The Fall of the House of Labour**,
p. 52] Until the 1880s, the possibility of self-employment was a real
one for many workers, a possibility being hindered by state action (for
example, by forcing people to buy land via Homestead Acts, restricting
banking to those with specie, suppressing unions and strikes and so on
-- see [section F.8.5](secF8.html#secf85)). Little wonder that
Individualist Anarchism was considered a real solution to the problems
generated by the creation of capitalism in the USA and that, by the
1880s, Communist Anarchist became the dominant form of anarchism. By
that time the transformation of America was nearing completion and
self-employment was no longer a real solution for the majority of
workers.

This social context is essential for understanding the thought of people
like Greene, Spooner and Tucker. For example, as Stephen L. Newman
points out, Spooner *"argues that every man ought to be his own
employer, and he envisions a world of yeoman farmers and independent
entrepreneurs."* [**Liberalism at Wit's End**, p. 72] This sort of
society was in the process of being destroyed when Spooner was writing.
Needless to say, the Individualist Anarchists did not think this
transformation was unstoppable and proposed, like other sections of US
labour, various solutions to problems society faced. Given the
commonplace awareness in the population of artisan production and its
advantages in terms of liberty, it is hardly surprising that the
individualist anarchists supported "free market" solutions to social
problems. For, given the era, this solution implied workers' control and
the selling of the product of labour, not the labourer him/herself.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, the *"greatest part [of **Liberty**'s
readers] proves to be of the professional/intellectual class: the
remainder includes independent manufacturers and merchants, artisans and
skilled workers . . . The anarchists' hard-core supporters were the
socio-economic equivalents of Jefferson's yeoman-farmers and
craftsworkers: a freeholder-artisan-independent merchant class allied
with freethinking professionals and intellectuals. These groups -- in
Europe as well as in America -- had socio-economic independence, and
through their desire to maintain and improve their relatively free
positions, had also the incentive to oppose the growing encroachments of
the capitalist State."* [Morgan Edwards, *"Neither Bombs Nor Ballots:
**Liberty** & the Strategy of Anarchism"*, pp. 65-91, **Benjamin R.
Tucker and the Champions of Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton and Sullivan
(eds.), p. 85]

Individualist anarchism is obviously an aspect of a struggle between the
system of peasant and artisan production of early America and the state
encouraged system of capitalism. Indeed, their analysis of the change in
American society from one of mainly independent producers into one based
mainly upon wage labour has many parallels with Karl Marx's analysis of
*"primitive accumulation"* in the Americas and elsewhere presented in
chapter 33 of **Capital** (*"The Modern Theory of Colonization"*). It is
this process which Individualist Anarchism protested against, the use of
the state to favour the rising capitalist class. So the social context
the individualist anarchists lived in must be remembered. America at the
times was a predominantly rural society and industry was not as
developed as it is now wage labour would have been minimised. As Wm.
Gary Kline argues:

> *"Committed as they were to equality in the pursuit of property, the
> objective for the anarchist became the construction of a society
> providing equal access to those things necessary for creating wealth.
> The goal of the anarchists who extolled mutualism and the abolition of
> all monopolies was, then, a society where everyone willing to work
> would have the tools and raw materials necessary for production in a
> non-exploitative system . . . the dominant vision of the future
> society . . . [was] underpinned by individual, self-employed
> workers."* [**The Individualist Anarchists: A Critique of
> Liberalism**, p. 95]

This social context helps explain why some of the individualist
anarchists were indifferent to the issue of wage labour, unlike most
anarchists. A limited amount of wage labour within a predominantly
self-employed economy does not make a given society capitalist any more
than a small amount of governmental communities within an predominantly
anarchist world would make it statist. As Marx put it, in such socities
*"the separation of the worker from the conditions of labour and from
the soil . . . does not yet exist, or only sporadically, or on too
limited a scale . . . Where, amongst such curious characters, is the
'field of abstinence' for the capitalists? . . . Today's wage-labourer
is tomorrow's independent peasant or artisan, working for himself. He
vanishes from the labour-market -- but not into the workhouse."* There
is a *"constant transformation of wage-labourers into independent
producers, who work for themselves instead of for capital"* and so *"the
degree of exploitation of the wage-labourer remain[s] indecently low."*
In addition, the *"wage-labourer also loses, along with the relation of
dependence, the feeling of dependence on the abstemious capitalist."*
[**Op. Cit.**, pp. 935-6] Within such a social context, the
anti-libertarian aspects of wage labour are minimised and so could be
overlooked by otherwise sharp critics of authoritarianism as Tucker and
Andrews.

Therefore Rocker was correct when he argued that Individualist Anarchism
was *"above all . . . rooted in the peculiar social conditions of
America which differed fundamentally from those of Europe."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 155] As these conditions changed, the viability of
Individualist Anarchism's solution to the social problem decreased (as
acknowledged by Tucker in 1911, for example -- see [section
G.1.1](secG1.html#secg11)). Individualist Anarchism, argued Morgan
Edwards, *"appears to have dwindled into political insignificance
largely because of the erosion of its political-economic base, rather
than from a simple failure of strategy. With the impetus of the Civil
War, capitalism and the State had too great a head start on the
centralisation of economic and political life for the anarchists to
catch up. This centralisation reduced the independence of the
intellectual/professional and merchant artisan group that were the
mainstay of the **Liberty** circle."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 85-6] While
many of the individualist anarchists adjusted their own ideas to
changing social circumstances, as can be seen by Greene's support for
co-operatives (*"the principle of association"*) as the only means of
ending exploitation of labour by capital, the main forum of the movement
(**Liberty**) did not consistently subscribe to this position nor did
their support for union struggles play a major role in their strategy.
Faced with another form of anarchism which supported both,
unsurprisingly communist-anarchism replaced it as the dominant form of
anarchism by the start of the 20th century in America.

If these social conditions are not taken into account then the ideas of
the likes of Tucker and Spooner will be distorted beyond recognition.
Similarly, by ignoring the changing nature of socialism in the face of a
changing society and economy, the obvious socialistic aspects of their
ideas will be lost. Ultimately, to analyse the Individualist Anarchists
in an a-historic manner means to distort their ideas and ideals.
Moreover, to apply those ideas in a non-artisan economy without the
intention of radically transforming the socio-economic nature of that
society towards one based on artisan production one would mean to create
a society distinctly different than one they envisioned (see [section
G.3](secG3.html) for further discussion).
