Section G - Is individualist anarchism capitalistic?
====================================================

The short answer is, no, it is not. While a diverse tendency, the
individualist anarchists were opposed to the exploitation of labour, all
forms of non-labour income (such as profits, interest and rent) as well
as capitalist property rights (particularly in land). While aiming for a
free market system, they considered laissez-faire capitalism to be based
on various kinds of state enforced class monopoly which ensured that
labour was subjected to rule, domination and exploitation by capital. As
such it is deeply **anti**-capitalist and many individualist anarchists,
including its leading figure Benjamin Tucker, explicitly called
themselves socialists (indeed, Tucker often referred to his theory as
***"Anarchistic-Socialism"***).

So, in this section of our anarchist FAQ we indicate why the
individualist anarchists cannot be classified as "ancestors" of the
bogus libertarians of the "anarcho"-capitalist school. Rather, they must
be classified as libertarian **socialists** due to their opposition to
exploitation, critique of capitalist property rights and concern for
equality, albeit being on the liberal wing of anarchist thought.
Moreover, while all wanted to have an economy in which all incomes were
based on labour, many also opposed wage labour, i.e. the situation where
one person sells their labour to another rather than the product of that
labour (a position which, we argue, their ideas logically imply). So
while **some** of their ideas do overlap with those of the
"anarcho"-capitalist school they are not capitalistic, no more than the
overlap between their ideas and anarcho-communism makes them
communistic.

In this context, the creation of "anarcho"-capitalism may be regarded as
yet another tactic by capitalists to reinforce the public's perception
that there are no viable alternatives to capitalism, i.e. by claiming
that "even anarchism implies capitalism." In order to justify this
claim, they have searched the history of anarchism in an effort to find
some thread in the movement that can be used for this purpose. They
think that with the individualist anarchists they have found such a
thread. However, such an appropriation requires the systematic ignoring
or dismissal of key aspects of individualist-anarchism (which, of
course, the right-"libertarian" does). Somewhat ironically, this attempt
by right-"libertarians" to exclude individualist anarchism from
socialism parallels an earlier attempt by state socialists to do the
same. Tucker furiously refuted such attempts in an article entitled
*"Socialism and the Lexicographers"*, arguing that *"the Anarchistic
Socialists are not to be stripped of one half of their title by the mere
dictum of the last lexicographer."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 365]

Nevertheless, in the individualists we find anarchism coming closest to
"classical" liberalism and being influenced by the ideas of Herbert
Spencer, a forefather of "libertarian" capitalism (of the minimal state
variety). As Kropotkin summarised, their ideas were *"a combination of
those of Proudhon with those of Herbert Spencer."* [**Anarchism**, p.
296] What the "anarcho"-capitalist is trying to is to ignore Proudhon's
influence (i.e. the socialist aspect of their theories) which just
leaves Spencer, who was a right-wing liberal. To reduce individualist
anarchism so is to destroy what makes it a unique political theory and
movement. While both Kropotkin and Tucker praised Spencer as a synthetic
philosopher and social scientist, they were both painfully aware of the
limitations in his socio-political ideas. Tucker considered his attacks
on all forms of socialism (including Proudhon) as authoritarian as
being, at best, misinformed or, at worse, dishonest. He also recognised
the apologetic and limited nature of his attacks on state intervention,
noting that *"amid his multitudinous illustrations . . . of the evils of
legislation, he in every instance cites some law passed ostensibly at
least to protect labour, alleviating suffering, or promote the people's
welfare. But never once does he call attention to the far more deadly
and deep-seated evils growing out of the innumerable laws creating
privilege and sustaining monopoly."* Unsurprisingly, he considered
Spencer as a *"champion of the capitalistic class."* [quoted by James J.
Martin, **Men Against the State**, p. 240] As we will discuss in
[section G.3](secG3.html), it is likely that he would have drawn the
same conclusion about "anarcho"-capitalism.

This does not mean that the majority thread within the anarchist
movement is uncritical of individualist anarchism. Far from it! Social
anarchists have argued that this influence of non-anarchist ideas means
that while its *"criticism of the State is very searching, and [its]
defence of the rights of the individual very powerful,"* like Spencer it
*"opens . . . the way for reconstituting under the heading of 'defence'
all the functions of the State."* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 297] This
flows, social anarchists argue, from the impact of liberal principles
and led some individualist anarchists like Benjamin Tucker to support
contract theory in the name of freedom, without being aware of the
authoritarian social relationships that could be implied by it, as can
be seen under capitalism (other individualist anarchists were more aware
of this contradiction as we will see). Therefore, social anarchists tend
to think of individualist anarchism as an inconsistent form of
anarchism, one which could become consistent by simply logically
applying its own principles (see [section G.4](secG4.html)). On their
part, many individualist anarchists simply denied that social anarchists
where anarchists, a position other anarchists refute (see [section
G.2](secG2.html)). As such, this section can also be considered, in
part, as a continuation of the discussion begun in [section
A.3](secA3.html).

Few thinkers are completely consistent. Given Tucker's adamant
anti-statism and anti-capitalism, it is likely that had he realised the
authoritarian social relationships which contract theory tends to
produce (and justify) when involving employing labour, he would have
modified his views in such a way as to eliminate the contradiction
(particularly as contracts involving wage labour directly contradicts
his support for "occupancy and use"). It is understandable why he failed
to do so, however, given the social context in which he lived and
agitated. In Tucker's America, self-employment was still a possibility
on a wide scale (in fact, for much of the nineteenth century it was the
dominant form of economic activity). His reforms were aimed at making it
easier for workers to gain access to both land and machinery, so
allowing wage workers to become independent farmers or artisans.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, he viewed individualist anarchism as a
society of workers, not one of capitalists and workers. Moreover, as we
will argue in [section G.4.1](secG4.html#secg41), his love for freedom
and opposition to usury logically implies artisan and co-operative
labour -- people selling the products of their labour, as opposed to the
labour itself -- which itself implies self-management in production (and
society in general), not authoritarianism within the workplace (this was
the conclusion of Proudhon as well as Kropotkin). Nevertheless, it is
this inconsistency -- the non-anarchist aspect of individualist
anarchism -- which right "libertarians" like Murray Rothbard select and
concentrate on, ignoring the anti-capitalist context in which this
aspect of individualist thought exists within. As David Wieck pointed
out:

> *"Out of the history of anarchist thought and action Rothbard has
> pulled forth a single thread, the thread of individualism, and defines
> that individualism in a way alien even to the spirit of a Max Stirner
> or a Benjamin Tucker, whose heritage I presume he would claim -- to
> say nothing of how alien is his way to the spirit of Godwin, Proudhon,
> Bakunin, Kropotkin, Malatesta, and the historically anonymous persons
> who through their thoughts and action have tried to give anarchism a
> living meaning. Out of this thread Rothbard manufactures one more
> bourgeois ideology."* [**Anarchist Justice**, pp. 227-228]

It is with this in mind that we discuss the ideas of people like Tucker.
As this section of the FAQ will indicate, even at its most liberal,
individualist, extreme anarchism was fundamentally **anti**-capitalist.
Any concepts which "anarcho"-capitalism imports from the individualist
tradition ignore both the theoretical underpinnings of their ideas as
well as the social context of self-employment and artisan production
within which those concepts arose, thus turning them into something
radically different from what was intended by their originators. As we
discuss in [section G.1.4](secG1.html#secg14) the social context in
which individualist anarchism developed is essential to understanding
both its politics and its limitations (*"Anarchism in America is not a
**foreign importation** but a product of the social conditions of this
country and its historical traditions,"* although it is *"true that
American anarchism was also influenced later by European ideas."*
[Rudolf Rocker, **Pioneers of American Freedom**, p. 163]).

Saying that, it would be a mistake to suggest (as some writers have)
that individualist anarchism can be viewed purely in American terms.
While understanding the nature of American society and economy at the
time is essential to understanding individualist anarchism, it would be
false to imply that only individualist anarchism was the product of
America conditions and subscribed to by Americans while social anarchism
was imported from Europe by immigrants. After all, Albert and Lucy
Parsons were both native-born Americans who became communist-anarchists
while Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman only become anarchists once
they had arrived in America. Native-born Voltairine de Cleyre moved from
individualist to communist anarchism. Josiah Warren may have been born
in Boston, but he developed his anarchism after his experiences in a
experimental community set up by Welsh socialist Robert Owen (who, in
turn, was inspired by William Godwin's ideas). While Warren and Proudhon
may have developed their ideas independently, American libertarians
became aware of Proudhon and other European socialists as radical
journals had correspondents in France during the 1848 revolution and
partial translations of radical writings from Europe appeared as quickly
as they could be transmitted and translated. Individualist anarchists
like William Greene and Tucker were heavily influenced by the ideas of
Proudhon and so imported aspects of European anarchism into American
individualist anarchism while the likes of the French individualist E.
Armand brought aspects of American anarchism into the European movement.
Similarly, both Spooner and Greene had been members of the First
International while individualist anarchists Joseph Labadie and Dyer Lum
where organisers of the **Knights of Labor** union along with Albert and
Lucy Parsons. Lum later joined the anarcho-communist inspired
**International Working People's Association** (IWPA) and edited its
English language paper (the **Alarm**) when Parson was imprisoned
awaiting execution. All forms of anarchism were, in other words, a
combination of European and American influences, both in terms of ideas
and in terms of social experiences and struggles, even organisations.

While red-baiting and cries of "Un-American" may incline some to stress
the "native-born" aspect of individualist anarchism (particularly those
seeking to appropriate that tendency for their own ends), both wings of
the US movement had native-born and foreign members, aspects and
influences (and, as Rocker noted, the *"so-called white civilisation of
[the American] continent is the work of European immigrants."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 163]). While both sides tended to denounce and attack the
other (particularly after the Haymarket events), they had more in common
than the likes of Benjamin Tucker and Johann Most would have been
prepared to admit and each tendency, in its own way, reflected aspects
of American society and the drastic transformation it was going through
at the time. Moreover, it was changes in American society which lead to
the steady rise of social anarchism and its eclipse of individualist
anarchism from the 1880s onwards. While there has been a tendency to
stress individualist tendency in accounts of American anarchism due to
its unique characteristics, only those *"without a background in
anarchist history"* would think *"that the individualist anarchists were
the larger segment of the anarchist movement in the U.S. at the time.
Nothing could be farther from the truth. The collectivist branch of
anarchism was much stronger among radicals and workers during the late
nineteenth century and early twentieth century than the individualist
brand. Before the Civil War, the opposite would be true."* [Greg Hall,
**Social Anarchism**, no. 30, pp. 90-91]

By the 1880s, social anarchism had probably exceeded the size of the
"home-grown" individualists in the United States. The IWPA had some five
thousand members at its peak with perhaps three times as many
supporters. [Paul Avrich, **The Haymarket Tragedy**, p. 83] Its journals
had an aggregate circulation of over 30,000. [George Woodcock,
**Anarchism**, p. 395] In contrast, the leading individualist newspaper
**Liberty** *"probably never had more than 600 to 1000 subscribers, but
it was undoubtedly read by more than that."* [Charles H. Hamilton,
*"Introduction"*, p. 1-19, **Benjamin R. Tucker and the Champions of
Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton and Sullivan (eds.), p. 10] The repression
after Haymarket took its toll and the progress of social anarchism was
hindered for a decade. However, *"[b]y the turn of the century, the
anarchist movement in America had become predominantly communist in
orientation."* [Paul Avrich, **Anarchist Voices**, p. 5] As an added
irony for those who stress the individualist nature of anarchism in
America while dismissing social anarchism as a foreign import, the first
American newspaper to use the name **"An-archist"** was published in
Boston in 1881 by anarchists within the social revolutionary branch of
the movement. [Paul Avrich, **The Haymarket Tragedy**, p. 57] Equally
ironic, given the appropriation of the term by the American right, the
first anarchist journal to use the term "libertarian" (**La Libertaire,
Journal du Mouvement Social**) was published in New York between 1858
and 1861 by French communist-anarchist Joseph Déjacque. [Max Nettlau,
**A Short History of Anarchism**, pp. 75-6]

All this is not to suggest that individualist anarchism does not have
American roots nor that many of its ideas and visions were not
significantly shaped by American social conditions and developments. Far
from it! It is simply to stress that it did not develop in complete
isolation of European anarchism during the latter half of the nineteenth
century and that the social anarchism which overtook by the end of that
century was also a product of American conditions (in this case, the
transformation of a pre-capitalist society into a capitalist one). In
other words, the rise of communist anarchism and the decline of
individualist anarchism by the end of the nineteenth century reflected
American society just as much as the development of the latter in the
first place. Thus the rise of capitalism in America meant the rise of an
anarchism more suitable to the social conditions and social
relationships produced by that change. Unsurprisingly, therefore,
individualist anarchism remains the minority trend in American anarchism
to this day with such comrades as Joe Peacott (see his pamphlet
**Individualism Reconsidered**), Kevin Carson (see his book **Studies in
Mutualist Political Economy**) and Shawn Wilbur (who has painstakingly
placed many rare early individualist and mutualist anarchist works onto
the internet) keeping its ideas alive.

So like social anarchism, individualist anarchism developed as a
response to the rise of capitalism and the transformation of American
society this produced. As one academic put it, the *"early anarchists,
though staunchly individualistic, did not entertain a penchant for . . .
capitalism. Rather, they saw themselves as socialists opposed to the
state socialism of Karl Marx. The individualist anarchists saw no
contradiction between their individualist stance and their rejection of
capitalism."* She stresses that they were *"fervent anti-capitalists"*
and thought that *"workers created value through their labour, a value
appropriated by owners of businesses . . . The individualist anarchists
blamed capitalism for creating inhumane working conditions and for
increasing inequalities of wealth. Their self-avowed 'socialism' was
rooted in their firm belief in equality, material as well as legal."*
This, however, did not stop her asserting that *"contemporary
anarcho-capitalists are descendants of nineteenth-century individualist
anarchists such as Josiah Warren, Lysander Spooner, and Benjamin
Tucker."* [Susan Love Brown, pp. 99-128, *"The Free Market as Salvation
from Government"*, **Meanings of the Market**, James G. Carrier (ed.),
p. 104, p. 107, p. 104 and p. 103] Trust an academic to ignore the
question of how related **are** two theories which differ on such a key
issue as whether to be anti-capitalist or not!

Needless to say, some "anarcho"-capitalists are well aware of the fact
that individualist anarchists were extremely hostile to capitalism while
supporting the "free market." Unsurprisingly, they tend to downplay this
opposition, often arguing that the anarchists who point out the
anti-capitalist positions of the likes of Tucker and Spooner are quoting
them out of context. The truth is different. In fact, it is the
"anarcho"-capitalist who takes the ideas of the individualist anarchists
from both the historical and theoretical context. This can be seen from
the "anarcho"-capitalist dismissal of the individualist anarchists'
"bad" economics as well as the nature of the free society wanted by
them.

It is possible, no doubt, to trawl through the many issues of, say,
**Liberty** or the works of individualist anarchism to find a few
comments which may be used to bolster a claim that anarchism need not
imply socialism. However, a few scattered comments here and there are
hardly a firm basis to ignore the vast bulk of anarchist theory and its
history as a movement. This is particularly the case when applying this
criteria consistently would mean that communist anarchism, for example,
would be excommunicated from anarchism simply because of the opinions of
**some** individualist anarchists. Equally, it may be possible to cobble
together all the non-anarchist positions of individualist anarchists and
so construct an ideology which justified wage labour, the land monopoly,
usury, intellectual property rights, and so on but such an ideology
would be nothing more than a mockery of individualist anarchism,
distinctly at odds with its spirits and aims. It would only convince
those ignorant of the anarchist tradition.

It is not a fitting tribute to the individualist anarchists that their
ideas are today being associated with the capitalism that they so
clearly despised and wished to abolish. As one modern day Individualist
Anarchist argues:

> *"It is time that anarchists recognise the valuable contributions of .
> . . individualist anarchist theory and take advantage of its ideas. It
> would be both futile and criminal to leave it to the capitalist
> libertarians, whose claims on Tucker and the others can be made only
> by ignoring the violent opposition they had to capitalist exploitation
> and monopolistic 'free enterprise' supported by the state."* [J.W.
> Baker, *"Native American Anarchism,"* pp. 43-62, **The Raven**, vol.
> 10, no. 1, pp. 61-2]

We hope that this section of the FAQ will go some way to explaining the
ideas and contributions of individualist anarchism to a new generation
of rebels. Given the diversity of individualist anarchism, it is hard to
generalise about it (some are closer to classical liberalism than
others, for example, while a few embraced revolutionary means of change
such as Dyer Lum). However, we will do our best to draw out the common
themes of the movement, indicating where certain people differed from
others. Similarly, there are distinct differences between European and
American forms of mutualism, regardless of how often Tucker invoked
Proudhon's name to justify his own interpretations of anarchism and we
will indicate these (these differences, we think, justify calling the
American branch individualist anarchism rather than mutualism). We will
also seek to show why social anarchism rejects individualist anarchism
(and vice versa) as well as giving a critical evaluation of both
positions. Given the diverse nature of individualist anarchism, we are
sure that we will not cover all the positions and individuals associated
with it but we hope to present enough to indicate why the likes of
Tucker, Labadie, Yarros and Spooner deserve better than to be reduced to
footnotes in books defending an even more extreme version of the
capitalism they spent their lives fighting.
