G.3 Is "anarcho"-capitalism a new form of individualist anarchism?
==================================================================

No. As Carole Pateman once pointed out, *"[t]here has always been a
strong radical individualist tradition in the USA. Its adherents have
been divided between those who drew anarchist, egalitarian conclusions,
and those who reduced political life to the capitalist economy writ
large, to a series of exchanges between unequally situated
individuals."* [**The Problem of Political Obligation**, p. 205] What
right-"libertarians" and "anarcho"-capitalists do is to confuse these
two traditions, ignoring fundamental aspects of individualist anarchism
in order to do so. Thus anarchist Peter Sabatini:

> *"in those rare moments when [Murray] Rothbard (or any other
> [right-wing] Libertarian) does draw upon individualist anarchism, he
> is always highly selective about what he pulls out. Most of the
> doctrine's core principles, being decidedly anti-Libertarianism, are
> conveniently ignored, and so what remains is shrill anti-statism
> conjoined to a vacuous freedom in hackneyed defence of capitalism. In
> sum, the 'anarchy' of Libertarianism reduces to a liberal fraud."*
> [**Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy**]

As class struggle anarchist Benjamin Franks notes individualist
anarchism *"has similarities with, but is not identical to,
anarcho-capitalism."* [**Rebel Alliances**, p. 44] For Colin Ward, while
the *"mainstream"* of anarchist propaganda *"has been
**anarchist-communism**"* there are *"several traditions of
**individualist anarchism**"*, including that associated with Max
Stirner and *"a remarkable series of 19th-century American figures"* who
*"differed from free-market liberals in their absolute mistrust of
American capitalism, and in their emphasis on mutualism."* Ward was
careful to note that by the *"late 20th century the word 'libertarian' .
. . was appropriated by a new group of American thinkers"* and so *"it
is necessary to examine the modern individualist 'libertarian' response
from the standpoint of the anarchist tradition."* It was found to be
wanting, for while Rothbard was *"the most aware of the actual anarchist
tradition among the anarcho-capitalist apologists"* he may have been
*"aware of a tradition, but he is singularly unaware of the old proverb
that freedom for the pike means death for the minnow."* The
individualist anarchists were *"busy social inventors exploring the
potential of autonomy."* The *"American 'libertarians' of the 20th
century are academics rather than social activists, and their
inventiveness seems to be limited to providing an ideology for
untrammelled market capitalism."* [**Anarchism: A Short Introduction**,
pp. 2-3, p. 62, p. 67, and p. 69]

In this section we will sketch these differences between the genuine
libertarian ideas of Individualist Anarchism and the bogus "anarchism"
of right-"libertarian" ideology. This discussion builds upon our general
critique of "anarcho"-capitalism we presented in [section
F](secFcon.html). However, here we will concentrate on presenting
individualist anarchist analysis of "anarcho"-capitalist positions
rather than, as before, mostly social anarchist ones (although, of
course, there are significant overlaps and similarities). In this way,
we can show the fundamental differences between the two theories for
while there are often great differences between specific individualist
anarchist thinkers all share a vision of a free society distinctly at
odds with the capitalism of their time as well as the "pure" system of
economic textbooks and right-"libertarian" dreams (which, ironically, so
often reflects the 19th century capitalism the individualist anarchists
were fighting).

First it should be noted that some "anarcho"-capitalists shy away from
the term, preferring such expressions as "market anarchist" or
"individualist anarchist." This suggests that there is some link between
their ideology and that of Tucker and his comrades. However, the founder
of "anarcho"-capitalism, Murray Rothbard, refused that label for, while
*"strongly tempted,"* he could not do so because *"Spooner and Tucker
have in a sense pre-empted that name for their doctrine and that from
that doctrine I have certain differences."* Somewhat incredibly Rothbard
argued that on the whole politically *"these differences are minor,"*
economically *"the differences are substantial, and this means that my
view of the consequences of putting our more of less common system into
practice is very far from theirs."* [*"The Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An
Economist's View"*, pp. 5-15, **Journal of Libertarian Studies**, vol.
20, no. 1, p. 7]

What an understatement! Individualist anarchists advocated an economic
system in which there would have been very little inequality of wealth
and so of power (and the accumulation of capital would have been minimal
without profit, interest and rent). Removing this social and economic
basis would result in **substantially** different political regimes. In
other words, politics is not isolated from economics. As anarchist David
Wieck put it, Rothbard *"writes of society as though some part of it
(government) can be extracted and replaced by another arrangement while
other things go on before, and he constructs a system of police and
judicial power without any consideration of the influence of historical
and economic context."* [**Anarchist Justice**, p. 227]

Unsurprisingly, the political differences he highlights **are**
significant, namely *"the role of law and the jury system"* and *"the
land question."* The former difference relates to the fact that the
individualist anarchists *"allow[ed] each individual free-market court,
and more specifically, each free-market jury, totally free rein over
judicial decision."* This horrified Rothbard. The reason is obvious, as
it allows real people to judge the law as well as the facts, modifying
the former as society changes and evolves. For Rothbard, the idea that
ordinary people should have a say in the law is dismissed. Rather, *"it
would not be a very difficult task for Libertarian lawyers and jurists
to arrive at a rational and objective code of libertarian legal
principles and procedures."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 7-8] Of course, the fact
that *"lawyers"* and *"jurists"* may have a radically different idea of
what is just than those subject to their laws is not raised by Rothbard,
never mind answered. While Rothbard notes that juries may defend the
people against the state, the notion that they may defend the people
against the authority and power of the rich is not even raised. That is
why the rich have tended to oppose juries as well as popular assemblies.
Unsurprisingly, as we indicated in [section F.6.1](secF6.html#secf61),
Rothbard wanted laws to be made by judges, lawyers, jurists and other
"libertarian" experts rather than jury judged and driven. In other
words, to exclude the general population from any say in the law and how
it changes. This hardly a *"minor"* difference! It is like a supporter
of the state saying that it is a *"minor"* difference if you favour a
dictatorship rather than a democratically elected government. As Tucker
argued, *"it is precisely in the tempering of the rigidity of
enforcement that one of the chief excellences of Anarchism consists . .
. under Anarchism all rules and laws will be little more than
suggestions for the guidance of juries, and that all disputes . . . will
be submitted to juries which will judge not only the facts but the law,
the justice of the law, its applicability to the given circumstances,
and the penalty or damage to be inflicted because of its infraction . .
. under Anarchism the law . . . will be regarded as **just** in
proportion to its flexibility, instead of now in proportion to its
rigidity."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, pp. 160-1] In others, the
law will evolve to take into account changing social circumstances and,
as a consequence, public opinion on specific events and rights. Tucker's
position is fundamentally **democratic** and evolutionary while
Rothbard's is autocratic and fossilised.

This is particularly the case if you are proposing an economic system
which is based on inequalities of wealth, power and influence and the
means of accumulating more. As we note in [section
G.3.3](secG3.html#secg33), one of individualist anarchists that remained
pointed this out and opposed Rothbard's arguments. As such, while
Rothbard may have subscribed to a system of competing defence companies
like Tucker, he expected them to operate in a substantially different
legal system, enforcing different (capitalist) property rights and
within a radically different socio-economic system. These differences
are hardly *"minor"*. As such, to claim that "anarcho"-capitalism is
simply individualist anarchism with "Austrian" economics shows an utter
lack of understanding of what individualist anarchism stood and aimed
for.

On the land question, Rothbard opposed the individualist position of
*"occupancy and use"* as it *"would automatically abolish all rent
payments for land."* Which was precisely **why** the individualist
anarchists advocated it! In a predominantly rural economy, as was the
case during most of the 19th century in America, this would result in a
significant levelling of income and social power as well as bolstering
the bargaining position of non-land workers by reducing the numbers
forced onto the labour market (which, as we note in [section
F.8.5](secF8.html#secf85), was the rationale for the state enforcing the
land monopoly in the first place). He bemoans that landlords cannot
charge rent on their *"justly-acquired private property"* without
noticing that is begging the question as anarchists deny that this is
*"justly-acquired"* land in the first place. Unsurprising, Rothbard
considered *"the proper theory of justice in landed property can be
found in John Locke"*, ignoring the awkward fact that the first
self-proclaimed anarchist book was written **precisely** to refute that
kind of theory and expose its anti-libertarian implications. His
argument simply shows how far from anarchism his ideology is. For
Rothbard, it goes without saying that the landlord's *"freedom of
contract"* tops the worker's freedom to control their own work and live
and, of course, their right to life. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 8 and p. 9]

For anarchists, *"the land is indispensable to our existence,
consequently a common thing, consequently insusceptible of
appropriation."* [Proudhon, **What is Property?**, p. 107] Tucker looked
forward to a time when capitalist property rights in land were ended and
*"the Anarchistic view that occupancy and use should condition and limit
landholding becomes the prevailing view."* This *"does not simply mean
the freeing of unoccupied land. It means the freeing of all land not
occupied **by the owner**"* and *"tenants would not be forced to pay you
rent, nor would you be allowed to seize their property. The Anarchic
associations would look upon your tenants very much as they would look
upon your guests."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 159, p. 155
and p. 162] The ramifications of this position on land use are
significant. At its most basic, what counts as force and coercion, and
so state intervention, are fundamentally different due to the differing
conceptions of property held by Tucker and Rothbard. If we apply, for
example, the individualist anarchist position on land to the workplace,
we would treat the workers in a factory as the rightful owners, on the
basis of occupation and use; at the same time, we could treat the share
owners and capitalists as aggressors for attempting to force their
representatives as managers on those actually occupying and using the
premises. The same applies to the landlord against the tenant farmer.
Equally, the outcome of such differing property systems will be
radically different -- in terms of inequalities of wealth and so power
(with having others working for them, it is unlikely that would-be
capitalists or landlords would get rich). Rather than a *"minor"*
difference, the question of land use fundamentally changes the nature of
the society built upon it and whether it counts as genuinely libertarian
or not.

Tucke was well aware of the implications of such differences. Supporting
a scheme like Rothbard's meant *"departing from Anarchistic ground,"* it
was *"Archism"* and, as he stressed in reply to one supporter of such
property rights, it opened the door to other authoritarian positions:
*"Archism in one point is taking him to Archism is another. Soon, if he
is logical, he will be an Archist in all respects."* It was a
*"fundamentally foolish"* position, because it *"starts with a basic
proposition that must be looked upon by all consistent Anarchists as
obvious nonsense."* *"What follows from this?"* asked Tucker.
*"Evidently that a man may go to a piece of vacant land and fence it
off; that he may then go to a second piece and fence that off; then to a
third, and fence that off; then to a fourth, a fifth, a hundredth, a
thousandth, fencing them all off; that, unable to fence off himself as
many as he wishes, he may hire other men to do the fencing for him; and
that then he may stand back and bar all other men from using these
lands, or admit them as tenants at such rental as he may choose to
extract."* It was *"a theory of landed property which all Anarchists
agree in viewing as a denial of equal liberty."* It is *"utterly
inconsistent with the Anarchistic doctrine of occupancy and use as the
limit of property in land."* [**Liberty**, No. 180, p. 4 and p. 6] This
was because of the dangers to liberty capitalist property rights in land
implied:

> *"I put the right of occupancy and use above the right of contract . .
> . principally by my interest in the right of contract. Without such a
> preference the theory of occupancy and use is utterly untenable;
> without it . . . it would be possible for an individual to acquire,
> and hold simultaneously, virtual titles to innumerable parcels of
> land, by the merest show of labour performed thereon . . . [This would
> lead to] the virtual ownership of the entire world by a small fraction
> of its inhabitants . . . [which would see] the right of contract, if
> not destroyed absolutely, would surely be impaired in an intolerable
> degree."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 350, p. 4]

Clearly a position which Rothbard had no sympathy for, unlike landlords.
Strange, though, that Rothbard did not consider the obvious liberty
destroying effects of the monopolisation of land and natural resources
as *"rational grounds"* for opposing landlords but, then, as we noted in
[section F.1](secF1.html) when it came to private property Rothbard
simply could not see its state-like qualities -- even when he pointed
them out himself! For Rothbard, the individualist anarchist position
involved a *"hobbling of land sites or of optimum use of land ownership
and cultivation and such arbitrary misallocation of land injures all of
society."* [Rothbard, **Op. Cit.**, p. 9] Obviously, those subject to
the arbitrary authority of landlords and pay them rent are not part of
*"society"* and it is a strange coincidence that the interests of
landlords just happen to coincide so completely with that of *"all of
society"* (including their tenants?). And it would be churlish to remind
Rothbard's readers that, as a methodological individualist, he was meant
to think that there is no such thing as *"society"* -- just individuals.
And in terms of these individuals, he clearly favoured the landlords
over their tenants and justifies this by appealing, like any crude
collectivist, to an abstraction (*"society"*) to which the tenants must
sacrifice themselves and their liberty. Tucker would not have been
impressed.

For Rothbard, the nineteenth century saw *"the establishment in North
America of a truly libertarian land system."* [**The Ethics of
Liberty**, p. 73] In contrast, the Individualist Anarchists attacked
that land system as the *"land monopoly"* and looked forward to a time
when *"the libertarian principle to the tenure of land"* was actually
applied [Tucker, **Liberty**, no. 350, p. 5] So given the central place
that "occupancy and use" lies in individualist anarchism, it was
extremely patronising for Rothbard to assert that *"it seems . . . a
complete violation of the Spooner-Tucker 'law of equal liberty' to
prevent the legitimate owner from selling his land to someone else."*
[*"The Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An Economist's View"*, **Op. Cit.**, p.
9] Particularly as Tucker had explicitly addressed this issue and
indicated the logical and common sense basis for this so-called
"violation" of their principles. Thus "occupancy and use" was *"the
libertarian principle to the tenure of land"* because it stopped a class
of all powerful landlords developing, ensuring a real equality of
opportunity and liberty rather than the formal "liberty" associated with
capitalism which, in practice, means selling your liberty to the rich.

Somewhat ironically, Rothbard bemoaned that it *"seems to be a highly
unfortunate trait of libertarian and quasi-libertarian groups to spend
the bulk of their time and energy emphasising their most fallacious or
unlibertarian points."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 14] He pointed to the
followers of Henry George and their opposition to the current land
holding system and the monetary views of the individualist anarchists as
examples (see [section G.3.6](secG3.html#secg36) for a critique of
Rothbard's position on mutual banking). Of course, both groups would
reply that Rothbard's positions were, in fact, both fallacious and
unlibertarian in nature. As, indeed, did Tucker decades before Rothbard
proclaimed his private statism a form of "anarchism." Yarros' critique
of those who praised capitalism but ignored the state imposed
restrictions that limited choice within it seems as applicable to
Rothbard as it did Herbert Spencer:

> *"A system is voluntary when it is voluntary all round . . . not when
> certain transactions, regarded from certain points of view, appear
> Voluntary. Are the circumstances which compel the labourer to accept
> unfair terms law-created, artificial, and subversive of equal liberty?
> That is the question, and an affirmative answer to it is tantamount to
> an admission that the present system is not voluntary in the true
> sense."* [**Liberty**, no. 184, p. 2]

So while "anarcho"-capitalists like Walter Block speculate on how
starving families renting their children to wealthy paedophiles is
acceptable *"on libertarian grounds"* it is doubtful that any
individualist anarchist would be so blasé about such an evil.
[*"Libertarianism vs. Objectivism: A Response to Peter Schwartz,"* pp.
39-62, **Reason Papers**, Vol. 26, Summer 2003, p. 20] Tucker, for
example, was well aware that liberty without equality was little more
than a bad joke. *"If,"* he argued, *"after the achievement of all
industrial freedoms, economic rent should prove to be the cause of such
inequalities in comfort that an effective majority found themselves at
the point of starvation, they would undoubtedly cry, 'Liberty be
damned!' and proceed to even up; and I think that at that stage of the
game they would be great fools if they didn't. From this it will be seen
that I am no[t] . . . a stickler for absolute equal liberty under all
circumstances."* Needless to say, he considered this outcome as unlikely
and was keen to *"[t]ry freedom first."* [**Liberty**, no. 267, p. 2 and
p. 3]

The real question is why Rothbard considered this a **political**
difference rather than an economic one. Unfortunately, he did not
explain. Perhaps because of the underlying **socialist** perspective
behind the anarchist position? Or perhaps the fact that feudalism and
monarchism was based on the owner of the land being its ruler suggests a
political aspect to propertarian ideology best left unexplored? Given
that the idea of grounding rulership on land ownership receded during
the Middle Ages, it may be unwise to note that under
"anarcho"-capitalism the landlord and capitalist would, likewise, be
sovereign over the land **and** those who used it? As we noted in
[section F.1](secF1.html), this is the conclusion that Rothbard does
draw. As such, there **is** a political aspect to this difference,
namely the difference between a libertarian social system and one rooted
in authority.

Ultimately, *"the expropriation of the mass of the people from the soil
forms the basis of the capitalist mode of production."* [Marx,
**Capital**, vol. 1, p. 934] For there are *"two ways of oppressing men:
either directly by brute force, by physical violence; or indirectly by
denying them the means of life and this reducing them to a state of
surrender."* In the second case, government is *"an organised instrument
to ensure that dominion and privilege will be in the hands of those who
. . . have cornered all the means of life, first and foremost the land,
which they make use of to keep the people in bondage and to make them
work for their benefit."* [Malatesta, **Anarchy**, p. 21] Privatising
the coercive functions of said government hardly makes much difference.

As such, Rothbard was right to distance himself from the term
individualist anarchism. It is a shame he did not do the same with
anarchism as well!

G.3.1 Is "anarcho"-capitalism American anarchism?
-------------------------------------------------

Unlike Rothbard, some "anarcho"-capitalists are more than happy to
proclaim themselves "individualist anarchists" and so suggest that their
notions are identical, or nearly so, with the likes of Tucker, Ingalls
and Labadie. As part of this, they tend to stress that individualist
anarchism is uniquely American, an indigenous form of anarchism unlike
social anarchism. To do so, however, means ignoring not only the many
European influences on individualist anarchism itself (most notably,
Proudhon) but also downplaying the realities of American capitalism
which quickly made social anarchism the dominant form of Anarchism in
America. Ironically, such a position is deeply contradictory as
"anarcho"-capitalism itself is most heavily influenced by a European
ideology, namely "Austrian" economics, which has lead its proponents to
reject key aspects of the indigenous American anarchist tradition.

For example, "anarcho"-capitalist Wendy McElroy does this in a short
essay provoked by the Seattle protests in 1999. While Canadian, her
rampant American nationalism is at odds with the internationalism of the
individualist anarchists, stating that after property destruction in
Seattle which placed American anarchists back in the media social
anarchism *"is not American anarchism. Individualist anarchism, the
indigenous form of the political philosophy, stands in rigorous
opposition to attacking the person or property of individuals."* Like an
ideological protectionist, she argued that *"Left [sic!] anarchism
(socialist and communist) are foreign imports that flooded the country
like cheap goods during the 19th century."* [**Anarchism: Two Kinds**]
Apparently Albert and Lucy Parsons were un-Americans, as was Voltairine
de Cleyre who turned from individualist to communist anarchism. And best
not mention the social conditions in America which quickly made
communist-anarchism predominant in the movement or that individualist
anarchists like Tucker proudly proclaimed their ideas socialist!

She argued that *"[m]any of these anarchists (especially those escaping
Russia) introduced lamentable traits into American radicalism"* such as
*"propaganda by deed"* as well as a class analysis which *"divided
society into economic classes that were at war with each other."* Taking
the issue of *"propaganda by the deed"* first, it should be noted that
use of violence against person or property was hardly alien to American
traditions. The Boston Tea Party was just as *"lamentable"* an attack on
*"property of individuals"* as the window breaking at Seattle while the
revolution and revolutionary war were hardly fought using pacifist
methods or respecting the *"person or property of individuals"* who
supported imperialist Britain. Similarly, the struggle against slavery
was not conducted purely by means Quakers would have supported (John
Brown springs to mind), nor was (to use just one example) Shay's
rebellion. So *"attacking the person or property of individuals"* was
hardly alien to American radicalism and so was definitely **not**
imported by *"foreign"* anarchists.

Of course, anarchism in American became associated with terrorism (or
*"propaganda by the deed"*) due to the Haymarket events of 1886 and
Berkman's assassination attempt against Frick during the Homestead
strike. Significantly, McElroy makes no mention of the substantial state
and employer violence which provoked many anarchists to advocate
violence in self-defence. For example, the great strike of 1877 saw the
police opened fire on strikers on July 25th, killing five and injuring
many more. *"For several days, meetings of workmen were broken up by the
police, who again and again interfered with the rights of free speech
and assembly."* The **Chicago Times** called for the use of hand
grenades against strikers and state troops were called in, killing a
dozen strikers. *"In two days of fighting, between 25 and 50 civilians
had been killed, some 200 seriously injured, and between 300 and 400
arrested. Not a single policeman or soldier had lost his life."* This
context explains why many workers, including those in reformist trade
unions as well as anarchist groups like the IWPA, turned to armed
self-defence ("violence"). The Haymarket meeting itself was organised in
response to the police firing on strikers and killing at least two. The
Haymarket bomb was thrown after the police tried to break-up a peaceful
meeting by force: *"It is clear then that . . . it was the police and
not the anarchists who were the perpetrators of the violence at the
Haymarket."* All but one of the deaths and most of the injuries were
caused by the police firing indiscriminately in the panic after the
explosion. [Paul Avrich, **The Maymarket Tragedy**, pp. 32-4, p. 189, p.
210, and pp. 208-9] As for Berkman's assassination attempt, this was
provoked by the employer's Pinkerton police opening fire on strikers,
killing and wounding many. [Emma Goldman, **Living My Life**, vol. 1, p.
86]

In other words, it was **not** foreign anarchists or alien ideas which
associated anarchism with violence but, rather, the reality of American
capitalism. As historian Eugenia C. Delamotte puts it, *"the view that
anarchism stood for violence . . . spread rapidly in the mainstream
press from the 1870s"* because of *"the use of violence against strikers
and demonstrators in the labour agitation that marked these decades --
struggles for the eight-hour day, better wages, and the right to
unionise, for example. Police, militia, and private security guards
harassed, intimidated, bludgeoned, and shot workers routinely in
conflicts that were just as routinely portrayed in the media as worker
violence rather than state violence; labour activists were also subject
to brutal attacks, threats of lynching, and many other forms of physical
assault and intimidation . . . the question of how to respond to such
violence became a critical issue in the 1870s, with the upswelling of
labour agitation and attempts to suppress it violently."* [**Voltairine
de Cleyre and the Revolution of the Mind**, pp. 51-2]

Joseph Labadie, it should be noted, thought the *"Beastly police"* got
what they deserved at Haymarket as they had attempted to break up a
peaceful public meeting and such people should *"go at the peril of
their lives. If it is necessary to use dynamite to protect the rights of
free meeting, free press and free speech, then the sooner we learn its
manufacture and use . . . the better it will be for the toilers of the
world."* The radical paper he was involved in, the **Labor Leaf**, had
previously argued that *"should trouble come, the capitalists will use
the regular army and militia to shoot down those who are not satisfied.
It won't be so if the people are equally ready."* Even reformist unions
were arming themselves to protect themselves, with many workers
applauding their attempts to organise union militias. As worker put it,
*"[w]ith union men well armed and accustomed to military tactics, we
could keep Pinkerton's men at a distance . . . Employers would think
twice, too, before they attempted to use troops against us . . . Every
union ought to have its company of sharpshooters."* [quoted by Richard
Jules Oestreicher, **Solidarity and Fragmentation**, p. 200 and p. 135]

While the violent rhetoric of the Chicago anarchists was used at their
trial and is remembered (in part because enemies of anarchism take great
glee in repeating it), the state and employer violence which provoked it
has been forgotten or ignored. Unless this is mentioned, a seriously
distorted picture of both communist-anarchism **and** capitalism are
created. It is significant, of course, that while the **words** of the
Martyrs are taken as evidence of anarchism's violent nature, the actual
violence (up to and including murder) against strikers by state and
private police apparently tells us nothing about the nature of the state
or capitalist system (Ward Churchill presents an excellent summary such
activities in his article *"From the Pinkertons to the PATRIOT Act: The
Trajectory of Political Policing in the United States, 1870 to the
Present"* [**CR: The New Centennial Review**, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 1-72]).

So, as can be seen, McElroy distorts the context of anarchist violence
by utterly ignoring the far worse capitalist violence which provoked it.
Like more obvious statists, she demonises the resistance to the
oppressed while ignoring that of the oppressor. Equally, it should also
be noted Tucker rejected violent methods to end class oppression not out
of principle, but rather strategy as there *"was no doubt in his mind as
to the righteousness of resistance to oppression by recourse to
violence, but his concern now was with its expedience . . . he was
absolutely convinced that the desired social revolution would be
possible only through the utility of peaceful propaganda and passive
resistance."* [James J. Martin, **Men Against the State**, p. 225] For
Tucker *"as long as freedom of speech and of the press is not struck
down, there should be no resort to physical force in the struggle
against oppression."* [quoted by Morgan Edwards, *"Neither Bombs Nor
Ballots: Liberty & the Strategy of Anarchism"*, pp. 65-91, **Benjamin R.
Tucker and the Champions of Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton and Sullivan
(eds.), p. 67] Nor should we forget that Spooner's rhetoric could be as
blood-thirsty as Johann Most's at times and that American individualist
anarchist Dyer Lum was an advocate of insurrection.

As far as class analysis does, which *"divided society into economic
classes that were at war with each other"*, it can be seen that the
"left" anarchists were simply acknowledging the reality of the situation
-- as did, it must be stressed, the individualist anarchists. As we
noted in [section G.1](secG1.html), the individualist anarchists were
well aware that there was a class war going on, one in which the
capitalist class used the state to ensure its position (the
individualist anarchist *"knows very well that the present State is an
historical development, that it is simply the tool of the
property-owning class; he knows that primitive accumulation began
through robbery bold and daring, and that the freebooters then organised
the State in its present form for their own self-preservation."* [A.H.
Simpson, **The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 92]). Thus workers had a
right to a genuinely free market for *"[i]f the man with labour to sell
has not this free market, then his liberty is violated and his property
virtually taken from him. Now, such a market has constantly been denied
. . . to labourers of the entire civilised world. And the men who have
denied it are . . . Capitalists . . . [who] have placed and kept on the
statue-books all sorts of prohibitions and taxes designed to limit and
effective in limiting the number of bidders for the labour of those who
have labour to sell."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 454] For Joshua King
Ingalls, *"[i]n any question as between the worker and the holder of
privilege, [the state] is certain to throw itself into the scale with
the latter, for it is itself the source of privilege, the creator of
class rule."* [quoted by Bowman N. Hall, *"Joshua K. Ingalls, American
Individualist: Land Reformer, Opponent of Henry George and Advocate of
Land Leasing, Now an Established Mode,"* pp. 383-96, **American Journal
of Economics and Sociology**, Vol. 39, No. 4, p. 292] Ultimately, the
state was *"a police force to regulate the people in the interests of
the plutocracy."* [Ingalls, quoted by Martin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 152]

Discussing Henry Frick, manager of the Homestead steelworkers who was
shot by Berkman for using violence against striking workers, Tucker
noted that Frick did not *"aspire, as I do, to live in a society of
mutually helpful equals"* but rather it was *"his determination to live
in luxury produced by the toil and suffering of men whose necks are
under his heel. He has deliberately chosen to live on terms of hostility
with the greater part of the human race."* While opposing Berkman's act,
Tucker believed that he was *"a man with whom I have much in common, --
much more at any rate than with such a man as Frick."* Berkman *"would
like to live on terms of equality with his fellows, doing his share of
work for not more than his share of pay."* [**The Individualist
Anarchists**, pp. 307-8] Clearly, Tucker was well aware of the class
struggle and why, while not supporting such actions, violence occurred
when fighting it.

As Victor Yarros summarised, for the individualist anarchists the
*"State is the servant of the robbers, and it exists chiefly to prevent
the expropriation of the robbers and the restoration of a free and fair
field for legitimate competition and wholesome, effective voluntary
cooperation."* [*"Philosophical Anarchism: Its Rise, Decline, and
Eclipse"*, pp. 470-483, **The American Journal of Sociology**, vol. 41,
no. 4, p. 475] For "anarcho"-capitalists, the state exploits all classes
subject to it (perhaps the rich most, by means of taxation to fund
welfare programmes and legal support for union rights and strikes).

So when McElroy states that, *"Individualist anarchism rejects the State
because it is the institutionalisation of force against peaceful
individuals"*, she is only partly correct. While it may be true for
"anarcho"-capitalism, it fails to note that for the individualist
anarchists the modern state was the institutionalisation of force by the
capitalist class to deny the working class a free market. The
individualist anarchists, in other words, like social anarchists also
rejected the state because it imposed certain class monopolies and class
legislation which ensured the exploitation of labour by capital -- a
significant omission on McElroy's part. *"Can it be soberly pretended
for a moment that the State . . . is purely a defensive institution?"*
asked Tucker. *"Surely not . . . you will find that a good nine-tenths
of existing legislation serves . . . either to prescribe the
individual's personal habits, or, worse still, to create and sustain
commercial, industrial, financial, and proprietary monopolies which
deprive labour of a large part of the reward that it would receive in a
perfectly free market."* [Tucker, **Instead of a Book**, pp. 25-6] In
fact:

> *"As long as a portion of the products of labour are appropriated for
> the payment of fat salaries to useless officials and big dividends to
> idle stockholders, labour is entitled to consider itself defrauded,
> and all just men will sympathise with its protest."* [Tucker,
> **Liberty**, no. 19, p. 1]

It goes without saying that almost all "anarcho"-capitalists follow
Rothbard in being totally opposed to labour unions, strikes and other
forms of working class protest. As such, the individualist anarchists,
just as much as the "left" anarchists McElroy is so keen to disassociate
them from, argued that *"[t]hose who made a profit from buying or
selling were class criminals and their customers or employees were class
victims. It did not matter if the exchanges were voluntary ones. Thus,
left anarchists hated the free market as deeply as they hated the
State."* [McElroy, **Op. Cit.**] Yet, as any individualist anarchist of
the time would have told her, the "free market" did not exist because
the capitalist class used the state to oppress the working class and
reduce the options available to choose from so allowing the exploitation
of labour to occur. Class analysis, in other words, was not limited to
*"foreign"* anarchism, nor was the notion that making a profit was a
form of exploitation (usury). As Tucker continually stressed: *"Liberty
will abolish interest; it will abolish profit; it will abolish
monopolistic rent; it will abolish taxation; it will abolish the
exploitation of labour."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 157]

It should also be noted that the "left" anarchist opposition to the
individualist anarchist "free market" is due to an analysis which argues
that it will not, in fact, result in the anarchist aim of ending
exploitation nor will it maximise individual freedom (see [section
G.4](secG4.html)). We do not "hate" the free market, rather we love
individual liberty and seek the best kind of society to ensure free
people. By concentrating on markets being free, "anarcho"-capitalism
ensures that it is wilfully blind to the freedom-destroying similarities
between capitalist property and the state (as we discussed in [section
F.1](secF1.html)). An analysis which many individualist anarchists
recognised, with the likes of Dyer Lum seeing that replacing the
authority of the state with that of the boss was no great improvement in
terms of freedom and so advocating co-operative workplaces to abolish
wage slavery. Equally, in terms of land ownership the individualist
anarchists opposed any voluntary exchanges which violated *"occupancy
and use"* and so they, so, *"hated the free market as deeply as they
hated the State."* Or, more correctly, they recognised that voluntary
exchanges can result in concentrations of wealth and so power which made
a mockery of individual freedom. In other words, that while the market
may be free the individuals within it would not be.

McElroy partly admits this, saying that *"the two schools of anarchism
had enough in common to shake hands when they first met. To some degree,
they spoke a mutual language. For example, they both reviled the State
and denounced capitalism. But, by the latter, individualist anarchists
meant 'state-capitalism' the alliance of government and business."* Yet
this *"alliance of government and business"* has been the only kind of
capitalism that has ever existed. They were well aware that such an
alliance made the capitalist system what it was, i.e., a system based on
the exploitation of labour. William Bailie, in an article entitled *"The
Rule of the Monopolists"* simply repeated the standard socialist
analysis of the state when he talked about the *"gigantic monopolies,
which control not only our industry, but all the machinery of the State,
-- legislative, judicial, executive, -- together with school, college,
press, and pulpit."* Thus the *"preponderance in the number of
injunctions against striking, boycotting, and agitating, compared with
the number against locking-out, blacklisting, and the employment of
armed mercenaries."* The courts could not ensure justice because of the
*"subserviency of the judiciary to the capitalist class . . . and the
nature of the reward in store for the accommodating judge."* Government
*"is the instrument by means of which the monopolist maintains his
supremacy"* as the law-makers *"enact what he desires; the judiciary
interprets his will; the executive is his submissive agent; the military
arm exists in reality to defend **his** country, protect **his**
property, and suppress **his** enemies, the workers on strike."*
Ultimately, *"when the producer no longer obeys the State, his economic
master will have lost his power."* [**Liberty**, no. 368, p. 4 and p. 5]
Little wonder, then, that the individualist anarchists thought that the
end of the state and the class monopolies it enforces would produce a
radically different society rather than one essentially similar to the
current one but without taxes. Their support for the "free market"
implied the end of capitalism and its replacement with a new social
system, one which would end the exploitation of labour.

She herself admits, in a roundabout way, that "anarcho"-capitalism is
significantly different that individualist anarchism. *"The schism
between the two forms of anarchism has deepened with time,"* she
asserts. This was *"[l]argely due to the path breaking work of Murray
Rothbard"* and so, unlike genuine individualist anarchism, the new
*"individualist anarchism"* (i.e., "anarcho"-capitalism) *"is no longer
inherently suspicious of profit-making practices, such as charging
interest. Indeed, it embraces the free market as the voluntary vehicle
of economic exchange"* (does this mean that the old version of it did
not, in fact, embrace *"the free market"* after all?) This is because it
*"draws increasingly upon the work of Austrian economists such as Mises
and Hayek"* and so *"it draws increasingly farther away from left
anarchism"* and, she fails to note, the likes of Warren and Tucker. As
such, it would be churlish to note that "Austrian" economics was even
more of a *"foreign import"* much at odds with American anarchist
traditions as communist anarchism, but we will! After all, Rothbard's
support of usury (interest, rent and profit) would be unlikely to find
much support from someone who looked forward to the development of *"an
attitude of hostility to usury, in any form, which will ultimately cause
any person who charges more than cost for any product to be regarded
very much as we now regard a pickpocket."* [Tucker, **The Individualist
Anarchists**, p. 155] Nor, as noted above, would Rothbard's support for
an *"Archist"* (capitalist) land ownership system have won him anything
but dismissal nor would his judge, jurist and lawyer driven political
system have been seen as anything other than rule by the few rather than
rule by none.

Ultimately, it is a case of influences and the kind of socio-political
analysis and aims it inspires. Unsurprisingly, the main influences in
individualist anarchism came from social movements and protests. Thus
poverty-stricken farmers and labour unions seeking monetary and land
reform to ease their position and subservience to capital all plainly
played their part in shaping the theory, as did the Single-Tax ideas of
Henry George and the radical critiques of capitalism provided by
Proudhon and Marx. In contrast, "anarcho"-capitalism's major (indeed,
predominant) influence is "Austrian" economists, an ideology developed
(in part) to provide intellectual support against such movements and
their proposals for reform. As we will discuss in the [next
section](secG3.html#secg32), this explains the quite fundamental
differences between the two systems for all the attempts of
"anarcho"-capitalists to appropriate the legacy of the likes of Tucker.

G.3.2 What are the differences between "anarcho"-capitalism and individualist anarchism?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The key differences between individualist anarchism and
"anarcho"-capitalism derive from the fact the former were socialists
while the latter embrace capitalism with unqualified enthusiasm.
Unsurprisingly, this leans to radically different analyses, conclusions
and strategies. It also expresses itself in the vision of the free
society expected from their respective systems. Such differences, we
stress, all ultimately flow from fact that the individualist anarchists
were/are socialists while the likes of Rothbard are wholeheartedly
supporters of capitalism.

As scholar Frank H. Brooks notes, *"the individualist anarchists hoped
to achieve socialism by removing the obstacles to individual liberty in
the economic realm."* This involved making equality of opportunity a
reality rather than mere rhetoric by ending capitalist property rights
in land and ensuring access to credit to set-up in business for
themselves. So while supporting a market economy *"they were also
advocates of socialism and critics of industrial capitalism, positions
that make them less useful as ideological tools of a resurgent
capitalism."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 111] Perhaps
unsurprisingly, most right-"libertarians" get round this problem by
hiding or downplaying this awkward fact. Yet it remains essential for
understanding both individualist anarchism and why "anarcho"-capitalism
is not a form of anarchism.

Unlike both individualist and social anarchists, "anarcho"-capitalists
support capitalism (a "pure" free market type, which has never existed
although it has been approximated occasionally as in 19th century
America). This means that they totally reject the ideas of anarchists
with regards to property and economic analysis. For example, like all
supporters of capitalists they consider rent, profit and interest as
valid incomes. In contrast, all Anarchists consider these as
exploitation and agree with the Tucker when he argued that
*"**[w]hoever** contributes to production is alone entitled. **What**
has no rights that **who** is bound to respect. **What** is a thing.
**Who** is a person. Things have no claims; they exist only to be
claimed. The possession of a right cannot be predicted of dead material,
but only a living person."* [quoted by Wm. Gary Kline, **The
Individualist Anarchists**, p. 73]

This, we must note, is the fundamental critique of the capitalist theory
that capital is productive. In and of themselves, fixed costs do not
create value. Rather value is creation depends on how investments are
developed and used once in place. Because of this the Individualist
Anarchists, like other anarchists, considered non-labour derived income
as usury, unlike "anarcho"-capitalists. Similarly, anarchists reject the
notion of capitalist property rights in favour of possession (including
the full fruits of one's labour). For example, anarchists reject private
ownership of land in favour of a "occupancy and use" regime. In this we
follow Proudhon's **What is Property?** and argue that *"property is
theft"* as well as *"despotism"*. Rothbard, as noted in the [section
F.1](secF1.html), rejected this perspective.

As these ideas are an **essential** part of anarchist politics, they
cannot be removed without seriously damaging the rest of the theory.
This can be seen from Tucker's comments that *"**Liberty** insists. . .
[on] the abolition of the State and the abolition of usury; on no more
government of man by man, and no more exploitation of man by man."*
[quoted by Eunice Schuster, **Native American Anarchism**, p. 140]
Tucker indicates here that anarchism has specific economic **and**
political ideas, that it opposes capitalism along with the state.
Therefore anarchism was never purely a "political" concept, but always
combined an opposition to oppression with an opposition to exploitation.
The social anarchists made exactly the same point. Which means that when
Tucker argued that *"**Liberty** insists on Socialism. . . -- true
Socialism, Anarchistic Socialism: the prevalence on earth of Liberty,
Equality, and Solidarity"* he knew exactly what he was saying and meant
it wholeheartedly. [**Instead of a Book**, p. 363] So because
"anarcho"-capitalists embrace capitalism and reject socialism, they
cannot be considered anarchists or part of the anarchist tradition.

There are, of course, overlaps between individualist anarchism and
"anarcho"-capitalism, just as there are overlaps between it and Marxism
(and social anarchism, of course). However, just as a similar analysis
of capitalism does not make individualist anarchists Marxists, so
apparent similarities between individualist anarchism and
"anarcho"-capitalism does not make the former a forerunner of the
latter. For example, both schools support the idea of "free markets."
Yet the question of markets is fundamentally second to the issue of
property rights for what is exchanged on the market is dependent on what
is considered legitimate property. In this, as Rothbard noted,
individualist anarchists and "anarcho"-capitalists differ and different
property rights produce different market structures and dynamics. This
means that capitalism is not the only economy with markets and so
support for markets cannot be equated with support for capitalism.
Equally, opposition to markets is **not** the defining characteristic of
socialism. As such, it **is** possible to be a market socialist (and
many socialist are) as "markets" and "property" do not equate to
capitalism as we proved in sections [G.1.1](secG1.html#secg11) and
[G.1.2](secG1.html#secg12) respectively.

One apparent area of overlap between individualist anarchism and
"anarcho"-capitalism is the issue of wage labour. As we noted in
[section G.1.3](secG1.html#secg13), unlike social anarchists, some
individualist anarchists were not consistently against it. However, this
similarity is more apparent than real as the individualist anarchists
were opposed to exploitation and argued (unlike "anarcho"-capitalism)
that in their system workers bargaining powers would be raised to such a
level that their wages would equal the full product of their labour and
so it would not be an exploitative arrangement. Needless to say, social
anarchists think this is unlikely to be the case and, as we discuss in
[section G.4.1](secG4.html#secg41), individualist anarchist support for
wage labour is in contradiction to many of the stated basic principles
of the individualist anarchists themselves. In particular, wage labour
violates "occupancy and use" as well as having more than a passing
similarity to the state.

However, these problems can be solved by consistently applying the
principles of individualist anarchism, unlike "anarcho"-capitalism, and
that is why it is a real (if inconsistent) school of anarchism.
Moreover, the social context these ideas were developed in and would
have been applied ensure that these contradictions would have been
minimised. If they had been applied, a genuine anarchist society of
self-employed workers would, in all likelihood, have been created (at
least at first, whether the market would increase inequalities is a moot
point between anarchists). Thus we find Tucker criticising Henry George
by noting that he was *"enough of an economist to be very well aware
that, whether it has land or not, labour which can get no capital --
that is, which is oppressed by capital -- cannot, without accepting the
alternative of starvation, refuse to reproduce capital for the
capitalists."* Abolition of the money monopoly will increase wages, so
allowing workers to *"steadily lay up money, with which he can buy tools
to compete with his employer or to till his bit of land with comfort and
advantage. In short, he will be an independent man, receiving what he
produces or an equivalent thereof. How to make this the lot of all men
is the labour question. Free land will not solve it. Free money,
supplemented by free land, will."* [**Liberty**, no. 99 , p. 4 and p. 5]
Sadly, Rothbard failed to reach George's level of understanding (at
least as regards his beloved capitalism).

Which brings us another source of disagreement, namely on the effects of
state intervention and what to do about it. As noted, during the rise of
capitalism the bourgeoisie were not shy in urging state intervention
against the masses. Unsurprisingly, working class people generally took
an anti-state position during this period. The individualist anarchists
were part of that tradition, opposing what Marx termed *"primitive
accumulation"* in favour of the pre-capitalist forms of property and
society it was destroying.

However, when capitalism found its feet and could do without such
obvious intervention, the possibility of an "anti-state" capitalism
could arise. Such a possibility became a definite once the state started
to intervene in ways which, while benefiting the system as a whole, came
into conflict with the property and power of individual members of the
capitalist and landlord class. Thus social legislation which attempted
to restrict the negative effects of unbridled exploitation and
oppression on workers and the environment were having on the economy
were the source of much outrage in certain bourgeois circles:

> *"Quite independently of these tendencies [of individualist anarchism]
> . . . the anti-state bourgeoisie (which is also anti-statist, being
> hostile to any social intervention on the part of the State to protect
> the victims of exploitation -- in the matter of working hours,
> hygienic working conditions and so on), and the greed of unlimited
> exploitation, had stirred up in England a certain agitation in favour
> of pseudo-individualism, an unrestrained exploitation. To this end,
> they enlisted the services of a mercenary pseudo-literature . . .
> which played with doctrinaire and fanatical ideas in order to project
> a species of 'individualism' that was absolutely sterile, and a
> species of 'non-interventionism' that would let a man die of hunger
> rather than offend his dignity."* [Max Nettlau, **A Short History of
> Anarchism**, p. 39]

This perspective can be seen when Tucker denounced Herbert Spencer as a
champion of the capitalistic class for his vocal attacks on social
legislation which claimed to benefit working class people but staying
strangely silent on the laws passed to benefit (usually indirectly)
capital and the rich. "Anarcho"-capitalism is part of that tradition,
the tradition associated with a capitalism which no longer needs obvious
state intervention as enough wealth as been accumulated to keep workers
under control by means of market power.

In other words, there is substantial differences between the victims of
a thief trying to stop being robbed and be left alone to enjoy their
property and the successful thief doing the same! Individualist
Anarchist's were aware of this. For example, Victor Yarros stressed this
key difference between individualist anarchism and the
proto-"libertarian" capitalists of "voluntaryism":

> "[Auberon Herbert] believes in allowing people to retain all their
> possessions, no matter how unjustly and basely acquired, while getting
> them, so to speak, to swear off stealing and usurping and to promise
> to behave well in the future. We, on the other hand, while insisting
> on the principle of private property, in wealth honestly obtained
> under the reign of liberty, do not think it either unjust or unwise to
> dispossess the landlords who have monopolised natural wealth by force
> and fraud. We hold that the poor and disinherited toilers would be
> justified in expropriating, not alone the landlords, who notoriously
> have no equitable titles to their lands, but **all** the financial
> lords and rulers, all the millionaires and very wealthy individuals. .
> . . Almost all possessors of great wealth enjoy neither what they nor
> their ancestors rightfully acquired (and if Mr. Herbert wishes to
> challenge the correctness of this statement, we are ready to go with
> him into a full discussion of the subject). . . .
> "If he holds that the landlords are justly entitled to their lands,
> let him make a defence of the landlords or an attack on our unjust
> proposal." [quoted by Carl Watner, *"The English Individualists As
> They Appear In Liberty,"* pp. 191-211, **Benjamin R. Tucker and the
> Champions of Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton and Sullivan (eds.), pp.
> 199-200]

It could be argued, in reply, that some "anarcho"-capitalists do argue
that stolen property should be returned to its rightful owners and, as a
result, do sometimes argue for land reform (namely, the seizing of land
by peasants from their feudal landlords). However, this position is, at
best, a pale shadow of the individualist anarchist position or, at
worse, simply rhetoric. As leading "anarcho"-capitalist Walter Block
pointed out:

> *"While this aspect of libertarian theory sounds very radical, in
> practice it is less so. This is because the claimant always needs
> proof. Possession is nine tenths of the law, and to overcome the
> presumption that property is now in the hands of its rightful owners
> required that an evidentiary burden by overcome. The further back in
> history was the initial act of aggression (not only because written
> evidence is less likely to be available), the less likely it is that
> there can be proof of it."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 54-5]

Somewhat ironically, Block appears to support land reform in Third World
countries in spite of the fact that the native peoples have no evidence
to show that they are the rightful owners of the land they work. Nor
does he bother himself to wonder about the wider social impact of such
theft, namely in the capital that was funded using it. If the land was
stolen, then so was its products and so was any capital bought with the
profits made from such goods. But, as he says, this aspect of
right-"libertarian" ideology *"sounds very radical"* but *"in practice
it is less so."* Apparently, theft **is** property! Not to mention that
nine tenths of property is currently possessed (i.e., used) not by its
"rightful owners" but rather those who by economic necessity have to
work for them. This is a situation the law was designed to protect,
including (apparently) a so-called "libertarian" one.

This wider impact is key. As we indicated in [section F.8](secF8.html),
state coercion (particularly in the form of the land monopoly) was
essential in the development of capitalism. By restricting access to
land, working class people had little option but to seek work from
landlords and capitalists. Thus the stolen land ensured that workers
were exploited by the landlord and the capitalist and so the
exploitation of the land monopoly was spread throughout the economy,
with the resulting exploited labour being used to ensure that capital
accumulated. For Rothbard, unlike the individualist anarchists, the land
monopoly had limited impact and can be considered separately from the
rise of capitalism:

> *"the emergence of wage-labour was an enormous boon for many thousands
> of poor workers and saved them from starvation. If there is no wage
> labour, as there was not in most production before the Industrial
> Revolution, then each worker must have enough money to purchase his
> own capital and tools. One of the great things about the emergence of
> the factory system and wage labour is that poor workers did not have
> to purchase their own capital equipment; this could be left to the
> capitalists."* [**Konkin on Libertarian Strategy**]

Except, of course, **before** the industrial revolution almost all
workers did, in fact, have their own capital and tools. The rise of
capitalism was based on what the exclusion of working people from the
land by means of the land monopoly. Farmers were barred, by the state,
from utilising the land of the aristocracy while their access to the
commons was stripped from them by the imposition of capitalist property
rights by the state. Thus Rothbard is right, in a sense. The emergence
of wage-labour was based on the fact that workers had to purchase access
to the land from those who monopolised it by means of state action --
which was precisely what the individualist anarchists opposed. Wage
labour, after all, first developed **on the land** not with the rise of
the factory system. Even Rothbard, we hope, would not have been so crass
as to say that landlordism was an enormous boon for those poor workers
as it saved them from starvation for, after all, one of the great things
about landlordism is that poor workers did not have to purchase their
own land; that could be left to the landlords.

The landless workers, therefore, had little option but to seek work from
those who monopolised the land. Over time, increasing numbers found work
in industry where employers happily took advantage of the effects of the
land monopoly to extract as much work for as little pay as possible. The
profits of both landlord and capitalist exploitation were then used to
accumulate capital, reducing the bargaining power of the landless
workers even more as it became increasingly difficult to set-up in
business due to natural barriers to competition. It should also be
stressed that once forced onto the labour market, the proletariat found
itself subjected to numerous state laws which prevented their free
association (for example, the banning of unions and strikes as
conspiracies) as well as their ability to purchase their own capital and
tools. Needless to say, the individualist anarchists recognised this and
considered the ability of workers to be able to purchase their own
capital and tools as an essential reform and, consequently, fought
against the money monopoly. They reasoned, quite rightly, that this was
a system of class privilege designed to keep workers in a position of
dependency on the landlords and capitalists, which (in turn) allowed
exploitation to occur. This was also the position of many workers, who
rather than consider capitalism a boon, organised to defend their
freedom and to resist exploitation -- and the state complied with the
wishes of the capitalists and broke that resistance.

Significantly, Tucker and other individualist anarchists saw state
intervention has a result of capital manipulating legislation to gain an
advantage on the so-called free market which allowed them to exploit
labour and, as such, it benefited the **whole** capitalist class (*"If,
then, the capitalist, by abolishing the free market, compels other men
to procure their tools and advantages of him on less favourable terms
than they could get before, while it may be better for them to come to
his terms than to go without the capital, does he not deduct from their
earnings?"* [Tucker, **Liberty**, no. 109, p. 4]). Rothbard, at best,
acknowledges that **some** sections of big business benefit from the
current system and so fails to have a comprehensive understanding of the
dynamics of capitalism as a **system** (rather as an ideology). This
lack of understanding of capitalism as a historic and dynamic system
rooted in class rule and economic power is important in evaluating
"anarcho"-capitalist claims to anarchism.

Then there is the issue of strategy, with Rothbard insisting on
*"political action,"* namely voting for the Libertarian Party (or least
non-"libertarian" party). *"I see no other conceivable strategy for the
achievement of liberty than political action,"* he stated. Like
Marxists, voting was seen as the means of achieving the abolition of the
state, as *"a militant and abolitionist [Libertarian Party] in control
of Congress could wipe out all the [non-'libertarian'] laws overnight .
. . No other strategy for liberty can work."* [**Op. Cit.**] The
individualist anarchists, like other anarchists, rejected such arguments
as incompatible with genuine libertarian principles. As Tucker put it,
voting could not be libertarian as it would make the voter *"an
accomplice in aggression."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 305]

Rothbard's position indicates an interesting paradox. Rothbard
wholeheartedly supported *"political action"* as the only means of
achieving the end of the state. Marxists (when not excommunicating
anarchism from the socialist movement) often argue that they agree with
the anarchists on the ends (abolition of the state) but only differed on
the means (i.e., political action over direct action). Obviously, no one
calls Marx an anarchist and this is precisely because he aimed to use
political action to achieve the abolition of the state. Yet, for some
reason, Rothbard's **identical** position on tactics makes some call him
an anarchist. So, given Rothbard's argument that the state must be
seized first by a political party by means of *"political action"* in
order to achieve his end, the question must be raised why he is
considered an anarchist at all. Marx and Engels, like Lenin, all made
identical arguments against anarchism, namely that political action was
essential so that the Socialist Party could seize state power and
implement the necessary changes to ensure that the state withered away.
No one has ever considered them anarchists in spite of the common aim of
ending the state yet many consider Rothbard to be an anarchist despite
advocating the same methods as the Marxists. As we noted in [section
F.8](secF8.html), a better term for "anarcho"-capitalism could be
"Marxist-capitalism" and Rothbard's argument for "political action"
confirms that suggestion.

Needless to say, other strategies favoured by many individualists
anarchists were rejected by "anarcho"-capitalists. Unlike Tucker, Lum
and others, Rothbard was totally opposed to trade unions and strikes,
viewing unions as coercive institutions which could not survive under
genuine capitalism (given the powers of property owners and the
inequalities of such a society, he may well have been right in thinking
workers would be unable to successfully defend their basic freedoms
against their masters but that is another issue). The individualist
anarchists were far more supportive. Henry Cohen, for example,
considered the union as a *"voluntary association formed for the mutual
benefit of its members, using the boycott and other passive weapons in
its fight against capitalism and the State."* This was *"very near the
Anarchist idea."* Some individualists were more critical of unions than
others. One, A.H. Simpson, argued that the trade unions *"are as
despotic and arbitrary as any other organisation, and no more
Anarchistic than the Pullman or Carnegie companies."* In other words,
the unions were to be opposed because they were like capitalist
corporations! [**The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 285 and p. 288] For
Tucker, as we note in [section G.5](secG5.html), unions were *"a
movement for self-government on the part of the people"* and it was *"in
supplanting"* the state *"by an intelligent and self-governing socialism
that the trades unions develop their chief significance."* [**Liberty**,
no. 22, p. 3]

So the claims that "anarcho"-capitalism is a new form of individualist
anarchism can only be done on the basis of completely ignoring the
actual history of capitalism as well as ignoring the history, social
context, arguments, aims and spirit of individualist anarchism. This is
only convincing if the actual ideas and aims of individualist anarchism
are unknown or ignored and focus is placed on certain words used (like
"markets" and "property") rather than the specific meanings provided to
them by its supporters. Sadly, this extremely superficial analysis is
all too common -- particularly in academic circles and, of course, in
right-"libertarian" ones.

Finally, it may be objected that "anarcho"-capitalism is a diverse, if
small, collection of individuals and some of them are closer to
individualist anarchism than others. Which is, of course, true (just as
some Marxists are closer to social anarchism than others). A few of them
do reject the notion than hundreds of years of state-capitalist
intervention has had little impact on the evolution of the economy and
argue that a genuinely free economy would see the end of the current
form of property rights and non-labour income as well as the
self-employment and co-operatives becoming the dominant form of
workplace organisation (the latter depends on the former, of course, for
without the necessary social preconditions a preference for
self-employment will remain precisely that). As Individualist Anarchist
Shawn Wilbur put, there is a difference between those
"anarcho"-capitalists who are ideologues for capitalism first and
foremost and the minority who are closer to traditional anarchist
aspirations. If the latter manage to jettison the baggage they have
inherited from "Austrian" economics as well as the likes of Murray
Rothbard and realise that they are, in fact, free market socialists and
**not** in favour of capitalism then few anarchists would hold their
past against them any more than they would a state socialist or
left-liberal who realised the error of their ways. Until they do,
though, few anarchists would accept them as anarchists.

G.3.3 What about "anarcho"-capitalists' support of "defence associations"?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

It would be fair to say that "anarcho"-capitalist interest in
individualist anarchism rests on their argument that, to quote Tucker,
*"defense is a service, like any other service"*, and that such a
service could and should be provided by private agencies paid for like
any other commodity on the market. [**Liberty**, no. 104, p. 4]
Therefore:

> *"Anarchism means no government, but it does not mean no laws and no
> coercion. This may seem paradoxical, but the paradox vanishes when the
> Anarchist definition of government is kept in view. Anarchists oppose
> government, not because they disbelieve in punishment of crime and
> resistance to aggression, but because they disbelieve in compulsory
> protection. Protection and taxation without consent is itself
> invasion; hence Anarchism favours a system of voluntary taxation and
> protection."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 212, p. 2]

While most of the rest of the theory is ignored or dismissed as being
the product of "bad" economics, this position is considered the key link
between the two schools of thought. However, it is not enough to say
that both the individualist anarchists and "anarcho"-capitalists support
a market in protection, you need to look at what forms of property are
being defended and the kind of society within which it is done. Change
the social context, change the kinds of property which are being
defended and you change the nature of the society in question. In other
words, defending capitalist property rights within an unequal society is
radically different in terms of individual liberty than defending
socialistic property rights within an equal society -- just as a market
economy based on artisan, peasant and co-operative production is
fundamentally different to one based on huge corporations and the bulk
of the population being wage slaves. Only the most superficial analysis
would suggest that they are the same and label both as being
"capitalist" in nature.

It should, therefore, not be forgotten that the individualist anarchists
advocated a system rooted in individual possession of land and tools
plus the free exchange of the products of labour between self-employed
people or wage workers who receive the full equivalent of their product.
This means that they supported the idea of a market in "defence
associations" to ensure that the fruits of an individual's labour would
not be stolen by others. Again, the social context of individualist
anarchism -- namely, an egalitarian economy without exploitation of
labour (see [section G.3.4](secG3.html#secg34)) -- is crucial for
understanding these proposals. However, as in their treatment of
Tucker's support for contract theory, "anarcho"-capitalists remove the
individualist anarchists' ideas about free-market defence associations
and courts from the social context in which they were proposed, using
those ideas in an attempt to turn the individualists into defenders of
capitalism.

As indicated in [section G.1.4](secG1.html#secg14), the social context
in question was one in which an economy of artisans and peasant farmers
was being replaced by a state-backed capitalism. This context is crucial
for understanding the idea of the "defence associations" that Tucker
suggested. For what he proposed was clearly **not** the defence of
capitalist property relations. This can be seen, for example, in his
comments on land use. Thus:

> *"'The land for the people' . . . means the protection by . . .
> voluntary associations for the maintenance of justice . . . of all
> people who desire to cultivate land in possession of whatever land
> they personally cultivate . . . and the positive refusal of the
> protecting power to lend its aid to the collection of any rent,
> whatsoever."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 299]

There is no mention here of protecting **capitalist** farming, i.e.
employing wage labour; rather, there is explicit mention that only land
being used for **personal** cultivation -- thus **without** employing
wage labour -- would be defended. In other words, the defence
association would defend *"occupancy and use"* (which is a clear break
with capitalist property rights) and not the domination of the landlord
over society or those who use the land the landlord claims to own. This
means that certain contracts were not considered valid within
individualist anarchism even if they were voluntarily agreed to by the
parties involved and so would not be enforceable by the "defence
associations." As Tucker put it:

> *"A man cannot be allowed, merely by putting labour, to the limit of
> his capacity and beyond the limit of his personal use, into material
> of which there is a limited supply and the use of which is essential
> to the existence of other men, to withhold that material from other
> men's use; and any contract based upon or involving such withholding
> is lacking in sanctity or legitimacy as a contract to deliver stolen
> goods."* [**Liberty**, No. 321, p. 4]

Refusal to pay rent on land is a key aspect of Tucker's thought, and it
is significant that he explicitly rejects the idea that a defence
association can be used to collect it. In addition, as a means towards
anarchy, Tucker suggests *"inducing the people to steadily refuse the
payment of rent and taxes."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 299] It is hard
to imagine that a landowner influenced by Murray Rothbard or David
Friedman would support such an arrangement or a "defence association"
that supported it. As such, the individualist anarchist system would
impose restrictions on the market from an "anarcho"-capitalist
perspective. Equally, from an individualist anarchist perspective,
"anarcho"-capitalism would be enforcing a key class monopoly by force
and so would simply be another kind of state. As Tucker put it in reply
to the proto-right-"libertarian" Auberon Herbert:

> *"It is true that Anarchists . . . do, in a sense, propose to get rid
> of ground-rent by force. That is to say, if landlords should try to
> evict occupants, the Anarchists advice the occupants to combine to
> maintain their ground by force . . . But it is also true that the
> Individualists . . . propose to get rid of theft by force . . . The
> Anarchists justify the use of machinery (local juries, etc.) to adjust
> the property question involved in rent just as the Individualists
> justify similar machinery to adjust the property question involved in
> theft."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 172, p. 7]

It comes as no surprise to discover that Tucker translated Proudhon's
**What is Property?** and subscribed to its conclusion that *"property
is robbery"*!

This opposition to the *"land monopoly"* was, like all the various
economic proposals made by the individualist anarchists, designed to
eliminate the vast differences in wealth accruing from the *"usury"* of
industrial capitalists, bankers, and landlords. For example, Josiah
Warren *"proposed like Robert Owen an exchange of notes based on labour
time . . . He wanted to establish an 'equitable commerce' in which all
goods are exchanged for their cost of production . . . In this way
profit and interest would be eradicated and a highly egalitarian order
would emerge."* [Peter Marshall, **Demanding the Impossible**, p. 385]
Given that the Warrenites considered that both workers and managers
would receive equal payment for equal hours worked (the manager may, in
fact earn less if it were concluded that their work was less unpleasant
than that done on the shopfloor), the end of a parasitic class of
wealthy capitalists was inevitable.

In the case of Benjamin Tucker, he was a firm adherent of socialist
economic analysis, believing that a free market and interest-free credit
would reduce prices to the cost of production and increase demand for
labour to the point where workers would receive the full value of their
labour. In addition, recognising that gold was a rare commodity, he
rejected a gold-backed money supply in favour of a land-backed one, as
land with *"permanent improvements on"* it is *"an excellent basis for
currency."* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 198] Given that much of the
population at the time worked on their own land, such a money system
would have ensured easy credit secured by land. Mutualism replaced the
gold standard (which, by its very nature would produce an oligarchy of
banks) with money backed by other, more available, commodities.

Such a system, the individualist anarchists argued, would be unlikely to
reproduce the massive inequalities of wealth associated with capitalism
and have a dynamic utterly different to that system. They did not
consider the state as some alien body grafted onto capitalism which
could be removed and replaced with "defence associations" leaving the
rest of society more or less the same. Rather, they saw the state as
being an essential aspect of capitalism, defending key class monopolies
and restricting freedom for the working class. By abolishing the state,
they automatically abolished these class monopolies and so capitalism.
In other words, they had political **and** economic goals and ignoring
the second cannot help but produce **different** results. As Voltairine
de Cleyre put it in her individualist days, Anarchism *"means not only
the denial of authority, not only a new economy, but a revision of the
principles of morality. It means the development of the individual as
well as the assertion of the individual."* [**The Voltairine de Cleyre
Reader**, p. 9]

Right-"libertarians" reject all of this, the social context of Tucker's
ideas on "defence associations." They do not aim for a *"new economy"*,
but simply the existing one without a public state. They have no
critique of capitalist property rights nor any understanding of how such
rights can produce economic power and limit individual freedom. In fact,
they attack what they consider the "bad economics" of the individualists
without realising it is **precisely** these "bad" (i.e. anti-capitalist)
economics which will minimise, if not totally eliminate, any potential
threat to freedom associated with "defence associations." Without the
accumulations of wealth inevitable when workers' do not receive the full
product of their labour, it is unlikely that a "defence association"
would act like the private police forces American capitalists utilised
to break unions and strikes both in Tucker's time and now. Unless this
social context exists, any defence associations will soon become
mini-states, serving to enrich the elite few by protecting the usury
they gain from, and their power and control (i.e. government) over,
those who toil. In other words, the "defence associations" of Tucker and
Spooner would not be private states, enforcing the power of capitalists
and landlords upon wage workers. Instead, they would be like insurance
companies, protecting possessions against theft (as opposed to
protecting capitalist theft from the dispossessed as would be the case
in "anarcho"-capitalism -- an important difference lost on the private
staters). Where social anarchists disagree with individualist anarchists
is on whether a market system will actually produce such equality,
particularly one without workers' self-management replacing the
authority inherent in the capitalist-labourer social relationship. As we
discuss in [section G.4](secG4.html), without the equality and the
egalitarian relationships of co-operative and artisan production there
would be a tendency for capitalism and private statism to erode anarchy.

In addition, the emphasis given by Tucker and Lysander Spooner to the
place of juries in a free society is equally important for understanding
how their ideas about defence associations fit into a non-capitalist
scheme. For by emphasising the importance of trial by jury, they knock
an important leg from under the private statism associated with
"anarcho"-capitalism. Unlike a wealthy judge, a jury made up mainly of
fellow workers would be more inclined to give verdicts in favour of
workers struggling against bosses or of peasants being forced off their
land by immoral, but legal, means. As Lysander Spooner argued in 1852,
*"[i]f a jury have not the right to judge between the government and
those who disobey its laws, and resist its oppressions, the government
is absolute, and the people, legally speaking, are slaves. Like many
other slaves they may have sufficient courage and strength to keep their
masters somewhat in check; but they are nevertheless known to the law
only as slaves."* [**Trial by Jury**] It is hardly surprising that
Rothbard rejects this in favour of a legal system determined and
interpreted by lawyers, judges and jurists. Indeed, as we noted in
[section F.6.1](secF6.html#secf61), Rothbard explicitly rejected the
idea that juries should be able to judge the law as well as the facts of
a case under his system. Spooner would have had no problem recognising
that replacing government imposed laws with those made by judges,
jurists and lawyers would hardly change the situation much. Nor would he
have been too surprised at the results of a free market in laws in a
society with substantial inequalities in income and wealth.

Individualist Anarchist Laurance Labadie, the son of Tucker associate
Joseph Labadie, argued in response to Rothbard as follows:

> "Mere common sense would suggest that any court would be influenced by
> experience; and any free-market court or judge would in the very
> nature of things have some precedents guiding them in their
> instructions to a jury. But since no case is exactly the same, a jury
> would have considerable say about the heinousness of the offence in
> each case, realising that circumstances alter cases, and prescribing
> penalty accordingly. This appeared to Spooner and Tucker to be a more
> flexible and equitable administration of justice possible or feasible,
> human beings being what they are . . .
> "But when Mr. Rothbard quibbles about the jurisprudential ideas of
> Spooner and Tucker, and at the same time upholds **presumably in his
> courts** the very economic evils which are at bottom the very reason
> for human contention and conflict, he would seem to be a man who
> chokes at a gnat while swallowing a camel." [quoted by Mildred J.
> Loomis and Mark A. Sullivan, *"Laurance Labadie: Keeper Of The
> Flame"*, pp. 116-30, **Benjamin R. Tucker and the Champions of
> Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton and Sullivan (eds.), p. 124]

As we argued in detail in [section F.6](secF6.html), a market for
"defence associations" within an unequal system based on extensive wage
labour would simply be a system of private states, enforcing the
authority of the property owner over those who use but do not own their
property. Such an outcome can only be avoided within an egalitarian
society where wage-labour is minimised, if not abolished totally, in
favour of self-employment (whether individually or co-operatively). In
other words, the kind of social context which the individualist
anarchists explicitly or implicitly assumed and aimed for. By focusing
selectively on a few individualist proposals taken out of their social
context, Rothbard and other "anarcho"-capitalists have turned the
libertarianism of the individualist anarchists into yet another
ideological weapon in the hands of (private) statism and capitalism.

When faced with the actual visions of a good society proposed by such
people as Tucker and Spooner, "anarcho"-capitalists tend to dismiss them
as irrelevant. They argue that it does not matter what Tucker or Spooner
thought would emerge from the application of their system, it is the
fact they advocated the "free market", "private property" and "defence
associations" that counts. In response anarchists note three things.
Firstly, individualist anarchists generally held radically different
concepts of what a "free market" and "private property" would be in
their system and so the tasks of any "defence association" would be
radically different. As such, anarchists argue that
"anarcho"-capitalists simply look at the words people use rather than
what they meant by them and the social context in which they are used.
Secondly, it seems a strange form of support to rubbish the desired
goals of people you claim to follow. If someone claimed to be a Marxist
while, at the same time, arguing that Marx was wrong about socialism
people would be justified in questioning their use of that label.
Thirdly, and most importantly, no one advocates a means which would not
result in their desired ends. If Tucker and Spooner did not think their
system would result in their goals they would have either changed their
goals or changed their method. As noted in [section
G.1.1](secG1.html#secg11), Tucker explicitly argued that concentrations
of wealth under capitalism had reached such levels that his system of
free competition would not end it. Clearly, then, outcomes were
important to individualist anarchists.

The lack of commonality can also be seen from the right-"libertarian"
response to Kevin Carson's excellent **Studies in Mutualist Political
Economy**, an impressive modern restatement of the ideas of Tucker and
other individualist anarchists. Leading "anarcho"-capitalist Walter
Block dismissed *"Marxists like Carson"* and labelled him *"a supposed
anarchist"* who on many issues *"is out there, way, way out there in
some sort of Marxist never-never land."* [*"Kevin Carson as Dr. Jeryll
and Mr. Hyde"*, pp. 35-46, **Journal of Libertarian Studies**, vol. 20,
no. 1, p. 40, p. 43 and p. 45] Another right-"libertarian", George
Reisman, concurred stated that for the most part *"Carson is a
Marxist"*, while arguing that *"the 'individualist' anarchist shows
himself to be quite the collectivist, attributing to the average person
qualities of independent thought and judgement that are found only in
exceptional individuals."* Carson's *"views on the nature of ownership
give full support to the conception of anarchy . . . as being nothing
but chaos."* Overall, *"Carson is essentially a Marxist and his book
filled with ignorant Marxist diatribes against capitalism."* [*"Freedom
is Slavery: Laissez-Faire capitalism is government intervention"*, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 47-86, p. 47, p. 55, p. 61 and p. 84] Needless to say, all
the issues which Block and Geisman take umbridge at can be found in the
works of individualist anarchists like Tucker (Carson's excellent
dissection of these remarkably ignorant diatribes is well worth reading
[*"Carson's Rejoinders"*, pp. 97-136, **Op. Cit.**]).

So the notion that a joint support for a market in "defence services"
can allow the social and theoretical differences between
"anarcho"-capitalism and individualist anarchism to be ignored is just
nonsense. This can best be seen from the fate of any individualist
anarchist defence association within "anarcho"-capitalism. As it would
not subscribe to Rothbard's preferred system of property rights it would
be in violation of the *"general libertarian law code"* drawn up and
implemented by right-"libertarian" jurists, judges and lawyers. This
would, by definition, make such an association *"outlaw"* when it
defended tenants against attempts to extract rents from them or to evict
them from the land or buildings they used but did not own. As it is a
judge-run system, no jury would be able to judge the law as well as the
crime, so isolating the capitalist and landlord class from popular
opposition. Thus the ironic situation arises that the ***"Benjamin
Tucker defence association"*** would be declared an outlaw organisation
under "anarcho"-capitalism and driven out of business (i.e., destroyed)
as it broke the land monopoly which the law monopoly enforces. Even more
ironically, such an organisation would survive in an communist anarchist
society (assuming it could find enough demand to make it worthwhile).

If the world had had the misfortune of having "anarcho"-capitalism
imposed on it in the nineteenth century, individualist anarchists like
Warren, Tucker, Labadie, Ingalls and Lum would have joined Proudhon,
Bakunin, Kropotkin, Parsons and Goldman in prison for practising
*"occupancy and use"* in direct violation of the *"general libertarian
law code."* That it was private police, private courts and private
prisons which were enforcing such a regime would not have been
considered that much of an improvement.

Unsurprisingly, Victor Yarros explicitly distanced himself from those
*"want liberty to still further crush and oppress the people; liberty to
enjoy their plunder without fear of the State's interfering with them .
. . liberty to summarily deal with impudent tenants who refuse to pay
tribute for the privilege of living and working on the soil."*
[**Liberty**, no. 102, p. 4] He would have had little problem
recognising "anarcho"-capitalism as being a supporter of *"that
particular kind of freedom which the **bourgeoisie** favours, and which
is championed by the **bourgeoisie's** loyal servants, [but] will never
prove fascinating to the disinherited and oppressed."* [**Op. Cit.**,
no. 93, p. 4]

G.3.4 Why is individualist anarchist support for equality important?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Another another key difference between genuine individualist anarchism
and "anarcho"-capitalism is the former's support for equality and the
latter's a lack of concern for it.

In stark contrast to anarchists of all schools, inequality is not seen
to be a problem with "anarcho"-capitalists (see [section
F.3](secF3.html)). However, it is a truism that not all "traders" are
equally subject to the market (i.e., have the same market power). In
many cases, a few have sufficient control of resources to influence or
determine price and in such cases, all others must submit to those terms
or not buy the commodity. When the commodity is labour power, even this
option is lacking -- workers have to accept a job in order to live. As
we argued in [section C.9](secC9.html), workers are usually at a
disadvantage on the labour market when compared to capitalists, and this
forces them to sell their liberty in return for making profits for
others. These profits increase inequality in society as the property
owners receive the surplus value their workers produce. This increases
inequality further, consolidating market power and so weakens the
bargaining position of workers further, ensuring that even the freest
competition possible could not eliminate class power and society
(something Tucker eventually recognised as occurring with the
development of trusts within capitalism -- see [section
G.1.1](secG1.html#secg11)).

By removing the underlying commitment to abolish non-labour income, any
"anarchist" capitalist society would have vast differences in wealth and
so power. Instead of a government imposed monopolies in land, money and
so on, the economic power flowing from private property and capital
would ensure that the majority remained in (to use Spooner's words)
*"the condition of servants"* (see sections [F.2](secF2.html) and
[F.3.1](secF3.html#secf31) for more on this). The Individualist
Anarchists were aware of this danger and so supported economic ideas
that opposed usury (i.e. rent, profit and interest) and ensured the
worker the full value of her labour. While not all of them called these
ideas "socialist" it is clear that these ideas **are** socialist in
nature and in aim (similarly, not all the Individualist Anarchists
called themselves anarchists but their ideas are clearly anarchist in
nature and in aim). This combination of the political and economic is
essential as they mutually reinforce each other. Without the economic
ideas, the political ideas would be meaningless as inequality would make
a mockery of them. As Spooner argued, inequality lead to many social
evils:

> *"Extremes of difference, in their pecuniary circumstances, divide
> society into castes; set up barriers to personal acquaintance; prevent
> or suppress sympathy; give to different individuals a widely different
> experience, and thus become the fertile source of alienation,
> contempt, envy, hatred, and wrong. But give to each man all the fruits
> of his own labour, and a comparative equality with others in his
> pecuniary condition, and caste is broken down; education is given more
> equally to all; and the object is promoted of placing each on a social
> level with all: of introducing each to the acquaintance of all; and of
> giving to each the greatest amount of that experience, which, being
> common to all, enables him to sympathise with all, and insures to
> himself the sympathy of all. And thus the social virtues of mankind
> would be greatly increased."* [**Poverty: Its Illegal Causes and Legal
> Cure**, pp. 46-7]

Because of the evil effects of inequality on freedom, both social and
individualist anarchists desire to create an environment in which
circumstances would not drive people to sell their liberty to others at
a disadvantage. In other words, they desired an equalisation of market
power by opposing interest, rent and profit and capitalist definitions
of private property. Kline summarises this by saying *"the American
[individualist] anarchists exposed the tension existing in liberal
thought between private property and the ideal of equal access. The
Individual Anarchists were, at least, aware that existing conditions
were far from ideal, that the system itself working against the majority
of individuals in their efforts to attain its promises. Lack of capital,
the means to creation and accumulation of wealth, usually doomed a
labourer to a life of exploitation. This the anarchists knew and they
abhorred such a system."* [**The Individualist Anarchists: A critique of
liberalism**, p. 102]

And this desire for bargaining equality is reflected in their economic
ideas and by removing these underlying economic ideas of the
individualist anarchists, "anarcho"-capitalism makes a mockery of any
ideas they do appropriate. Essentially, the Individualist Anarchists
agreed with Rousseau that in order to prevent extreme inequality of
fortunes you deprive people of the means to accumulate in the first
place and **not** take away wealth from the rich. An important point
which "anarcho"-capitalism fails to understand or appreciate.

The Individualist Anarchists assumed that exploitation of labour would
be non-existent in their system, so a general equality would prevail and
so economic power would not undermine liberty. Remove this underlying
assumption, assume that profits could be made and capital accumulated,
assume that land can be monopolised by landlords (as the
"anarcho"-capitalists do) and a radically different society is produced.
One in which economic power means that the vast majority have to sell
themselves to get access to the means of life and are exploited by those
who own them in the process. A condition of "free markets" may exist,
but as Tucker argued in 1911, it would not be anarchism. The ***deus ex
machina*** of invisible hands takes a beating in the age of monopolies.

So we must stress that the social situation is important as it shows how
apparently superficially similar arguments can have radically different
aims and results depending on who suggests them and in what
circumstances. Hence the importance of individualist anarchist support
for equality. Without it, genuine freedom would not exist for the many
and "anarchy" would simply be private statism enforcing rule by the
rich.

G.3.5 Would individualist anarchists have accepted "Austrian" economics?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the great myths perpetrated by "anarcho"-capitalists is the
notion that "anarcho"-capitalism is simply individualist anarchism plus
"Austrian" economics. Nothing could be further from the truth, as is
clear once the individualist anarchist positions on capitalist property
rights, exploitation and equality are understood. Combine this with
their vision of a free society as well as the social and political
environment they were part of and the ridiculous nature of such claims
become obvious.

At its most basic, Individualist anarchism was rooted in socialist
economic analysis as would be expected of a self-proclaimed socialist
theory and movement. The "anarcho"-capitalists, in a roundabout way,
recognise this with Rothbard dismissing the economic fallacies of
individualist anarchism in favour of "Austrian" economics. *"There is,"*
he stated, *"in the body of thought known as 'Austrian economics,' a
scientific [sic!] explanation of the workings of the free market . . .
which individualist anarchists could easily incorporate into their so
political and social **Weltanshauung**. But to do this, they must throw
out the worthless excess baggage of money-crankism and reconsider the
nature and justification of the economic categories of interest, rent
and profit."* Yet Rothbard's assertion is nonsense, given that the
individualist anarchists were well aware of various justifications for
exploitation expounded by the defenders of capitalism and rejected
everyone. He himself noted that the *"individualist anarchists were
exposed to critiques of their economic fallacies; but, unfortunately,
the lesson, despite the weakness of Tucker's replies, did not take."*
[*"The Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An Economist's View"*, **Op. Cit.**, p.
14] As such, it seems like extremely wishful thinking that the likes of
Tucker would have rushed to embrace an economic ideology whose basic aim
has always been to refute the claims of socialism and defend capitalism
from attacks on it.

Nor can it be suggested that the individualist anarchists were ignorant
of the developments within bourgeois economics which the "Austrian"
school was part of. Both Tucker and Yarros, for example, attacked
marginal productivity theory as advocated by John B. Clark.
[**Liberty**, no. 305] Tucker critiqued another anarchist for once being
an *"Anarchistic socialist, standing squarely upon the principles of
Liberty and Equity"* but then *"abandon[ing] Equity by repudiating the
Socialistic theory of value and adopting one which differs but little,
if any, from that held by the ordinary economist."* [**Op. Cit.**, no.
80, p. 4] So the likes of Tucker were well aware of the so-called
marginalist revolution and rejected it.

Somewhat ironically, a key founders of "Austrian" economics was quoted
favourably in **Liberty** but only with regards to his devastating
critique of existing theories of interest and profit. Hugo Bilgram asked
a defender of interest whether he had *"ever read Volume 1 of
Böhm-Bawerk's 'Capital and Interest'"* for in this volume *"the
fructification theory is . . . completely refuted."* Bilgram, needless
to say, did not support Böhm-Bawerk's defence of usury, instead arguing
that restrictions in the amount of money forced people to pay for its
use and *"[t]his, and nothing else, [causes] the interest accruing to
capital, regarding which the modern economists are doing their utmost to
find a theory that will not expose the system of industrial piracy of
today."* He did not exclude Böhm-Bawerk's theory from his conclusion
that *"since every one of these pet theories is based on some fallacy,
[economists] cannot agree upon any one."* The abolition of the money
monopoly will *"abolish the power of capital to appropriate a net
profit."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 282, p. 11] Tucker himself noted that
Böhm-Bawerk *"has refuted all these ancient apologies for interest --
productivity of capital, abstinence, etc."* [**Op. Cit.**, no. 287, p.
5] **Liberty** also published a synopsis of Francis Tandy's **Voluntary
Socialism**, whose chapter 6 was *"devoted to an analysis of value
according to the marginal utility value of Böhm-Bawerk. It also deals
with the Marxian theory of surplus value, showing that all our economic
ills are due to the existence of that surplus value."* [**Op. Cit.**,
no. 334, p. 5] Clearly, then, the individualist anarchists were aware of
the "Austrian" tradition and only embraced its critique of previous
defences of non-labour incomes.

We have already critiqued the "time preference" justification for
interest in [section C.2.7](secC2.html#secc27) so will not go into it in
much detail here. Rothbard argued that it *"should be remembered by
radicals that, if they wanted to, all workers could refuse to work for
wages and instead form their own producers' co-operatives and wait for
years for their pay until the producers are sold to the consumers; the
fact that they do not do so, shows the enormous advantage of the capital
investment, wage-paying system as a means of allowing workers to earn
money far in advance of the sale of their products."* And how, Professor
Rothbard, are these workers to live during the years they wait until
their products are sold? The reason why workers do not work for
themselves has nothing to do with "time preference" but their lack of
resources, their **class** position. Showing how capitalist ideology
clouds the mind, Rothbard asserted that interest (*"in the shape of
'long-run' profit"*) would still exist in a *"world in which everyone
invested his own money and nobody loaned or borrowed."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 12] Presumably, this means that the self-employed worker who invests
her own money into her own farm pays herself interest payments just as
her labour income is, presumably, the "profits" from which this
"interest" payment is deducted along with the "rent" for access to the
land she owns!

So it seems extremely unlikely that the individualist anarchists would
have considered "Austrian" economics as anything other than an attempt
to justify exploitation and capitalism, like the other theories they
spent so much time refuting. They would quickly have noted that "time
preference", like the "waiting"/"abstinence" justifications for
interest, is based on taking the current class system for granted and
ignoring the economic pressures which shape individual decisions. In
Tucker's words (when he critiqued Henry George's argument that interest
is related to time) *"increase which is purely the work of time bears a
price only because of monopoly."* The notion that "time" produced profit
or interest was one Tucker was well aware of, and refuted on many
occasions. He argued that it was class monopoly, restrictions on
banking, which caused interest and *"where there is no monopoly there
will be little or no interest."* If someone *"is to be rewarded for his
mere time, what will reward him save [another]'s labour? There is no
escape from this dilemma. The proposition that the man who for time
spent in idleness receives the product of time employed in labour is a
parasite upon the body industrial is one which . . . [its supporters]
can never successfully dispute with men who understand the rudiments of
political economy."* [**Liberty**, no. 109, p. 4 and p. 5] For Joshua
King Ingalls, *"abstinence"* (or the ability to *"wait,"* as it was
renamed in the late nineteenth century) was *"a term with which our
cowardly moral scientists and political economists attempt to conjure up
a spirit that will justify the greed of our land and money systems; by a
casuistry similar to that which once would have justified human
slavery."* [*"Labor, Wages, And Capital. Division Of Profits
Scientifically Considered,"* **Brittan's Quarterly Journal**, I (1873),
pp. 66-79]

What of the economic justification for that other great evil for
individualist anarchists, rent? Rothbard attacked Adam Smith comment
that landlords were monopolists who demanded rent for nature's produce
and like to reap where they never sowed. As he put it, Smith showed *"no
hint of recognition here that the landlord performs the vital function
of allocating the land to its most productive use."* [**An Austrian
Perspective on the History of Economic Thought**, vol. 1, p. 456] Yet,
as Smith was well aware, it is the farmer who has to feed himself and
pay rent who decides how best to use the land, not the landlord. All the
landlord does is decide whether to throw the farmer off the land when a
more profitable business opportunity arrives (as in, say, during the
Highland clearances) or that it is more "productive" to export food
while local people starve (as in, say, the great Irish famine). It was
precisely this kind of arbitrary power which the individualist
anarchists opposed. As John Beverley Robinson put it, the *"land owner
gives nothing whatever, but permission to you to live and work on his
land. He does not give his product in exchange for yours. He did not
produce the land. He obtained a title at law to it; that is, a privilege
to keep everybody off his land until they paid him his price. He is well
called the lord of the land -- the landlord!"* [**Patterns of Anarchy**,
p. 271]

Significantly, while Rothbard attacked Henry George's scheme for land
nationalisation as being a tax on property owners and stopping rent
playing the role "Austrian" economic theory assigns it, the
individualist anarchists opposed it because, at best, it would not end
landlordism or, at worse, turn the state into the only landlord. In an
unequal society, leasing land from the state *"would greatly enhance the
power of capitalism to engross the control of the land, since it would
relieve it of the necessity of applying large amounts in purchasing land
which it could secure the same control of by lease . . . It would
greatly augment and promote the reign of the capitalism and displace the
independent worker who now cultivates his own acres, but who would be
then unable to compete with organised capital . . . and would be
compelled to give up his holding and sink into the ranks of the
proletariat."* [Joshua King Ingalls, Bowman N. Hall, *"Joshua K.
Ingalls, American Individualist: Land Reformer, Opponent of Henry George
and Advocate of Land Leasing, Now an Established Mode"*, pp. 383-96,
**American Journal of Economics and Sociology**, Vol. 39, No. 4, p. 394]

Given Tucker's opposition to rent, interest and profit is should go
without saying that he rejected the neo-classical and "Austrian" notion
that a workers' wages equalled the "marginal product," i.e. its
contribution to the production process (see [section C.2](secC2.html)
for a critique of this position). Basing himself on the socialist
critique of classical economics developed by Proudhon and Marx, he
argued that non-labour income was usury and would be driven to zero in a
genuinely free market. As such, any notion that Tucker thought that
workers in a "free market" are paid according to their marginal product
is simply wrong and any claim otherwise shows a utter ignorance of the
subject matter. Individualist anarchists like Tucker strongly believed
that a truly free (i.e. non-capitalist) market would ensure that the
worker would receive the *"full product"* of his or her labour.
Nevertheless, in order to claim Tucker as a proto-"anarcho"-capitalist,
"anarcho"-capitalists may argue that capitalism pays the "market price"
of labour power, and that this price **does** reflect the *"full
product"* (or value) of the worker's labour. As Tucker was a socialist,
we doubt that he would have agreed with the "anarcho"-capitalist
argument that market price of labour reflected the value it produced.
He, like the other individualist anarchists, was well aware that labour
produces the "surplus value" which was appropriated in the name of
interest, rent and profit. In other words, he very forcibly rejected the
idea that the market price of labour reflects the value of that labour,
considering *"the natural wage of labour is its product"* and *"that
this wage, or product, is the only just source of income."* [**Instead
of a Book**, p. 6]

**Liberty** also favourably quoted a supporter of the silver coinage,
General Francis A. Walker, and his arguments in favour of ending the
gold standard. It praised his argument as *"far more sound and rational
than that of the supercilios, narrow, bigoted monomentallists."* Walker
attacked those *"economists of the **a priori** school, who treat all
things industrial as if they were in a state of flux, ready to be poured
indifferently into any kind of mould or pattern."* These economists
*"are always on hand with the answer that industrial society will
'readjust' itself to the new conditions"* and *"it would not matter if
wages were at any time unduly depressed by combinations of employers,
inasmuch as the excess of profits resulting would infallibly become
capital, and as such, constitute an additional demand for labour . . .
It has been the teaching of the economists of this sort which has so
deeply discredited political economy with the labouring men on the one
hand, and with practical business men on the other."* The *"greatest
part of the evil of a diminishing money supply is wrought through the
discouragement of enterprise."* [**Liberty**, no. 287, p. 11] Given that
the "Austrian" school takes the **a priori** methodology to ridiculous
extremes and is always on hand to defend *"excess of profits"*,
*"combinations of employers"* and the gold standard we can surmise
Tucker's reaction to Rothbard's pet economic ideology.

Somewhat ironically, give Rothbard's attempts to inflict bourgeois
economics along with lots of other capitalist ideology onto
individualist anarchism, Kropotkin noted that supporters of
*"individualist anarchism . . . soon realise that the individualisation
they so highly praise is not attainable by individual efforts, and . . .
[some] abandon the ranks of the anarchists, and are driven into the
liberal individualism of the classical economists."* [**Anarchism**, p.
297] "Anarcho"-capitalists confuse the ending place of **ex**-anarchists
with their starting point. As can be seen from their attempt to co-opt
the likes of Spooner and Tucker, this confusion only appears persuasive
by ignoring the bulk of their ideas as well as rewriting the history of
anarchism.

So it can, we think, be save to assume that Tucker and other
individualist anarchists would have little problem in refuting
Rothbard's economic fallacies as well as his goldbug notions (which seem
to be a form of the money monopoly in another form) and support for the
land monopoly. Significantly, modern individualist anarchists like Kevin
Carson have felt no need to embrace "Austrian" economics and retain
their socialist analysis while, at the same time, making telling
criticisms of Rothbard's favourite economic ideology and the apologetics
for "actually existing" capitalism its supporters too often indulge in
(Carson calls this *"vulgar libertarianism"*, wherein
right-"libertarians" forget that the current economuy is far from their
stated ideal when it is a case of defending corporations or the
wealthy).

G.3.6 Would mutual banking simply cause inflation?
--------------------------------------------------

One of the arguments against Individualist and mutualist anarchism, and
mutual banking in general, is that it would just produce accelerating
inflation. The argument is that by providing credit without interest,
more and more money would be pumped into the economy. This would lead to
more and more money chasing a given set of goods, so leading to price
rises and inflation.

Rothbard, for example, dismissed individualist anarchist ideas on mutual
banking as being *"totally fallacious monetary views."* He based his
critique on "Austrian" economics and its notion of *"time preference"*
(see [section C.2.7](secC2.html#secc27) for a critique of this
position). Mutual banking would artificially lower the interest rate by
generating credit, Rothbard argued, with the new money only benefiting
those who initially get it. This process "exploits" those further down
the line in the form accelerating inflation. As more and more money was
be pumped into the economy, it would lead to more and more money chasing
a given set of goods, so leading to price rises and inflation. To prove
this, Rothbard repeated Hume's argument that *"if everybody magically
woke up one morning with the quantity of money in his possession
doubled"* then prices would simply doubled. [*"The Spooner-Tucker
Doctrine: An Economist's View"*, **Journal of Libertarian Studies**,
vol. 20, no. 1, p. 14 and p. 10]

However, Rothbard is assuming that the amount of goods and services are
fixed. This is just wrong and shows a real lack of understanding of how
money works in a real economy. This is shown by the lack of agency in
his example, the money just "appears" by magic (perhaps by means of a
laissez-fairy?). Milton Friedman made the same mistake, although he used
the more up to date example of government helicopters dropping bank
notes. As post-Keynesian economist Nicholas Kaldor pointed out with
regards to Friedman's position, the *"transmission mechanism from money
to income remained a 'black box' -- he could not explain it, and he did
not attempt to explain it either. When it came to the question of
**how** the authorities increase the supply of bank notes in circulation
he answered that they are scattered over populated areas by means of a
helicopter -- though he did not go into the ultimate consequences of
such an aerial Santa Claus."* [**The Scourge of Monetarism**, p. 28]

Friedman's and Rothbard's analysis betrays a lack of understanding of
economics and money. This is unsurprising as it comes to us via
neo-classical economics. In neo-classical economics inflation is always
a monetary phenomena -- too much money chasing too few goods. Milton
Friedman's Monetarism was the logical conclusion of this perspective and
although "Austrian" economics is extremely critical of Monetarism it
does, however, share many of the same assumptions and fallacies (as
Hayek's one-time follower Nicholas Kaldor noted, key parts of Friedman's
doctrine are *"closely reminiscent of the Austrian school of the
twenties and the early thirties"* although it *"misses some of the
subtleties of the Hayekian transmission mechanism and of the
money-induced distortions in the 'structure of production.'"* [**The
Essential Kaldor**, pp. 476-7]). We can reject this argument on numerous
points.

Firstly, the claim that inflation is always and everywhere a monetary
phenomena has been empirically refuted -- often using Friedman's own
data and attempts to apply his dogma in real life. As we noted in
[section C.8.3](secC8.html#secc83), the growth of the money supply and
inflation have no fixed relationship, with money supply increasing while
inflation falling. As such, *"the claim that inflation is always and
everywhere caused by increases in the money supply, and that the rate of
inflation bears a stable, predictable relationship to increases in the
money supply is ridiculous."* [Paul Ormerod, **The Death of Economics**,
p. 96] This means that the assumption that increasing the money supply
by generating credit will always simply result in inflation cannot be
supported by the empirical evidence we have. As Kaldor stressed, the
*"the 'first-round effects' of the helicopter operation could be
anything, depending on where the scatter occurred . . . there is no
reason to suppose that the ultimate effect on the amount of money in
circulation or on incomes would bear any close relation to the initial
injections."* [**The Scourge of Monetarism**, p. 29]

Secondly, even if we ignore the empirical record (as "Austrian"
economics tends to do when faced with inconvenient facts) the "logical"
argument used to explain the theory that increases in money will
increase prices is flawed. Defenders of this argument usually present
mental exercises to prove their case (as in Hume and Friedman). Needless
to say, such an argument is spurious in the extreme simply because money
does not enter the economy in this fashion. It is generated to meet
specific demands for money and is so, generally, used productively. In
other words, money creation is a function of the demand for credit,
which is a function of the needs of the economy (i.e. it is endogenous)
and **not** determined by the central bank injecting it into the system
(i.e. it is **not** exogenous). And this indicates why the argument that
mutual banking would produce inflation is flawed. It does not take into
account the fact that money will be used to generate ***new*** goods and
services.

As leading Post-Keynesian economist Paul Davidson argued, the notion
that *"inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon"* (to
use Friedman's expression) is *"ultimately based on the old homily that
inflation is merely 'too many dollars chasing too few goods.'"* Davidson
notes that *"[t]his 'too many dollars cliché is usually illustrated by
employing a two-island parable. Imagine a hypothetical island where the
only available goods are 10 apples and the money supply consists of,
say, 10 \$1 bills. If all the dollars are used to purchase the apples,
the price per apple will be \$1. For comparison, assume that on a second
island there are 20 \$1 bills and only 10 apples. All other things being
equal, the price will be \$2 per apple. Ergo, inflation occurs whenever
the money supply is excessive relative to the available goods."* The
similarities with Rothbard's argument are clear. So are its flaws as
*"no explanation is given as to why the money supply was greater on the
second island. Nor is it admitted that, if the increase in the money
supply is associated with entrepreneurs borrowing 'real bills' from
banks to finance an increase in payrolls necessary to harvest, say, 30
additional apples so that the \$20 chases 40 apples, then the price will
be only \$0.50 per apple. If a case of 'real bills' finance occurs, then
an increase in the money supply is not associated with higher prices but
with greater output."* [**Controversies in Post Keynesian Economics**,
p. 100] Davidson is unknowingly echoing Tucker (*"It is the especial
claim of free banking that it will increase production . . . If free
banking were only a picayanish attempt to distribute more equitably the
small amount of wealth now produced, I would not waste a moment's energy
on it."* [**Liberty**, no. 193, p. 3]).

This, in reply to the claims of neo-classical economics, indicates why
mutual banking would not increase inflation. Like the neo-classical
position, Rothbard's viewpoint is static in nature and does not
understand how a real economy works. Needless to say, he (like Friedman)
did not discuss how the new money gets into circulation. Perhaps, like
Hume, it was a case of the money fairy (laissez-fairy?) placing the
money into people's wallets. Maybe it was a case, like Friedman, of
government (black?) helicopters dropping it from the skies. Rothbard did
not expound on the mechanism by which money would be created or placed
into circulation, rather it just appears one day out of the blue and
starts chasing a given amount of goods. However, the individualist
anarchists and mutualists did not think in such bizarre (typically,
economist) ways. Rather than think that mutual banks would hand out cash
willy-nilly to passing strangers, they realistically considered the role
of the banks to be one of evaluating useful investment opportunities
(i.e., ones which would be likely to succeed). As such, the role of
credit would be to **increase** the number of goods and services in
circulation along with money, so ensuring that inflation is not
generated (assuming that it is caused by the money supply, of course).
As one Individualist Anarchist put it, *"[i]n the absence of such
restrictions [on money and credit], imagine the rapid growth of wealth,
and the equity in its distribution, that would result."* [John Beverley
Robinson, **The Individualist Anarchists**, p. 144] Thus Tucker:

> *"A is a farmer owning a farm. He mortgages his farm to a bank for
> \$1,000, giving the bank a mortgage note for that sum and receiving in
> exchange the bank's notes for the same sum, which are secured by the
> mortgage. With the bank-notes A buys farming tools of B. The next day
> B uses the notes to buy of C the materials used in the manufacture of
> tools. The day after, C in turn pays them to D in exchange for
> something he needs. At the end of a year, after a constant succession
> of exchanges, the notes are in the hands of Z, a dealer in farm
> produce. He pays them to A, who gives in return \$1,000 worth of farm
> products which he has raised during the year. Then A carries the notes
> to the bank, receives in exchange for them his mortgage note, and the
> bank cancels the mortgage. Now, in this whole circle of transactions,
> has there been any lending of capital? If so, who was the lender? If
> not, who is entitled to interest?"* [**Instead of a Book**, p. 198]

Obviously, in a real economy, as Rothbard admits *"inflation of the
money supply takes place a step at a time and that the first
beneficiaries, the people who get the new money first, gain at the
expense of the people unfortunate enough to come last in line."* This
process is *"plunder and exploitation"* as the *"prices of things they
[those last in line] have to buy shooting up before the new injection
[of money] filters down to them."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 11] Yet this
expansion of the initial example, again, assumes that there is no
increase in goods and services in the economy, that the *"first
beneficiaries"* do nothing with the money bar simply buying more of the
existing goods and services. It further assumes that this existing
supply of goods and services is unchangeable, that firms do not have
inventories of goods and sufficient slack to meet unexpected increases
in demand. In reality, of course, a mutual bank would be funding
productive investments and any firm will respond to increasing demand by
increasing production as their inventories start to decline. In effect,
Rothbard's analysis is just as static and unrealistic as the notion of
money suddenly appearing overnight in people's wallets. Perhaps
unsurprisingly Rothbard compared the credit generation of banks to the
act of counterfeiters so showing his utter lack of awareness of how
banks work in a credit-money (i.e., real) economy.

The "Austrian" theory of the business cycle is rooted in the notion that
banks artificially lower the rate of interest by providing more credit
than their savings and specie reverses warrant. Even in terms of pure
logic, such an analysis is flawed as it cannot reasonably be asserted
that all "malinvestment" is caused by credit expansion as capitalists
and investors make unwise decisions all the time, irrespective of the
supply of credit. Thus it is simply false to assert, as Rothbard did,
that the *"process of inflation, as carried out in the real [sic!]
world"* is based on *"new money"* entered the market by means of *"the
loan market"* but *"this fall is strictly temporary, and the market soon
restores the rate to its proper level."* A crash, according to Rothbard,
is the process of restoring the rate of interest to its *"proper"* level
yet a crash can occur even if the interest rate is at that rate,
assuming that the banks can discover this equilibrium rate and have an
incentive to do so (as we discussed in [section C.8](secC8.html) both
are unlikely). Ultimately, credit expansion fails under capitalism
because it runs into the contradictions within the capitalist economy,
the need for capitalists, financiers and landlords to make profits via
exploiting labour. As interest rates increase, capitalists have to
service their rising debts putting pressure on their profit margins and
so raising the number of bankruptcies. In an economy without non-labour
income, the individualist anarchists argued, this process is undercut if
not eliminated.

So expanding this from the world of fictional government helicopters and
money fairies, we can see why Rothbard is wrong. Mutual banks operate on
the basis of providing loans to people to set up or expand business,
either as individuals or as co-operatives. When they provide a loan, in
other words, they **increase** the amount of goods and services in the
economy. Similarly, they do not simply increase the money supply to
reduce interest rates. Rather, they reduce interest rates to increase
the demand for money in order to increase the productive activity in an
economy. By producing new goods and services, inflation is kept at bay.
Would increased demand for goods by the new firms create inflation? Only
if every firm was operating at maximum output, which would be a highly
unlikely occurrence in reality (unlike in economic textbooks).

So what, then does case inflation? Inflation, rather than being the
result of monetary factors, is, in fact, a result of profit levels and
the dynamic of the class struggle. In this most anarchists agree with
post-Keynesian economics which views inflation as *"a symptom of an
on-going struggle over income distribution by the exertion of market
power."* [Paul Davidson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 102] As workers' market power
increases via fuller employment, their organisation, militancy and
solidarity increases so eroding profits as workers keep more of the
value they produce. Capitalists try and maintain their profits by rising
prices, thus generating inflation (i.e. general price rises). Rather
than accept the judgement of market forces in the form of lower profits,
capitalists use their control over industry and market power of their
firms to maintain their profit levels at the expense of the consumer
(i.e., the workers and their families).

In this sense, mutual banks **could** contribute to inflation -- by
reducing unemployment by providing the credit needed for workers to
start their own businesses and co-operatives, workers' power would
increase and so reduce the power of managers to extract more work for a
given wage and give workers a better economic environment to ask for
better wages and conditions. This was, it should be stressed, a key
reason why the individualist anarchists supported mutual banking:

> *"people who are now deterred from going into business by the
> ruinously high rates which they must pay for capital with which to
> start and carry on business will find their difficulties removed . . .
> This facility of acquiring capital will give an unheard of impetus to
> business, and consequently create an unprecedented demand for labour
> -- a demand which will always be in excess of the supply, directly to
> the contrary of the present condition of the labour market . . .
> Labour will then be in a position to dictate its wages."* [Tucker,
> **The Individualist Anarchists**, pp. 84-5]

And, it must also be stressed, this was a key reason why the capitalist
class turned against Keynesian full employment policies in the 1970s
(see [section C.8.3](secC8.html#secc83)). Lower interest rates and
demand management by the state lead precisely to the outcome predicted
by the likes of Tucker, namely an increase in working class power in the
labour market as a result of a lowering of unemployment to unprecedented
levels. This, however, lead to rising prices as capitalists tried to
maintain their profits by passing on wage increases rather than take the
cut in profits indicated by economic forces. This could also occur if
mutual banking took off and, in this sense, mutual banking could produce
inflation. However, such an argument against the scheme requires the
neo-classical and "Austrian" economist to acknowledge that capitalism
cannot produce full employment and that the labour market must always be
skewed in favour of the capitalist to keep it working, to maintain the
inequality of bargaining power between worker and capitalist. In other
words, that capitalism needs unemployment to exist and so cannot produce
an efficient and humane allocation of resources.

By supplying working people with money which is used to create
productive co-operatives and demand for their products, mutual banks
increase the amount of goods and services in circulation as it increases
the money supply. Combined with the elimination of profit, rent and
interest, inflationary pressures are effectively undercut (it makes much
more sense to talk of a interest/rent/profits-prices spiral rather than
a wages-prices spiral when discussing inflation). Only in the context of
the ridiculous examples presented by neo-classical and "Austrian"
economics does increasing the money supply result in rising inflation.
Indeed, the "sound economic" view, in which if the various
money-substitutes are in a fixed and constant proportion to "real money"
(i.e. gold or silver) then inflation would not exist, ignores the
history of money and the nature of the banking system. It overlooks the
fact that the emergence of bank notes, fractional reserve banking and
credit was a spontaneous process, not planned or imposed by the state,
but rather came from the profit needs of capitalist banks which, in
turn, reflected the real needs of the economy (*"The truth is that, as
the exchanges of the world increased, and the time came when there was
not enough gold and silver to effect these exchanges, so . . . people
had to resort to paper promises."* [John Beverley Robinson, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 139]). What **was** imposed by the state, however, was the
imposition of legal tender, the use of specie and a money monopoly
(*"attempt after attempt has been made to introduce credit money outside
of government and national bank channels, and the promptness of the
suppression has always been proportional to the success of the
attempt."* [Tucker, **Liberty**, no. 193, p. 3]).

Given that the money supply is endogenous in nature, any attempt to
control the money supply will fail. Rather than control the money
supply, which would be impossible, the state would have to use interest
rates. To reduce the demand for money, interest rates would be raised
higher and higher, causing a deep recession as business cannot maintain
their debt payments and go bankrupt. This would cause unemployment to
rise, weakening workers' bargaining power and skewing the economy back
towards the bosses and profits -- so making working people pay for
capitalism's crisis. Which, essentially, is what the Thatcher and Reagan
governments did in the early 1980s. Finding it impossible to control the
money supply, they raised interest rates to dampen down the demand for
credit, which provoked a deep recession. Faced with massive
unemployment, workers' market power decreased and their bosses
increased, causing a shift in power and income towards capital.

So, obviously, in a capitalist economy the increasing of credit is a
source of instability. While not causing the business cycle, it does
increase its magnitude. As the boom gathers strength, banks want to make
money and increase credit by lowering interest rates below what they
should be to match savings. Capitalists rush to invest, so soaking up
some of the unemployment which always marks capitalism. The lack of
unemployment as a disciplinary tool is why the boom turns to bust, not
the increased investment. Given that in a mutualist system, profits,
interest and rent do not exist then erosion of profits which marks the
top of a boom would not be applicable. If prices drop, then labour
income drops. Thus a mutualist society need not fear inflation. As
Kaldor argued with regard to the current system, *"under a
'credit-money' system . . . unwanted or excess amounts of money **could
never come into existence**; it is the increase in the value of
transactions . . . which calls forth an increase in the 'money supply'
(whether in the form of bank balances or notes in circulation) as a
result of the net increase in the value of working capital at the
various stages of production and distribution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 46]
The gold standard cannot do what a well-run credit-currency can do,
namely tailor the money supply to the economy's demand for money. The
problem in the nineteenth century was that a capitalist credit-money
economy was built upon a commodity-money base, with predictably bad
results.

Would this be any different under Rothbard's system? Probably not. For
Rothbard, each bank would have 100% reserve of gold with a law passed
that defined fractional reserve banking as fraud. How would this affect
mutual banks? Rothbard argued that attempts to create mutual banks or
other non-gold based banking systems would be allowed under his system.
Yet, how does this fit into his repeated call for a 100% gold standard
for banks? Why would a mutual bank be excluded from a law on banking? Is
there a difference between a mutual bank issuing credit on the basis of
a secured loan rather than gold and a normal bank doing so? Needless to
say, Rothbard never did address the fact that the customers of the banks
**know** that they practised fractional reserve banking and still did
business with them. Nor did he wonder why no enterprising banker
exploited a market niche by advertising a 100% reserve policy. He simply
assumed that the general public subscribed to his gold-bug prejudices
and so would not frequent mutual banks. As for other banks, the full
might of the law would be used to stop them practising the same policies
and freedoms he allowed for mutual ones. So rather than give people the
freedom to choose whether to save with a fractional reserve bank or not,
Rothbard simply outlawed that option. Would a regime inspired by
Rothbard's goldbug dogmas really allow mutual banks to operate when it
refuses other banks the freedom to issue credit and money on the same
basis? It seems illogical for that to be the case and so would such a
regime not, in fact, simply be a new form of the money monopoly Tucker
and his colleagues spent so much time combating? One thing is sure,
though, even a 100% gold standard will not stop credit expansion as
firms and banks would find ways around the law and it is doubtful that
private defence firms would be in a position to enforce it.

Once we understand the absurd examples used to refute mutual banking
plus the real reasons for inflation (i.e., *"a symptom of a struggle
over the distribution of income."* [Davidson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 89]) and
how credit-money actually works, it becomes clear that the case against
mutual banking is far from clear. Somewhat ironically, the
post-Keynesian school of economics provides a firm understanding of how
a real credit system works compared to Rothbard's logical deductions
from imaginary events based on propositions which are, at root,
identical with Walrasian general equilibrium theory (an analysis
"Austrians" tend to dismiss). It may be ironic, but not unsurprising as
Keynes praised Proudhon's follower Silvio Gesell in **The General
Theory** (also see Dudley Dillard's essay *"Keynes and Proudhon"* [**The
Journal of Economic History**, vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 63-76]). Libertarian
Marxist Paul Mattick noted Keynes debt to Proudhon, and although Keynes
did not subscribe to Proudhon's desire to use free credit to fund
*"independent producers and workers' syndicates"* as a means create an
economic system *"without exploitation"* he did share the Frenchman's
*"attack upon the payment of interest"* and wish to see the end of the
rentier. [**Marx and Keynes**, p. 5 and p. 6]

Undoubtedly, given the "Austrian" hatred of Keynes and his economics
(inspired, in part, by the defeat inflicted on Hayek's business cycle
theory in the 1930s by the Keynesians) this will simply confirm their
opinion that the Individualist Anarchists did not have a sound economic
analysis! As Rothbard noted, the individualist anarchist position was
*"simply pushing to its logical conclusion a fallacy adopted widely by
preclassical and by current Keynesian writers."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 10]
However, Keynes was trying to analyse the economy as it is rather than
deducing logically desired conclusions from the appropriate assumptions
needed to confirm the prejudices of the assumer (like Rothbard). In
this, he did share the same method if not exactly the same conclusions
as the Individualist Anarchists and Mutualists.

Needless to say, social anarchists do not agree that mutual banking can
reform capitalism away. As we discuss in [section G.4](secG4.html), this
is due to many factors, including the nature barriers to competition
capital accumulation creates. However, this critique is based on the
real economy and does not reflect Rothbard's abstract theorising based
on pre-scientific methodology. While other anarchists may reject certain
aspects of Tucker's ideas on money, we are well aware, as one
commentator noted, that his *"position regarding the State and money
monopoly derived from his Socialist convictions"* where socialism
*"referred to an intent to fundamentally reorganise the societal systems
so as to return the full product of labour to the labourers."* [Don
Werkheiser, *"Benjamin R. Tucker: Champion of Free Money"*, pp. 212-221,
**Benjamin R. Tucker and the Champions of Liberty**, Coughlin, Hamilton
and Sullivan (eds.), p. 212]
