G.6 What are the ideas of Max Stirner?
======================================

To some extent, Stirner's work **The Ego and Its Own** is like a
Rorschach test. Depending on the reader's psychology, he or she can
interpret it in drastically different ways. Hence, a few have tried to
use Stirner's ideas to defend capitalism while others have used them to
argue for anarcho-syndicalism. For example, many in the anarchist
movement in Glasgow, Scotland, took Stirner's *"Union of Egoists"*
literally as the basis for their anarcho-syndicalist organising in the
1940s and beyond. Similarly, we discover the noted anarchist historian
Max Nettlau stating that *"[o]n reading Stirner, I maintain that he
cannot be interpreted except in a socialist sense."* [**A Short History
of Anarchism**, p. 55] In this section of the FAQ, we will indicate why,
in our view, the latter, syndicalistic, interpretation of egoism is far
more appropriate than the capitalistic one.

It should be noted, before continuing, that Stirner's work has had a
bigger impact on individualist anarchism than social anarchism. Benjamin
Tucker and many of his comrades embraced egoism when they became aware
of **The Ego and Its Own** (a development which provoked a split in
individualist circles which, undoubtedly, contributed to its decline).
However, his influence was not limited to individualist anarchism. As
John P. Clark notes, Stirner *"has also been seen as a significant
figure by figures who are more in the mainstream of the anarchist
tradition. Emma Goldman, for example, combines an acceptance of many of
the principles of anarcho-syndicalism and anarcho-communism with a
strong emphasis on individuality and personal uniqueness. The
inspiration for this latter part of her outlook comes from thinkers like
. . . Stirner. Herbert Read has commented on the value of Stirner's
defence of individuality."* [**Max Stirner's Egoism**, p. 90] Daniel
Guérin's classic introduction to anarchism gives significant space to
the German egoist, arguing he *"rehabilitated the individual at a time
when the philosophical field was dominated by Hegelian
anti-individualism and most reformers in the social field had been led
by the misdeeds of bourgeois egotism to stress its opposite"* and
pointed to *"the boldness and scope of his thought."* [**Anarchism**, p.
27] From meeting anarchists in Glasgow during the Second World War,
long-time anarchist activist and artist Donald Rooum likewise combined
Stirner and anarcho-communism. In America, the short-lived Situationist
influenced group *"For Ourselves"* produced the inspired **The Right to
Be Greedy: Theses on the Practical Necessity of Demanding Everything**,
a fusion of Marx and Stirner which proclaimed a *"communist egoism"*
based on the awareness that greed *"in its fullest sense is the **only
possible** basis of communist society."*

It is not hard to see why so many people are influenced by Stirner's
work. It is a classic, full of ideas and a sense of fun which is lacking
in many political writers. For many, it is only known through the
criticism Marx and Engels subjected it too in their book **The German
Ideology**. As with their later attacks on Proudhon and Bakunin, the two
Germans did not accurately reflect the ideas they were attacking and, in
the case of Stirner, they made it their task to make them appear
ridiculous and preposterous. That they took so much time and energy to
do so suggests that Stirner's work is far more important and difficult
to refute than their notoriously misleading diatribe suggests. That in
itself should prompt interest in his work.

As will become clear from our discussion, social anarchists have much to
gain from understanding Stirner's ideas and applying what is useful in
them. While some may object to our attempt to place egoism and communism
together, pointing out that Stirner rejected "communism". Quite! Stirner
did not subscribe to libertarian communism, because it did not exist
when he was writing and so he was directing his critique against the
various forms of **state** communism which did. Moreover, this does not
mean that anarcho-communists and others may not find his work of use to
them. And Stirner would have approved, for nothing could be more foreign
to his ideas than to limit what an individual considers to be in their
best interest. Unlike the narrow and self-defeating "egoism" of, say,
Ayn Rand, Stirner did not prescribe what was and was not in a person's
self-interest. He did not say you should act in certain ways because he
preferred it, he did not redefine selfishness to allow most of bourgeois
morality to remain intact. Rather he urged the individual to think for
themselves and seek their own path. Not for Stirner the grim "egoism" of
"selfishly" living a life determined by some guru and which only that
authority figure would approve of. True egoism is not parroting what
Stirner wrote and agreeing with everything he expounded. Nothing could
be more foreign to Stirner's work than to invent "Stirnerism." As Donald
Rooum put it:

> *"I am happy to be called a Stirnerite anarchist, provided
> 'Stirnerite' means one who agrees with Stirner's general drift, not
> one who agrees with Stirner's every word. Please judge my arguments on
> their merits, not on the merits of Stirner's arguments, and not by the
> test of whether I conform to Stirner."* [*"Anarchism and
> Selfishness"*, pp. 251-9, **The Raven**, no. 3, p. 259fn]

With that in mind, we will summarise Stirner's main arguments and
indicate why social anarchists have been, and should be, interested in
his ideas. Saying that, John P. Clark presents a sympathetic and useful
social anarchist critique of his work in **Max Stirner's Egoism**.
Unless otherwise indicated all quotes are from Stirner's **The Ego and
Its Own**.

So what is Stirner all about? Simply put, he is an Egoist, which means
that he considers self-interest to be the root cause of an individual's
every action, even when he or she is apparently doing "altruistic"
actions. Thus: *"I am everything to myself and I do everything **on my
account**."* Even love is an example of selfishness, *"because love
makes me happy, I love because loving is natural to me, because it
pleases me."* He urges others to follow him and *"take courage now to
really make **yourselves** the central point and the main thing
altogether."* As for other people, he sees them purely as a means for
self-enjoyment, a self-enjoyment which is mutual: *"For me you are
nothing but my food, even as I am fed upon and turned to use by you. We
have only one relation to each other, that of **usableness,** of
utility, of use."* [p. 162, p. 291 and pp. 296-7]

For Stirner, all individuals are unique (*"My flesh is not their flesh,
my mind is not their mind,"*) and should reject any attempts to restrict
or deny their uniqueness: *"To be looked upon as a mere **part,** part
of society, the individual cannot bear -- because he is **more**; his
uniqueness puts from it this limited conception."* Individuals, in order
to maximise their uniqueness, must become aware of the **real** reasons
for their actions. In other words they must become conscious, not
unconscious, egoists. An unconscious, or involuntary, egoist is one
*"who is always looking after his own and yet does not count himself as
the highest being, who serves only himself and at the same time always
thinks he is serving a higher being, who knows nothing higher than
himself and yet is infatuated about something higher."* [p. 138, p. 265
and p. 36] In contrast, egoists are aware that they act purely out of
self-interest, and if they support a "higher being," it is not because
it is a noble thought but because it will benefit them.

Stirner himself, however, has no truck with "higher beings." Indeed,
with the aim of concerning himself purely with his own interests, he
attacks all "higher beings," regarding them as a variety of what he
calls *"spooks,"* or ideas to which individuals sacrifice themselves and
by which they are dominated. First amongst these is the abstraction
*"Man"*, into which all unique individuals are submerged and lost. As he
put it, *"liberalism is a religion because it separates my essence from
me and sets it above me, because it exalts 'Man' to the same extent as
any other religion does to God . . . it sets me beneath Man."* Indeed,
he *"who is infatuated with **Man** leaves persons out of account so far
as that infatuation extends, and floats in an ideal, sacred interest.
**Man**, you see, is not a person, but an ideal, a spook."* [p. 176 and
p.79] Among the many *"spooks"* Stirner attacks are such notable aspects
of capitalist life as private property, the division of labour, the
state, religion, and (at times) society itself. We will discuss
Stirner's critique of capitalism before moving onto his vision of an
egoist society and how it relates to social anarchism.

For the egoist, private property is a spook which *"lives by the grace
of **law**"* and it *"becomes 'mine' only by effect of the law"*. In
other words, private property exists purely *"through the **protection
of the State,** through the State's grace."* Recognising its need for
state protection, Stirner is also aware that *"[i]t need not make any
difference to the 'good citizens' who protects them and their
principles, whether an absolute King or a constitutional one, a
republic, if only they are protected. And what is their principle, whose
protector they always 'love'? Not that of labour"*, rather it is
*"**interesting-bearing possession** . . . **labouring capital**,
therefore . . . labour certainly, yet little or none at all of one's
own, but labour of capital and of the -- subject labourers."* [p. 251,
p. 114, p. 113 and p. 114]

As can be seen from capitalist support for fascism, Stirner was correct
-- as long as a regime supports capitalist interests, the 'good
citizens' (including many on the so-called "libertarian" right)) will
support it. Stirner sees that not only does private property require
state protection, it also leads to exploitation and oppression. As noted
in [section D.10](secD10.html), like subsequent anarchists like
Kropotkin, Stirner attacked the division of labour resulting from
private property for its deadening effects on the ego and individuality
of the worker:

> *"When everyone is to cultivate himself into man, condemning a man to
> **machine-like labour** amounts to the same thing as slavery . . .
> Every labour is to have the intent that the man be satisfied.
> Therefore he must become a **master** in it too, be able to perform it
> as a totality. He who in a pin-factory only puts on heads, only draws
> the wire, works, as it were mechanically, like a machine; he remains
> half-trained, does not become a master: his labour cannot **satisfy**
> him, it can only **fatigue** him. His labour is nothing by itself, has
> no object **in itself,** is nothing complete in itself; he labours
> only into another's hands, and is **used** (exploited) by this
> other."* [p. 121]

Stirner had nothing but contempt for those who defended property in
terms of "natural rights" and opposed theft and taxation with a passion
because it violates said rights. *"Rightful, or legitimate property of
another,"* he stated, *"will by only that which **you** are content to
recognise as such. If your content ceases, then this property has lost
legitimacy for you, and you will laugh at absolute right to it."* After
all, *"what well-founded objection could be made against theft"* [p. 278
and p. 251] He was well aware that inequality was only possible as long
as the masses were convinced of the sacredness of property. In this way,
the majority end up without property:

> "Property in the civic sense means **sacred** property, such that I
> must **respect** your property . . . Be it ever so little, if one only
> has somewhat of his own - to wit, a **respected** property: The more
> such owners . . . the more 'free people and good patriots' has the
> State.
>
> "Political liberalism, like everything religious, counts on
> **respect**, humaneness, the virtues of love . . . For in practice
> people respect nothing, and everyday the small possessions are bought
> up again by greater proprietors, and the 'free people' change into day
> labourers." [p. 248]

Thus free competition *"is not 'free,' because I lack the **things** for
competition."* Due to this basic inequality of wealth (of "things"),
*"[u]nder the **regime** of the commonality the labourers always fall
into the hands of the possessors . . . of the capitalists, therefore.
The labourer cannot **realise** on his labour to the extent of the value
that it has for the customer."* [p. 262 and p. 115] In other words, the
working class is exploited by the capitalists and landlords.

Moreover, it is the exploitation of labour which is the basis of the
state, for the state *"rests on the **slavery of labour.** If **labour
becomes free**, the State is lost."* Without surplus value to feed off,
a state could not exist. For Stirner, the state is the greatest threat
to his individuality: *"**I** am free in **no** State."* This is because
the state claims to be sovereign over a given area, while, for Stirner,
only the ego can be sovereign over itself and that which it uses (its
*"property"*): *"I am my **own** only when I am master of myself."* Thus
the state *"is not thinkable without lordship and servitude
(subjection); for the State must will to be the lord of all that it
embraces."* Stirner also warned against the illusion in thinking that
political liberty means that the state need not be a cause of concern
for *"[p]olitical liberty means that the **polis**, the State, is free;
. . . not, therefore, that I am free of the State. . . It does not mean
**my** liberty, but the liberty of a power that rules and subjugates me;
it means that one of my **despots** . . . is free."* [p. 116, p. 226, p.
169, p. 195 and p. 107]

Therefore Stirner urges insurrection against all forms of authority and
**dis**-respect for property. For *"[i]f man reaches the point of losing
respect for property, everyone will have property, as all slaves become
free men as soon as they no longer respect the master as master."* And
in order for labour to become free, all must have *"property."* *"The
poor become free and proprietors only when they **rise.**"* Thus, *"[i]f
we want no longer to leave the land to the landed proprietors, but to
appropriate it to ourselves, we unite ourselves to this end, form a
union, a **société**, that makes **itself** proprietor . . . we can
drive them out of many another property yet, in order to make it **our**
property, the property of the -- **conquerors**."* Thus property
*"deserves the attacks of the Communists and Proudhon: it is untenable,
because the civic proprietor is in truth nothing but a propertyless man,
one who is everywhere **shut out**. Instead of owning the world, as he
might, he does not own even the paltry point on which he turns around."*
[p. 258, p. 260, p. 249 and pp. 248-9]

Stirner recognises the importance of self-liberation and the way that
authority often exists purely through its acceptance by the governed. As
he argues, *"no thing is sacred of itself, but my **declaring it
sacred,** by my declaration, my judgement, my bending the knee; in
short, by my conscience."* It is from this worship of what society deems
*"sacred"* that individuals must liberate themselves in order to
discover their true selves. And, significantly, part of this process of
liberation involves the destruction of **hierarchy.** For Stirner,
*"Hierarchy is domination of thoughts, domination of mind!,"* and this
means that we are *"kept down by those who are supported by thoughts."*
[p. 72 and p. 74] That is, by our own willingness to not question
authority and the sources of that authority, such as private property
and the state:

> *"Proudhon calls property 'robbery' (**le vol**) But alien property --
> and he is talking of this alone -- is not less existent by
> renunciation, cession, and humility; it is a **present**. Who so
> sentimentally call for compassion as a poor victim of robbery, when
> one is just a foolish, cowardly giver of presents? Why here again put
> the fault on others as if they were robbing us, while we ourselves do
> bear the fault in leaving the others unrobbed? The poor are to blame
> for there being rich men."* [p. 315]

For those, like modern-day "libertarian" capitalists, who regard
"profit" as the key to "selfishness," Stirner has nothing but contempt.
Because "greed" is just one part of the ego, and to spend one's life
pursuing only that part is to deny all other parts. Stirner called such
pursuit *"self-sacrificing,"* or a *"one-sided, unopened, narrow
egoism,"* which leads to the ego being possessed by one aspect of
itself. For *"he who ventures everything else for **one thing,** one
object, one will, one passion . . . is ruled by a passion to which he
brings the rest as sacrifices."* [p. 76]

For the true egoist, capitalists are *"self-sacrificing"* in this sense,
because they are driven only by profit. In the end, their behaviour is
just another form of self-denial, as the worship of money leads them to
slight other aspects of themselves such as empathy and critical thought
(the bank balance becomes the rule book). A society based on such
"egoism" ends up undermining the egos which inhabit it, deadening one's
own and other people's individuality and so reducing the vast potential
"utility" of others to oneself. In addition, the drive for profit is not
even based on self-interest, it is forced upon the individual by the
workings of the market (an alien authority) and results in labour
*"claim[ing] all our time and toil,"* leaving no time for the individual
*"to take comfort in himself as the unique."* [pp. 268-9]

Stirner also turns his analysis to "socialism" and "communism," and his
critique is as powerful as the one he directs against capitalism. This
attack, for some, gives his work an appearance of being pro-capitalist,
while, as indicated above, it is not. Stirner did attack socialism, but
he (rightly) attacked **state** socialism, not libertarian socialism,
which did not really exist at that time (the only well known anarchist
work at the time was Proudhon's **What is Property?**, published in 1840
and this work obviously could not fully reflect the developments within
anarchism that were to come). He also indicated why moralistic (or
altruistic) socialism is doomed to failure, and laid the foundations of
the theory that socialism will work only on the basis of egoism
(communist-egoism, as it is sometimes called). Stirner correctly pointed
out that much of what is called socialism was nothing but warmed up
liberalism, and as such ignores the individual: *"Whom does the liberal
look upon as his equal? Man! . . ., In other words, he sees in you, not
**you**, but the **species.**"* A socialism that ignores the individual
consigns itself to being state capitalism, nothing more. "Socialists" of
this school forget that "society" is made up of individuals and that it
is individuals who work, think, love, play and enjoy themselves. Thus:
*"That society is no ego at all, which could give, bestow, or grant, but
an instrument or means, from which we may derive benefit . . . of this
the socialists do not think, because they -- as liberals -- are
imprisoned in the religious principle and zealously aspire after -- a
sacred society, such as the State was hitherto."* [p. 123]

Of course, for the egoist libertarian communism can be just as much an
option as any other socio-political regime. As Stirner stressed, egoism
*"is not hostile to the tenderest of cordiality . . . nor of socialism:
in short, it is not inimical to any interest: it excludes no interest.
It simply runs counter to un-interest and to the uninteresting: it is
not against love but against sacred love . . . not against socialists,
but against the sacred socialists."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1,
p. 23] After all, if it aids the individual then Stirner had no more
problems with libertarian communism that, say, rulers or exploitation.
Yet this position does not imply that egoism tolerates the latter.
Stirner's argument is, of course, that those who are subject to either
have an interest in ending both and should unite with those in the same
position to end it rather than appealing to the good will of those in
power. As such, it goes without saying that those who find in egoism
fascistic tendencies are fundamentally wrong. Fascism, like any class
system, aims for the elite to rule and provides various spooks for the
masses to ensure this (the nation, tradition, property, and so on).
Stirner, on the other hand, urges an universal egoism rather than one
limited to just a few. In other words, he would wish those subjected to
fascistic domination to reject such spooks and to unite and rise against
those oppressing them:

> *"Well, who says that every one can do everything? What are you there
> for, pray, you who do not need to put up with everything? Defend
> yourself, and no one will do anything to you! He who would break your
> will has to do with you, and is your **enemy**. Deal with him as such.
> If there stand behind you for your protection some millions more, then
> you are an imposing power and will have an easy victory."* [p. 197]

That Stirner's desire for individual autonomy becomes transferred into
support for rulership for the few and subjection for the many by many of
his critics simply reflects the fact we are conditioned by class society
to accept such rule as normal -- and hope that our masters will be kind
and subscribe to the same spooks they inflict on their subjects. It is
true, of course, that a narrow "egoism" would accept and seek such
relationships of domination but such a perspective is not Stirner's.
This can be seen from how Stirner's egoist vision could fit with social
anarchist ideas.

The key to understanding the connection lies in Stirner's idea of the
*"union of egoists,"* his proposed alternative mode of organising
society. Stirner believed that as more and more people become egoists,
conflict in society will decrease as each individual recognises the
uniqueness of others, thus ensuring a suitable environment within which
they can co-operate (or find *"truces"* in the *"war of all against
all"*). These *"truces"* Stirner termed **"Unions of Egoists."** They
are the means by which egoists could, firstly, *"annihilate"* the state,
and secondly, destroy its creature, private property, since they would
*"multiply the individual's means and secure his assailed property."*
[p. 258]

The unions Stirner desires would be based on free agreement, being
spontaneous and voluntary associations drawn together out of the mutual
interests of those involved, who would *"care best for their welfare if
they **unite** with others."* [p. 309] The unions, unlike the state,
exist to ensure what Stirner calls *"intercourse,"* or *"union"* between
individuals. To better understand the nature of these associations,
which will replace the state, Stirner lists the relationships between
friends, lovers, and children at play as examples. [**No Gods, No
Masters**, vol. 1, p. 25] These illustrate the kinds of relationships
that maximise an individual's self-enjoyment, pleasure, freedom, and
individuality, as well as ensuring that those involved sacrifice nothing
while belonging to them. Such associations are based on mutuality and a
free and spontaneous co-operation between equals. As Stirner puts it,
*"intercourse is mutuality, it is the action, the **commercium,** of
individuals."* [p. 218] Its aim is *"pleasure"* and *"self-enjoyment."*
Thus Stirner sought a broad egoism, one which appreciated others and
their uniqueness, and so criticised the narrow egoism of people who
forgot the wealth others are:

> *"But that would be a man who does not know and cannot appreciate any
> of the delights emanating from an interest taken in others, from the
> consideration shown to others. That would be a man bereft of
> innumerable pleasures, a wretched character . . . would he not be a
> wretched egoist, rather than a genuine Egoist? . . . The person who
> loves a human being is, by virtue of that love, a wealthier man that
> someone else who loves no one."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p.
> 23]

In order to ensure that those involved do not sacrifice any of their
uniqueness and freedom, the contracting parties have to have roughly the
same bargaining power and the association created must be based on
self-management (i.e. equality of power). Only under self-management can
all participate in the affairs of the union and express their
individuality. Otherwise, we have to assume that some of the egoists
involved will stop being egoists and will allow themselves to be
dominated by another, which is unlikely. As Stirner himself argued:

> "But is an association, wherein most members allow themselves to be
> lulled as regards their most natural and most obvious interests,
> actually an Egoist's association? Can they really be 'Egoists' who
> have banded together when one is a slave or a serf of the other?. . .
> "Societies wherein the needs of some are satisfied at the expense of
> the rest, where, say, some may satisfy their need for rest thanks to
> the fact that the rest must work to the point of exhaustion, and can
> lead a life of ease because others live in misery and perish of
> hunger, or indeed who live a life of dissipation because others are
> foolish enough to live in indigence, etc., such societies . . . [are]
> more of a religious society, a communion held as sacrosanct by right,
> by law and by all the pomp and circumstance of the courts." [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 24]

Therefore, egoism's revolt against all hierarchies that restrict the ego
logically leads to the end of authoritarian social relationships,
particularly those associated with private property and the state. Given
that capitalism is marked by extensive differences in bargaining power
outside its "associations" (i.e. firms) and power within these
"associations" (i.e. the worker/boss hierarchy), from an egoist point of
view it is in the self-interest of those subjected to such relationships
to get rid of them and replace them with unions based on mutuality, free
association, and self-management. Ultimately, Stirner stresses that it
is in the workers' **self-interest** to free themselves from both state
and capitalist oppression. Sounding like an anarcho-syndicalist, Stirner
recognised the potential for strike action as a means of
self-liberation:

> *"The labourers have the most enormous power in their hands, and, if
> they once become thoroughly conscious of it and used it, nothing could
> withstand them; they would only have to stop labour, regard the
> product of labour as theirs, and enjoy it. This is the sense of the
> labour disturbances which show themselves here and there."* [p. 116]

Given the holistic and egalitarian nature of the union of egoists, it
can be seen that it shares little with the so-called free agreements of
capitalism (in particular wage labour). The hierarchical structure of
capitalist firms hardly produces associations in which the individual's
experiences can be compared to those involved in friendship or play, nor
do they involve equality. An essential aspect of the *"union of
egoists"* for Stirner was such groups should be "owned" by their
members, not the members by the group. That points to a **libertarian**
form of organisation within these "unions" (i.e. one based on equality
and participation), **not** a hierarchical one. If you have no say in
how a group functions (as in wage slavery, where workers have the
"option" of "love it or leave it") then you can hardly be said to own
it, can you? Indeed, Stirner argues, for *"[o]nly in the union can you
assert yourself as unique, because the union does not possess you, but
you possess it or make it of use to you."* [p. 312]

Thus, Stirner's *"union of egoists"* cannot be compared to the
employer-employee contract as the employees cannot be said to "own" the
organisation resulting from the contract (nor do they own themselves
during work time, having sold their labour/liberty to the boss in return
for wages -- see [section B.4](secB4.html)). Only within a participatory
association can you *"assert"* yourself freely and subject your maxims,
and association, to your *"ongoing criticism"* -- in capitalist
contracts you can do both only with your bosses' permission.

And by the same token, capitalist contracts do not involve "leaving each
other alone" (a la "anarcho"-capitalism). No boss will "leave alone" the
workers in his factory, nor will a landowner "leave alone" a squatter on
land he owns but does not use. Stirner rejects the narrow concept of
"property" as private property and recognises the **social** nature of
"property," whose use often affects far more people than those who claim
to "own" it: *"I do not step shyly back from your property, but look
upon it always as **my** property, in which I 'respect' nothing. Pray do
the like with what you call my property!"* [p. 248] This view logically
leads to the idea of both workers' self-management and grassroots
community control (as will be discussed more fully in [section
I](secIcon.html)) as those affected by an activity will take a direct
interest in it and not let "respect" for "private" property allow them
to be oppressed by others.

Moreover, egoism (self-interest) must lead to self-management and mutual
aid (solidarity), for by coming to agreements based on mutual respect
and social equality, we ensure non-hierarchical relationships. If I
dominate someone, then in all likelihood I will be dominated in turn. By
removing hierarchy and domination, the ego is free to experience and
utilise the full potential of others. As Kropotkin argued in **Mutual
Aid**, individual freedom and social co-operation are not only
compatible but, when united, create the most productive conditions for
all individuals within society.

Stirner reminds the social anarchist that communism and collectivism are
not sought for their own sake but to ensure individual freedom and
enjoyment. As he argued: *"But should competition some day disappear,
because concerted effort will have been acknowledged as more beneficial
than isolation, then will not every single individual inside the
associations be equally egoistic and out for his own interests?"* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 22] This is because competition has its drawbacks, for
*"[r]estless acquisition does not let us take breath, take a calm
**enjoyment**. We do not get the comfort of our possessions. . . Hence
it is at any rate helpful that we come to an agreement about **human**
labours that they may not, as under competition, claim all our time and
toil."* [p. 268] In other words, in the market only the market is free
not those subject to its pressures and necessities -- an important
truism which defenders of capitalism always ignore.

Forgetting about the individual was, for Stirner, the key problem with
the forms of communism he was familiar with and so this *"organisation
of labour touches only such labours as others can do for us . . . the
rest remain egoistic, because no one can in your stead elaborate your
musical compositions, carry out your projects of painting, etc.; nobody
can replace Raphael's labours. The latter are labours of a unique
person, which only he is competent to achieve."* He went on to ask *"for
whom is time to be gained [by association]? For what does man require
more time than is necessary to refresh his wearied powers of labour?
Here Communism is silent."* Unlike egoism, which answers: *"To take
comfort in himself as unique, after he has done his part as man!"* In
other words, competition *"has a continued existence"* because *"all do
not attend to **their affair** and come to an **understanding** with
each other about it."* [p. 269 and p. 275] As can be seen from Chapter 8
of Kropotkin's **Conquest of Bread** (*"The Need for Luxury"*),
communist-anarchism builds upon this insight, arguing that communism is
required to ensure that all individuals have the time and energy to
pursue their own unique interests and dreams (see [section
I.4](secI4.html)).

Stirner notes that socialising property need not result in genuine
freedom if it is not rooted in individual use and control. He states
*"the lord is proprietor. Choose then whether you want to be lord, or
whether society shall be!"* He notes that many communists of his time
attacked alienated property but did not stress that the aim was to
ensure access for all individuals. *"Instead of transforming the alien
into own,"* Stirner noted, *"they play impartial and ask only that all
property be left to a third party, such as human society. They
revindicate the alien not in their own name, but in a third party's"*
Ultimately, of course, under libertarian communism it is not "society"
which uses the means of life but individuals and associations of
individuals. As Stirner stressed: *"Neither God nor Man ('human
society') is proprietor, but the individual."* [p. 313, p. 315 and p.
251] This is why social anarchists have always stressed self-management
-- only that can bring collectivised property into the hands of those
who utilise it. Stirner places the focus on decision making back where
it belongs -- in the individuals who make up a given community rather
than abstractions like "society."

Therefore Stirner's union of egoists has strong connections with social
anarchism's desire for a society based on freely federated individuals,
co-operating as equals. His central idea of "property" -- that which is
used by the ego -- is an important concept for social anarchism because
it stresses that hierarchy develops when we let ideas and organisations
own us rather than vice versa. A participatory anarchist community will
be made up of individuals who must ensure that it remains their
"property" and be under their control; hence the importance of
decentralised, confederal organisations which ensure that control. A
free society must be organised in such a way to ensure the free and full
development of individuality and maximise the pleasure to be gained from
individual interaction and activity. Lastly, Stirner indicates that
mutual aid and equality are based not upon an abstract morality but upon
self-interest, both for defence against hierarchy and for the pleasure
of co-operative intercourse between unique individuals.

Stirner demonstrates brilliantly how abstractions and fixed ideas
(*"spooks"*) influence the very way we think, see ourselves, and act. He
shows how hierarchy has its roots within our own minds, in how we view
the world. He offers a powerful defence of individuality in an
authoritarian and alienated world, and places subjectivity at the centre
of any revolutionary project, where it belongs. Finally, he reminds us
that a free society must exist in the interests of all, and must be
based upon the self-fulfilment, liberation and enjoyment of the
individual.
