H.2.16 Does the Spanish Revolution show the failure of anarchism?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The actions of the anarchists of the CNT and FAI during the Spanish
Civil War is almost always mentioned by Marxists when they attack
anarchism. Take, for example, Pat Stack:

> "This question of state power, and which class holds it, was to prove
> crucial for revolutionaries during the Spanish Civil War and in
> particular during the revolutionary upheavals in Catalonia. Here
> anarchism faced its greatest test and greatest opportunity, yet it
> failed the former and therefore missed the latter.
> "When the government in the region under the leadership of Companys
> admitted its impotence and offered to dissolve, effectively handing
> power to the revolutionary forces, the anarchists turned them down.
> CNT leader and FAI . . . militant Garcia Oliver explained, 'The CNT
> and the FAI decided on collaboration and democracy, renouncing
> revolutionary totalitarianism which would lead to the strangulation of
> the revolution by the anarchist and Confederal dictatorship. We had to
> choose, between Libertarian Communism, which meant anarchist
> dictatorship, and democracy, which meant collaboration.' The choice
> was between leaving the state intact and paving the way for Franco's
> victory or building a workers' government in Catalonia which could act
> as a focal point for the defeat of Franco and the creation of the
> structures of a new workers' state. In choosing the former the
> anarchists were refusing to distinguish between a capitalist state and
> a workers' state . . . The movement that started by refusing to build
> a workers' state ended up by recognising a capitalist one and
> betraying the revolution in the process." [*"Anarchy in the UK?"*,
> **Socialist Review**, no. 246]

There are four key flaws in this kind of argument. First, there is the
actual objective situation in which the decision to collaborate was made
in. Strangely, for all his talk of anarchists ignoring *"material
conditions"* when we discuss the Russian revolution, Stack fails to
mention any when he discusses the decisions of the Spanish Anarchists.
As such, his critique is pure idealism, without any attempt to ground it
in the objective circumstances facing the CNT and FAI. Second, the quote
provided as the only evidence for Stack's analysis dates from a year
**after** the decision was made. Rather than reflect the actual concerns
of the CNT and FAI at the time, they reflect the attempts of the leaders
of an organisation which had significantly departed from its libertarian
principles to justify their actions. While this obviously suits Stack's
idealist analysis of events, its use can be flawed for this reason.
Thirdly, clearly the decision of the CNT and FAI **ignored** anarchist
theory. As such, it seems ironic to blame anarchism when anarchists
ignores its recommendations, yet this is what Stack argues. Lastly,
there is the counter-example of Aragon, which clearly refutes Stack's
analysis.

To understand why the CNT and FAI made the decisions it did, it is
necessary to do what Stack fails to do, namely to provide some context.
The decision to ignore anarchist theory, ignore the state rather than
smashing it and work with other anti-fascist organisations was made
immediately after the army had been defeated on the streets of Barcelona
on the 20th of July, 1936. It is this fact, the success of a popular
insurrection in one region against a **nation wide** military coup,
which helps place the CNT's decisions into context. Catalonia is but one
region in Spain. While the CNT had great strength, it was not uniform.
Some areas, such as around Madrid and in Asturias, the socialist UGT was
stronger (although the CNT had been making inroads in both areas).

This meant any decision to introduce libertarian communism in Catalonia
would have, in all likelihood, meant isolation within Republican Spain
and the possibility that the CNT would have to fight both the Republican
state **as well as** Franco. So the decision to collaborate was
obviously driven by fear of Franco and the concern not to divide the
forces fighting him. As a 1937 CNT report put it, the union had a
*"difficult alternative: to completely destroy the state, to declare war
against the Rebels, the government, foreign capitalists . . . or
collaborating."* [quoted by Robert Alexander, **The Anarchists in the
Spanish Civil War**, vol. 2, p. 1156]

As such, the **real** choice facing the CNT was not *"between leaving
the state intact . . . or building a workers' government in Catalonia
which could act as a focal point for the defeat of Franco"* but rather
something drastically different. Either work with other anti-fascists
against Franco so ensuring unity against the common enemy and implement
anarchism after victory **or** immediately implement libertarian
communism and possibly face a conflict on two fronts, against Franco
**and** the Republic (and, possibly, imperialist intervention against
the social revolution). This situation made the CNT-FAI decide to
collaborate with other anti-fascist groups in the Catalan **Central
Committee of Anti-Fascist Militias**. To downplay these objective
factors and simply blame the decision on anarchist politics is a joke.
This dilemma was the one which was driving the decisions of the CNT
leadership, **not** any failings in anarchist politics.

Similarly, the Garica Oliver quote provided by Stack dated from July
1937. They were made as justifications of CNT-FAI actions and were
designed for political effect. They cannot be taken at face value as
they are totally contradictory. He was arguing that libertarian
communism (a society based on directly democratic free associations
organised and run from the bottom up) was an *"anarchist dictatorship"*
and **less** democratic than the capitalist Republic he had been
fighting against between 1931 and 1936! Moreover, libertarian communism
**was** the revolution. As such, to choose it over capitalist democracy
to stop *"the strangulation of the revolution"* makes no sense, as the
revolution which was created by the rank-and-file of the anarchist
movement after the defeat of Franco was based on libertarian communist
ideas and ideals!

It is safe to take Garica Oliver's words with a large pinch of salt. To
rely upon them for an analysis of the actions of the Spanish Anarchists
or the failings of anarchism suggests an extremely superficial
perspective. This is particularly the case when we look at both the
history of the CNT and anarchist theory. As noted in [section
H.1.4](secH1.html#sech14), according to anarchist ideas, the social
revolution, to quote Bakunin, must *"totally destroy the State,"*
expropriate capital and the land *"on behalf of workers' associations"*
and create *"the federative Alliance of all working men's associations"*
which *"will constitute the Commune."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected
Writings**, p. 170] As can be seen, the CNT ignored these
recommendations. Given that the CNT did **not** destroy the state, nor
create a federation of workers' councils, then how can anarchist theory
be blamed? It seems strange to point to the failure of anarchists to
apply their politics as an example of the failure of those politics, yet
this is what Stack is doing.

As we discuss in [section I.8.11](secI8.html#seci811), the CNT
leadership, going against anarchist theory, decided to postpone the
revolution until **after** Franco was defeated. As the Catalan CNT
leadership put it in August 1936:

> "Reports have also been received from other regions. There has been
> some talk about the impatience of some comrades who wish to go further
> than crushing fascism, but for the moment the situation in Spain as a
> whole is extremely delicate. In revolutionary terms, Catalonia is an
> oasis within Spain.
> "Obviously no one can foresee the changes which may follow the civil
> war and the conquest of that part of Spain which is still under the
> control of mutinous reactionaries." [quoted by Jose Peirats, **The CNT
> in the Spanish Revolution**, vol. 1, pp. 151-2]

As can be seen, concern that Catalonia would be isolated from the rest
of the Republic is foremost in their minds. Equally, there is the
acknowledgement that many CNT members were applying anarchist politics
by fighting fascism via a revolutionary war. This can be seen by the
rank and file of the CNT and FAI ignoring the decision to "postpone" the
revolution in favour of an anti-fascist war. All across Republican
Spain, workers and peasants started to expropriate capital and the land,
placing it under workers' self-management. They did so on their own
initiative. They also applied anarchist ideas in full in Aragon, where
the **Council of Aragon** was created in October 1936 at a meeting of
delegates from CNT unions, village collectives and militia columns. In
other words, the creation of a federation of workers' associations as
argued by Bakunin. Little wonder Stack fails to mention what happened in
Aragon: it would undermine his argument against anarchism to mention it.

To contrast Catalonia and Aragon shows the weakness of Stack's argument.
The same organisation, with the same politics, yet different results.
How can anarchist ideas be blamed for what happened in Catalonia when
they had been applied in Aragon? Such a position could not be logically
argued and, unsurprisingly, Aragon usually fails to get mentioned by
Marxists when discussing Anarchism during the Spanish Civil War. The
continuity of what happened in Aragon with the ideas of anarchism and
the CNT's 1936 Zaragoza Resolution on Libertarian Communism is clear.

In summary, how could anarchism have *"failed"* during the Spanish
Revolution when it was ignored in Catalonia (for fear of fascism) and
applied in Aragon? How can it be argued that anarchist politics were to
blame when those very same politics had formed the Council of Aragon? It
cannot. Simply put, the Spanish Civil War showed the failure of certain
anarchists to apply their ideas in a difficult situation rather than the
failure of anarchism.

Needless to say, Stack also claims that the **Friends of Durruti** group
developed towards Marxism. As he puts it:

> *"Interestingly the one Spanish anarchist group that developed the
> most sophisticated critique of all this was the Friends of Durutti
> [sic!]. As [Trotskyist] Felix Morrow points out, 'They represented a
> conscious break with the anti-statism of traditional anarchism. They
> explicitly declared the need for democratic organs of power, juntas or
> soviets, in the overthrow of capitalism, and the necessary state
> measures of repression against the counter-revolution.' The failure of
> the Spanish anarchists to understand exactly that these were the stark
> choices‚ workers' power, or capitalist power followed by reaction."*

That Stack could not bother to spell Durruti's name correctly shows how
seriously we should take this analysis. The **Friends of Durruti** (FoD)
were an anarchist grouping within the CNT and FAI which, like a large
minority of others, strongly and consistently opposed the policy of
anti-fascist unity. Rather than signify a *"conscious break"* with
anarchism, it signified a conscious **return** to it. This can be
clearly seen when we compare their arguments to those of Bakunin. As
noted by Stack, the FoD argued for *"juntas"* in the overthrow of
capitalism and to defend against counter-revolution. Yet this was
**exactly** what revolutionary anarchists have argued for since Bakunin
(see [section H.2.1](secH2.html#sech21) for details). The continuity of
the ideas of the FoD with the pre-Civil War politics of the CNT and the
ideas of revolutionary anarchism are clear. As such, the FoD were simply
arguing for a return to the traditional positions of anarchism and
cannot be considered to have broken with it. If Stack or Morrow knew
anything about anarchism, then they would have known this.

As such, the failure of the Spanish anarchists was not the *"stark
choice"* between *"workers' power"* and *"capitalist power"* but rather
the making of the wrong choice in the real dilemma of introducing
anarchism (which would, by definition, be based on workers' power,
organisation and self-management) or collaborating with other
anti-fascist groups in the struggle against the greater enemy of Franco
(i.e. fascist reaction). That Stack does not see this suggests that he
simply has no appreciation of the dynamics of the Spanish Revolution and
prefers abstract sloganeering to a serious analysis of the problems
facing it.

Stack ends by summarising:

> *"The most important lesson . . . is that whatever ideals and gut
> instincts individual anarchists may have, anarchism, both in word and
> deed, fails to provide a roadworthy vehicle for human liberation. Only
> Marxism, which sees the centrality of the working class under the
> leadership of a political party, is capable of leading the working
> class to victory."*

As a useful antidote to these claims, we need simply quote Trotsky on
what the Spanish anarchists should have done. In his words: *"Because
the leaders of the CNT renounced dictatorship **for themselves** they
left the place open for the Stalinist dictatorship."* Hardly an example
of "workers' power"! Or, as he put it earlier in the same year, a
*"revolutionary party, even having seized power (of which the anarchist
leaders were incapable in spite of the heroism of the anarchist
workers), is still by no means the sovereign ruler of society."* [our
emphasis, **Writings 1936-7**, p. 514 and p. 488] Rather than seeing
*"democratic organs of power, juntas or soviets, in the overthrow of
capitalism"* as being the key issue, Trotsky considered the party as
being the decisive factor. At best, such organs would be used to achieve
party power and would simply be a fig-leaf for its rule (see [section
H.3.11](secH3.html#sech311) for more on this).

Clearly, the leading Marxist at the time was not arguing for the
*"centrality of the working class under the leadership of a political
party."* He was arguing for the dictatorship of a "revolutionary" party
***over*** the working class. Rather than the working class being
"central" to the running of a revolutionary regime, Trotsky saw the
party taking that position. What sort of *"victory"* is possible when
the party has dictatorial power over the working class and the
*"sovereign ruler"* of society? Simply the kind of "victory" that leads
to Stalinism.

Anarchists reject this vision. They also reject the first step along
this path, namely the identification of party power with workers' power.
Simply put, if the "revolutionary" party is in power then the working
class is not. Rather than seeing working class organisations as the
means by which working people run society, Leninists see them purely in
instrumental terms - the means by which the party can seize power. As
the Russian Revolution proved beyond doubt, in a conflict between
workers' power and party power Leninists will suppress the former to
ensure the latter.

To paraphrase Stack, the most important lesson from both the Russian and
Spanish revolutions is that whatever ideals and gut instincts individual
Leninists may have, Leninism, both in word and deed, fails to provide a
roadworthy vehicle for human liberation. Only Anarchism, which sees the
centrality of the working class self-management of the class struggle
and revolution, is capable of ensuring the creation of a real, free,
socialist society.

Therefore, rather than see the failure of anarchism, the Spanish
Revolution showed the failure of anarchists to apply their politics due
to exceptionally difficult objective circumstances, a mistake which
almost all anarchists acknowledge and have learned from. This does not
justify the decision, rather it helps to explain it. Moreover, the
Spanish Revolution also has a clear example of anarchism being applied
in the Council of Aragon. As such, it is hard to blame anarchism for the
failure of the CNT when the same organisation applied its ideas
successfully there. Simply put, Marxist claims that the Spanish
Revolution shows the failure of anarchist ideas are not only wrong, they
are extremely superficial and not rooted in the objective circumstances
of the time.

Lastly, it could be argued that our critique of the standard Leninist
attack on anarchism during the Spanish Revolution is similar to that
presented by Leninists to justify Bolshevik authoritarianism during the
Russian one. After all, Leninists like Stack point to the objective
circumstances facing Lenin's regime - its isolation, civil war and
economic problems - as explaining its repressive actions. However, this
is not the case as the defeat of the Spanish Revolution was due to
anarchists **not** applying our ideas while, for Russia, it was due to
the Bolsheviks **applying** their ideology. The difficulties that faced
the Russian Revolution pushed the Bolsheviks further down the road they
where already travelling down (not to mention that Bolshevik ideology
significantly contributed to making many of these problem worse). As we
discuss in [section H.6](secH6.html), the notion that "objective
circumstances" explains Bolshevik tyranny is simply unconvincing,
particularly given the role Bolshevik ideology played in this process.

For more discussion of the Spanish Revolution and its lessons for
anarchists, see [section I.8](secI8.html). In addition, the appendix
*["Marxists and Spanish Anarchism"](append32.html)* has a much fuller
discussion of this issue (including whether the **Friends of Durruti**
broke with anarchism).
