H.1 Have anarchists always opposed state socialism?
===================================================

Yes. Anarchists have always argued that real socialism cannot be created
using a state. The basic core of the argument is simple. Socialism
implies equality, yet the state signifies inequality - inequality in
terms of power. As we argued in [section B.2](secB2.html), anarchists
consider one of the defining aspects of the state is its hierarchical
nature. In other words, the delegation of **power** into the hands of a
few. As such, it violates a core idea of socialism, namely social
equality. Those who make up the governing bodies in a state have more
power than those who have elected them (see [section I.1](secI1.html)).

It is with this perspective that anarchists have combated the idea of
state socialism and Marxism (although we should stress that libertarian
forms of Marxism, such as council communism, have strong similarities to
anarchism). In the case of the Russian Revolution, the anarchists were
amongst the first on the left to be suppressed by the Bolsheviks.
Indeed, the history of Marxism is, in part, a history of its struggles
against anarchists just as the history of anarchism is also, in part, a
history of its struggle against the various forms of Marxism and its
offshoots.

While both Stirner and Proudhon wrote many pages against the evils and
contradictions of state socialism, anarchists have only really been
fighting the Marxist form of state socialism since Bakunin. This is
because, until the First International, Marx and Engels were relatively
unknown socialist thinkers. Proudhon was aware of Marx (they had meant
in France in the 1840s and had corresponded) but Marxism was unknown in
France during his life time and so Proudhon did not directly argue
against Marxism (he did, however, critique Louis Blanc and other French
state socialists). Similarly, when Stirner wrote **The Ego and Its Own**
Marxism did not exist bar a few works by Marx and Engels. Indeed, it
could be argued that Marxism finally took shape after Marx and Engels
had read Stirner's classic work and produced their notoriously
inaccurate diatribe, **The German Ideology**, against him. However, like
Proudhon, Stirner attacked **other** state socialists and communists.

Before discussing Bakunin's opposition and critique of Marxism in the
[next section](secH1.html#sech11), we should consider the thoughts of
Stirner and Proudhon on state socialism. These critiques contain may
important ideas and so are worth summarising. However, it is worth
noting that when both Stirner and Proudhon were writing communist ideas
were all authoritarian in nature. Libertarian communism only developed
after Bakunin's death in 1876. This means that when Proudhon and Stirner
were critiquing "communism" they were attacking a specific form of
communism, the form which subordinated the individual to the community.
Anarchist communists like Kropotkin and Malatesta also opposed such
kinds of "communism" (as Kropotkin put it, *"before and in 1848"*
communism *"was put forward in such a shape as to fully account for
Proudhon's distrust as to its effect upon liberty. The old idea of
Communism was the idea of monastic communities . . . The last vestiges
of liberty and of individual energy would be destroyed, if humanity ever
had to go through such a communism."* [**Act for Yourselves**, p. 98]).
Of course, it may be likely that Stirner and Proudhon would have
rejected libertarian communism as well, but bear in mind that not all
forms of "communism" are identical.

For Stirner, the key issue was that communism (or socialism), like
liberalism, looked to the *"human"* rather than the unique. *"To be
looked upon as a mere **part**, part of society,"* asserted Stirner,
*"the individual cannot bear - because he is **more**; his uniqueness
puts from it this limited conception."* As such, his protest against
socialism was similar to his protest against liberalism (indeed, he drew
attention to their similarity by calling it *"social liberalism"*).
Stirner was aware that capitalism was not the great defender of freedom
it was claimed to be by its supporters. *"Restless acquisition,"* he
argued, *"does not let us take breath, take a claim **enjoyment**: we do
not get the comfort of our possessions."* Communism, by the
*"organisation of labour,"* can *"bear its fruit"* so that *"we come to
an agreement about **human** labours, that they may not, as under
competition, claim all our time and toil."* However, communism *"is
silent"* over *"for whom is time to be gained."* He, in contrast,
stresses that it is for the individual, *"To take comfort in himself as
the unique."* [**The Ego and Its Own**, p. 265 and pp. 268-9] Thus state
socialism does not recognise that the purpose of association is to free
the individual and instead subjects the individual to a new tyranny:

> *"it is not another State (such as a 'people's State') that men aim
> at, but their **union,** uniting, this ever-fluid uniting of
> everything standing - A State exists even without my co-operation . .
> . the independent establishment of the State founds my lack of
> independence; its condition as a 'natural growth,' its organism,
> demands that my nature do not grow freely, but be cut to fit it."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p. 224]

Similarly, Stirner argued that *"Communism, by the abolition of all
personal property, only presses me back still more into dependence on
another, to wit, on the generality or collectivity"* which is *"a
condition hindering my free movement, a sovereign power over me.
Communism rightly revolts against the pressure that I experience from
individual proprietors; but still more horrible is the might that it
puts in the hands of the collectivity."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 257] History
has definitely confirmed this fear. By nationalising property, the
various state socialist regimes turned the worker from a servant of the
capitalist into a serf of the state. In contrast, communist-anarchists
argue for free association and workers' self-management as the means of
ensuring that socialised property does not turn into the denial of
freedom rather than as a means of ensuring it. As such, Stirner's attack
on what Marx termed *"vulgar communism"* is still important and finds
echoes in communist-anarchist writings as well as the best works of Marx
and his more libertarian followers (see [section I.4](secI4.html) on how
libertarian communism is not *"silent"* on these matters and
incorporates Stirner's legitimate concerns and arguments).

Similar arguments to Stirner's can be found in Proudhon's works against
the various schemes of state socialism that existing in France in the
middle of the nineteenth century. He particularly attacked the ideas of
Louis Blanc. Blanc, whose most famous book was **Organisation du
Travail** (**Organisation of Work**, first published in 1840) argued
that social ills resulted from competition and they could be solved by
means of eliminating it via government initiated and financed reforms.
More specifically, Blanc argued that it was *"necessary to use the whole
power of the state"* to ensure the creation and success of workers'
associations (or *"social workshops"*). Since that *"which the
proletarians lack to free themselves are the tools of labour,"* the
government *"must furnish them"* with these. *"The state,"* in short,
*"should place itself resolutely at the head of industry."* [quoted by
K. Steven Vincent, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and the Rise of French
Republican Socialism**, p. 139] Capitalists would be encouraged to
invest money in these workshops, for which they would be guaranteed
interest payments but the workers would keep the remaining profits
generated by the workshops. Such state-initiated workshops would soon
prove to be more efficient than privately owned industry and, by
charging lower prices, force privately owned industry either out of
business or to change into social workshops, so eliminating competition.

Proudhon objected to this scheme on many levels. He argued that Blanc's
scheme appealed *"to the state for its silent partnership; that is, he
gets down on his knees before the capitalists and recognises the
sovereignty of monopoly."* Given that Proudhon saw the state as an
instrument of the capitalist class, asking that state to abolish
capitalism was illogical and impossible. Moreover, by getting the funds
for the "social workshop" from capitalists, Blanc's scheme was hardly
undermining their power. *"Capital and power,"* Proudhon argued,
*"secondary organs of society, are always the gods whom socialism
adores; if capital and power did not exist, it would invent them."*
[quoted by Vincent, **Op. Cit.**, p. 157] He stressed the authoritarian
nature of Blanc's scheme:

> *"M. Blanc is never tired of appealing to authority, and socialism
> loudly declares itself anarchistic; M. Blanc places power above
> society, and socialism tends to subordinate it to society; M. Blanc
> makes social life descend from above, and socialism maintains that it
> springs up and grows from below; M. Blanc runs after politics, and
> socialism is in quest of science. No more hypocrisy, let me say to M.
> Blanc: you desire neither Catholicism nor monarchy nor nobility, but
> you must have a God, a religion, a dictatorship, a censorship, a
> hierarchy, distinctions, and ranks. For my part, I deny your God, your
> authority, your sovereignty, your judicial State, and all your
> representative mystifications."* [**System of Economical
> Contradictions**, p. 263]

Equally, Proudhon opposed the "top-down" nature of Blanc's ideas. As it
was run by the state, the system of workshops would hardly be
libertarian as *"hierarchy would result from the elective principle . .
. as in constitutional politics. But these social workshops again,
regulated by law, - will they be anything but corporations? What is the
bond of corporations? The law. Who will make the law? The government."*
Such a regime, Proudhon argued, would be unlikely to function well and
the net result would be *"all reforms ending, now in hierarchical
corporation, now in State monopoly, or the tyranny of communism."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 269 and p. 271] This was because of the perspective of
state socialists:

> *"As you cannot conceive of society without hierarchy, you have made
> yourselves the apostles of authority; worshippers of power, you think
> only of strengthening it and muzzling liberty; your favourite maxim is
> that the welfare of the people must be achieved in spite of the
> people; instead of proceeding to social reform by the extermination of
> power and politics, you insist on a reconstruction of power and
> politics."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 397]

Instead of reform from above, Proudhon stressed the need for working
class people to organise themselves for their own liberation. As he put
it, the *"problem before the labouring classes . . . [is] not in
capturing, but in subduing both power and monopoly, - that is, in
generating from the bowels of the people, from the depths of labour, a
greater authority, a more potent fact, which shall envelop capital and
the state and subjugate them."* For, *"to combat and reduce power, to
put it in its proper place in society, it is of no use to change the
holders of power or introduce some variation into its workings: an
agricultural and industrial combination must be found by means of which
power, today the ruler of society, shall become its slave."* This was
because the state *"finds itself inevitably enchained to capital and
directed against the proletariat."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 398, p. 397 and p.
399] Unsurprisingly, Proudhon stressed in 1848 that *"the proletariat
must emancipate itself without the help of the government."* [quoted by
George Woodcock, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 125] In addition, by
guaranteeing interest payments, Blanc's scheme insured the continued
exploitation of labour by capital and, of course, while opposing
capitalist competition, Proudhon did not consider it wise to abolish all
forms of the market.

Proudhon argued for a two-way approach to undermining capitalism from
below: the creation of workers associations and the organisation of
credit. By creating mutual banks, which provided credit at cost, workers
could create associations to compete with capitalist firms, drive them
out of business and so eliminate exploitation once and for all by
workers' self-management. In this way, the working class would
emancipate itself from capitalism and build a socialist society from
below upwards by their own efforts and activities. Proudhon, as Marxist
Paul Thomas notes, *"believed fervently . . . in the salvation of
working men, by their own efforts, through economic and social action
alone . . . Proudhon advocated, and to a considerable extent inspired,
the undercutting of this terrain [of the state] from without by means of
autonomous working-class associations."* [**Karl Marx and the
Anarchists**, pp. 177-8] Rejecting violent revolution (as well as
strikes as counter-productive), Proudhon argued for economic means to
end economic exploitation and, as such, he saw anarchism as coming about
by reform (unlike later social anarchists, who were generally
revolutionaries and argued that capitalism cannot be reformed away and
so supported strikes and other forms of collective working class direct
action, struggle and combative organisation).

Unsurprisingly, Proudhon's ideas were shaped by the society in lived and
agitated in. In the mid-nineteenth century, the bulk of the French
working class were artisans and peasants and so such an approach
reflected the social context in which it was proposed. With a
predominance of small-scale industry, the notion of free credit provided
by mutual banks as the means of securing working class people access to
the means of production is theoretically feasible. It was this social
context which informed Proudhon's ideas (see [section
H.2.3](secH2.html#sech23)). He never failed to stress that association
would be tyranny if imposed upon peasants and artisans (rather, he
thought that associations would be freely embraced by these workers if
they thought it was in their interests to). However, he did not ignore
the rise of large-scale industry and explicitly proposed workers'
associations (i.e., co-operatives) for those industries which
objectively needed it (i.e. capitalist industry) and for those other
toilers who desired it. The net effect was the same, though, namely to
abolish wage labour.

It was this opposition to wage labour which drove Proudhon's critique of
state socialism. He continually stressed that state ownership of the
means of production was a danger to the liberty of the worker and simply
the continuation of capitalism with the state as the new boss. As he put
it in 1848, he *"did not want to see the State confiscate the mines,
canals and railways; that would add to monarchy, and more wage slavery.
We want the mines, canals, railways handed over to democratically
organised workers' associations . . . these associations [will] be
models for agriculture, industry and trade, the pioneering core of that
vast federation of companies and societies woven into the common cloth
of the democratic social Republic."* He contrasted workers' associations
run by and for their members to those *"subsidised, commanded and
directed by the State,"* which would crush *"all liberty and all wealth,
precisely as the great limited companies are doing."* [**No Gods, No
Masters**, vol. 1, p. 62 and p. 105]

Marx, of course, had replied to Proudhon's work **System of Economic
Contradictions** with his **Poverty of Philosophy**. However, Marx's
work aroused little interest when published although Proudhon did
carefully read and annotate his copy of it, claiming it to be *"a
libel"* and a *"tissue of abuse, calumny, falsification and plagiarism"*
(he even called Marx *"the tapeworm of Socialism."*) [quoted by
Woodcock, **Op. Cit.**, p. 102] Sadly, Proudhon did not reply publicly
to Marx's work due to an acute family crisis and then the start of the
1848 revolution in France. However, given his views of Louis Blanc and
other socialists who saw socialism being introduced after the seizing of
state power, he would hardly have been supportive of Marx's ideas.

So while none of Proudhon's and Stirner's arguments were directly aimed
at Marxism, their critiques are applicable to much of mainstream Marxism
as this inherited many of the ideas of the state socialism they
attacked. Much of their analysis was incorporated in the collectivist
and communist ideas of the anarchists that followed them (some directly,
as from Proudhon, some by co-incidence as Stirner's work was quickly
forgotten and only had an impact on the anarchist movement when he was
rediscovered in the 1890s). This can be seen from the fact that
Proudhon's ideas on the management of production by workers'
associations, opposition to nationalisation as state-capitalism and the
need for action from below by working people themselves, all found their
place in communist-anarchism and anarcho-syndicalism and in their
critique of mainstream Marxism (such as social democracy) and Leninism.
Echoes of these critiques can be found Bakunin's comments of 1868:

> *"I hate Communism because it is the negation of liberty and because
> for me humanity is unthinkable without liberty. I am not a Communist,
> because Communism concentrates and swallows up in itself for the
> benefit of the State all the forces of society, because it inevitably
> leads to the concentration of property in the hands of the State . . .
> I want to see society and collective or social property organised from
> below upwards, by way of free associations, not from above downwards,
> by means of any kind of authority whatsoever . . . That is the sense
> in which I am a Collectivist and not a Communist."* [quoted by K.J.
> Kenafick, **Michael Bakunin and Karl Marx**, pp. 67-8]

It is with Bakunin that Marxism and Anarchism came into direct conflict
as it was Bakunin who lead the struggle against Marx in the
**International Workingmen's Association** between 1868 and 1872. It was
in these exchanges that the two schools of socialism (the libertarian
and the authoritarian) clarified themselves. With Bakunin, the anarchist
critique of Marxism (and state socialism in general) starts to reach its
mature form. We discuss Bakunin's critique in the [next
section](secH1.html#sech11).

H.1.1 What was Bakunin's critique of Marxism?
---------------------------------------------

Bakunin and Marx famously clashed in the first **International Working
Men's Association** between 1868 and 1872. This conflict helped clarify
the anarchist opposition to the ideas of Marxism and can be considered
as the first major theoretical analysis and critique of Marxism by
anarchists. Later critiques followed, of course, particularly after the
degeneration of Social Democracy into reformism and the failure of the
Russian Revolution (both of which allowed the theoretical critiques to
be enriched by empirical evidence) but the Bakunin/Marx conflict laid
the ground for what came after. As such, an overview of Bakunin's
critique is essential as anarchists continued to develop and expand upon
it (particularly after the experiences of actual Marxist movements and
revolutions confirmed it).

First, however, we must stress that Marx and Bakunin had many similar
ideas. They both stressed the need for working people to organise
themselves to overthrow capitalism by a social revolution. They argued
for collective ownership of the means of production. They both
constantly stressed that the emancipation of the workers must be the
task of the workers themselves. They differed, of course, in exactly how
these common points should be implemented in practice. Both, moreover,
had a tendency to misrepresent the opinions of the other on certain
issues (particularly as their struggle reached its climax). Anarchists,
unsurprisingly, argue Bakunin has been proved right by history, so
confirming the key aspects of his critique of Marx.

So what was Bakunin's critique of Marxism? There are six main areas.
Firstly, there is the question of current activity (i.e. whether the
workers' movement should participate in "politics" and the nature of
revolutionary working class organisation). Secondly, there is the issue
of the form of the revolution (i.e. whether it should be a political
**then** an economic one, or whether it should be both at the same
time). Thirdly, there is the prediction that state socialism will be
exploitative, replacing the capitalist class with the state bureaucracy.
Fourthly, there is the issue of the "dictatorship of the proletariat."
Fifthly, there is the question of whether political power **can** be
seized by the working class as a whole or whether it can only be
exercised by a small minority. Sixthly, there was the issue of whether
the revolution be centralised or decentralised in nature. We shall
discuss each in turn.

On the issue of current struggle, the differences between Marx and
Bakunin are clear. For Marx, the proletariat had to take part in
bourgeois elections as an organised political party. As the resolution
of the (gerrymandered) Hague Congress of First International put it:
*"In its struggle against the collective power of the propertied classes
the proletariat cannot act as a class except by constituting itself a
political party, distinct from and opposed to, all old parties formed by
the propertied classes . . . The conquest of political power has
therefore become the great duty of the working class."* [**Collected
Works**, vol. 23, p. 243]

This political party must stand for elections and win votes. As Marx
argued in the preamble of the French Workers' Party, the workers must
turn the franchise *"from a means of deception . . . into an instrument
of emancipation."* This can be considered as part of the process
outlined in the **Communist Manifesto**, where it was argued that the
*"immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all the other
proletarian parties,"* namely the *"conquest of political power by the
proletariat,"* the *"first step in the revolution by the working class"*
being *"to raise the proletariat to the position of ruling class, to win
the battle of democracy."* Engels later stressed (in 1895) that the
*"**Communist Manifesto** had already proclaimed the winning of
universal suffrage, of democracy, as one of the first and most important
tasks of the militant proletariat"* and that German Social Democracy had
showed workers of all countries *"how to make use of universal
suffrage."* [**Marx and Engels Reader**, p. 566, p. 484, p. 490 and p.
565]

With this analysis in mind, Marxist influenced political parties have
consistently argued for and taken part in election campaigns, seeking
office as a means of spreading socialist ideas and as a means of
pursuing the socialist revolution. The Social Democratic parties which
were the first Marxist parties (and which developed under the watchful
eyes of Marx and Engels) saw revolution in terms of winning a majority
within Parliamentary elections and using this political power to abolish
capitalism (once this was done, the state would "wither away" as classes
would no longer exist). In effect, as we discuss in [section
H.3.10](secH3.html#sech310), these parties aimed to reproduce Marx's
account of the forming of the Paris Commune on the level of the national
Parliament.

Bakunin, in contrast, argued that while the communists *"imagine they
can attain their goal by the development and organisation of the
political power of the working classes . . . aided by bourgeois
radicalism"* anarchists *"believe they can succeed only through the
development and organisation of the non-political or anti-political
power of the working classes."* The Communists *"believe it necessary to
organise the workers' forces in order to seize the political power of
the State,"* while anarchists *"organise for the purpose of destroying
it."* Bakunin saw this in terms of creating new organs of working class
power in opposition to the state, organised *"from the bottom up, by the
free association or federation of workers, starting with the
associations, then going on to the communes, the region, the nations,
and, finally, culminating in a great international and universal
federation."* In other words, a system of workers' councils. As such, he
constantly argued for workers, peasants and artisans to organise into
unions and join the **International Workingmen's Association**, so
becoming *"a real force . . . which knows what to do and is therefore
capable of guiding the revolution in the direction marked out by the
aspirations of the people: a serious international organisation of
workers' associations of all lands capable of replacing this departing
world of **states.**"* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, pp. 262-3, p. 270 and
p. 174] To Marx's argument that workers should organise politically
(i.e., send their representations to Parliament) Bakunin realised that
when *"common workers"* are sent *"to Legislative Assemblies"* the
result is that the *"worker-deputies, transplanted into a bourgeois
environment, into an atmosphere of purely bourgeois ideas, will in fact
cease to be workers and, becoming Statesmen, they will become bourgeois
. . . For men do not make their situations; on the contrary, men are
made by them."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 108]

As far as history goes, the experience of Social Democracy confirmed
Bakunin's analysis. A few years after Engels death in 1895, German
Social Democracy was racked by the "revisionism" debate. This debate did
not spring from the minds of a few leaders, isolated from the movement,
but rather expressed developments **within** the movement itself. In
effect, the revisionists wanted to adjust the party rhetoric to what the
party was actually doing and so the battle against the revisionists
basically represented a battle between what the party **said** it was
doing and its actual practice. As one of the most distinguished
historians of this period put it, the *"distinction between the
contenders remained largely a subjective one, a difference of ideas in
the evaluation of reality rather than a difference in the realm of
action."* [C. Schorske, **German Social Democracy**, p. 38] By the start
of the First World War, the Social Democrats had become so corrupted by
its activities in bourgeois institutions they supported its state (and
ruling class) and voted for war credits rather than denounce the war as
Imperialist slaughter for profits. Clearly, Bakunin was proved right.
(see also [section J.2.6](secJ2.html#secj26) for more discussion on the
effect of electioneering on radical parties).

However, we must stress that because Bakunin rejected participating in
bourgeois politics, it did not mean that he rejected "politics" or
"political struggle" in general (see [section
J.2.10](secJ2.html#secj210)). Bakunin clearly advocated what would later
by termed a syndicalist strategy (see [section
H.2.8](secH2.html#sech28)). This union movement would be complemented by
a specific anarchist organisation which would work within it to
influence it towards anarchist aims by the *"natural influence"* of its
members (see [section J.3.7](secJ3.html#secj37)).

Comparing Bakunin and Marx, it is clear whom history has validated. Even
that anti-anarchist Stalinist hack Eric Hobsbawn could not avoid
admitting that *"the remarkable achievement of Spanish anarchism which
was to create a working-class movement that remained genuinely
revolutionary. Social democratic and . . . even communist trade unions
have rarely been able to escape either schizophrenia [i.e.,
revolutionary rhetoric hiding reformist practice] or betrayal of their
socialist convictions."* [**Revolutionaries**, p. 104] This is probably
the only accurate comment made in his various diatribes on anarchism
but, of course, he did not allow the implications of his statement to
bother his faith in Leninist ideology. So given the long history of
reformism and betrayal of socialist principles by radicals utilising
elections and political parties, it comes as no surprise that anarchists
consider both Bakunin's critique and alternative to be confirmed by
experience ([section J.2](secJ2.html) discusses direct action and
electioneering).

Which brings us to the second issue, namely the nature of the revolution
itself. For Bakunin, a revolution meant a **social** revolution from
below. This involved both the abolition of the state **and** the
expropriation of capital. In his words, *"the revolution must set out
from the first [to] radically and totally to destroy the State."* The
*"natural and necessary consequences"* of which will be the
*"confiscation of all productive capital and means of production on
behalf of workers' associations, who are to put them to collective use .
. . the federative Alliance of all working men's associations . . . will
constitute the Commune."* There *"can no longer be any successful
political . . . revolution unless the political revolution is
transformed into social revolution."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected
Writings**, p. 170 and p. 171]

Which, incidentally, disproves Engels' claims that Bakunin *"does not
regard capital . . . but the **state** as the main evil to be
abolished"* after which *"capitalism will go to blazes of itself."*
[**The Marx-Engels Reader**, p. 728] This misrepresents Bakunin's
position, as he always stressed that economic and political
transformation *"must be accomplished together and simultaneously."*
[**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 106] Given that Bakunin thought the state was
the protector of capitalism, no economic change could be achieved until
such time as it was abolished. This also meant that Bakunin considered a
political revolution before an economic one to mean the continued
slavery of the workers. As he argued, *"[t]o win political freedom first
can signify no other thing but to win this freedom only, leaving for the
first days at least economic and social relations in the same old state,
- that is, leaving the proprietors and capitalists with their insolent
wealth, and the workers with their poverty."* With capitalists' economic
power intact, could the workers' **political** power remain strong? As
such, *"every political revolution taking place prior to and
consequently without a social revolution must necessarily be a bourgeois
revolution, and a bourgeois revolution can only be instrumental in
bringing about bourgeois Socialism - that is, it is bound to end in a
new, more hypocritical and more skilful, but no less oppressive,
exploitation of the proletariat by the bourgeois."* [**The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 294 and p. 289]

Did Marx and Engels hold this position? Apparently so. Discussing the
Paris Commune, Marx noted that it was *"the political form at last
discovered under which to work out the economic emancipation of
labour,"* and as the *"political rule of the producer cannot coexist
with the perpetuation of his social slavery"* the Commune was to *"serve
as a lever for uprooting the economic foundations upon which rests the
existence of classes."* Engels argued that the *"proletariat seizes the
public power, and by means of this transforms the . . . means of
production . . . into public property."* In the **Communist Manifesto**
they argued that *"the first step in the revolution by the working
class"* is the *"rais[ing] the proletariat to the position of ruling
class, to win the battle of democracy."* The proletariat *"will use its
political supremacy to wrest, by degrees, all capital from the
bourgeois, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of
the State, i.e. of the proletariat organised as the ruling class."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 635, p. 717 and p. 490]

This is made even clearer in Engels' *"Principles of Communism"* (often
considered as a draft of the **Manifesto**). That document stressed that
it was not possible for *"private property to be abolished at one
stroke"*, arguing that *"the proletarian revolution will transform
existing society gradually."* The revolution *"will establish a
**democratic constitution**, and through this, the direct or indirect
dominance of the proletariat. Direct in England, where the proletarians
are already a majority of the people."* *"Democracy"*, Engels went on,
*"would be quite useless to the proletariat if it were not immediately
used as a means of carrying through further measures directly attacking
private ownership."* [**Collected Works**, vol. 6, p. 350] Decades
later, when Marx discussed what the "dictatorship of the proletariat"
meant, he argued (in reply to Bakunin's question of *"over whom will the
proletariat rule?"*) that it simply meant *"that so long as other
classes continue to exist, the capitalist class in particular, the
proletariat fights it (for with the coming of the proletariat to power,
its enemies will not yet have disappeared), it must use measures of
**force**, hence governmental measures; if it itself still remains a
class and the economic conditions on which the class struggle and the
existence of classes have not yet disappeared, they must be forcibly
removed or transformed, and the process of their transformation must be
forcibly accelerated."* [**The Marx-Engels Reader**, pp. 542-3] Note,
"capitalists," not "former capitalists," so implying that the members of
the proletariat are, in fact, still proletarians after the "socialist"
revolution and so still subject to wage slavery under economic masters.
Which makes perfect sense, as otherwise the term *"dictatorship of the
proletariat"* would be meaningless.

Then there is the issue of when the working class could seize political
power. As Engels put it, the struggle *"between bourgeoisie and
proletariat can only be fought out in a republic."* This is *"the form
in which the struggle must be fought out"* and in countries without a
republic, such as Germany at the time, workers would *"have to
**conquer** it."* [Marx and Engels, **The Socialist Revolution**, p.
264] Decades previously, Engels has argued that the *"first, fundamental
condition for the introduction of community of property is the political
liberation of the proletariat through a democratic constitution."*
[**Collected Works**, vol. 6, p. 102] Thus the bourgeois revolution
would come first, then the proletarian one. The **Communist Manifesto**
had raised the possibility of a bourgeois revolution in Germany being
*"but a prelude to an immediately following proletarian revolution."*
[**Selected Writings**, p. 63] Within two years, Marx and Engels argued
that this was wrong, that a socialist revolution was not possible in
Continental Europe for some time. Even in the 1880s, Engels was still
arguing that a proletarian revolution was not immediately possible in
Germany and the first results of any revolution would be a bourgeois
republic within which the task of social democracy was to build its
forces and influence.

Clearly, then, Marx and Engels considered the creation of a republic in
a well developed capitalist economy as the basis for seizing of state
power as the key event and, later, the expropriation of the
expropriators would occur. Thus the economic power of the capitalists
would remain, with the proletariat utilising political power to combat
and reduce it. Anarchists argue that if the proletariat does not hold
economic power, its political power would at best be insecure and would
in fact degenerate. Would the capitalists just sit and wait while their
economic power was gradually eliminated by political action? And what of
the proletariat during this period? Will they patiently obey their
bosses, continue to be oppressed and exploited by them until such time
as the end of their "social slavery" has been worked out (and by whom)?
Would they be happy to fight for a bourgeois republic first, then wait
for an unspecified period of time before the party leadership proclaimed
that the time was ripe to introduce socialism?

As the experience of the Russian Revolution showed, the position of Marx
and Engels proved to be untenable. Bakunin's perspective was repeated by
a Russian worker in 1906 when he expressed his impatience with Menshevik
strategy:

> *"Here [the Mensheviks] . . . tells us that the workers' congress is
> the best means of assuring the independence of the proletariat in the
> bourgeois revolution; otherwise, we workers will play the role of
> cannon fodder in it. So I ask: what is the insurance for? Will we
> really make the bourgeois revolution? Is it possible that we will
> spill blood twice - once for the victory of the bourgeois revolution,
> and the time for the victory of our proletarian revolution? No,
> comrades, it is not to be found in the party programme [that this must
> be so]; but if we workers are to spill blood, then only once, for
> freedom and socialism."* [quoted by Abraham Ascher, **The Mensheviks
> in the Russian Revolution**, p. 43]

In 1917, this lesson was well learned and the Russian workers initially
followed Bakunin's path (mostly spontaneously and without significant
influence by anarchists and anarcho-syndicalists). The Mensheviks
repeated their mistakes of 1905 as they *"proved unable to harness this
revolutionary potential to any practical purpose. They were blinded by
their rigid marxist formula of 'bourgeois revolution first, socialist
revolution later' and tired to restrain the masses. They preached
self-abnegation to them, told them to stand aside until such times as
the bourgeoisie had built a solid capitalist system. This made no sense
to workers and peasants - why should they renounce the power that was in
their hands already?"* Leading Menshevik Fedor Dan *"admitted in 1946
that the Menshevik concept of the bourgeois revolution rested on
'illusions'"* [Vera Broido, **Lenin and the Mensheviks**, p 14 and p.
15] Once Lenin returned to Russia, the Bolsheviks broke with this
previously shared perspective and started to support and encourage the
radicalisation of the workers and so managed to gain popular support.
However, they did so partially and incompletely and, as a consequence,
finally held back and so fatally undermined the revolution.

After the February revolution paralysed the state, the workers organised
factory committees and raised the idea and practice of workers
self-management of production. The Russian anarchists supported this
movement whole-heartedly, arguing that it should be pushed as far as it
would go. In contrast, Lenin argued for *"workers' control over the
capitalists."* [**The Lenin Anthology**, p. 402] This was,
unsurprisingly, the policy applied immediately after the Bolshevik
seizure of power. However, as one Leninist writer admits, *"[t]wo
overwhelmingly powerful forces obliged the Bolsheviks to abandon this
'reformist' course."* One was the start of the civil war, the other
*"was the fact that the capitalists used their remaining power to make
the system unworkable. At the end of 1917 the All Russian Congress of
employers declared that those 'factories in which the control is
exercised by means of active interference in the administration will be
closed.' The workers' natural response to the wave of lockouts which
followed was to demand that their [sic!] state nationalise the
factories."* [John Rees, *"In Defence of October"*, pp. 3-82,
**International Socialism**, no. 52, p. 42] By July 1918, only one-fifth
of nationalised firms had been done so by the state, the rest by local
committees from below (which, incidentally, shows the unresponsiveness
of centralised power). Clearly, the idea that a social revolution can
come after a political was shown to be a failure - the capitalist class
used its powers to disrupt the economic life of Russia.

Faced with the predictable opposition by capitalists to their system of
"control" the Bolsheviks nationalised the means of production. Sadly,
**within** the nationalised workplace the situation of the worker
remained essentially unchanged. Lenin had been arguing for one-man
management (appointed from above and armed with "dictatorial" powers)
since late April 1918 (see [section H.3.14](secH3.html#sech314)). This
aimed at replacing the capitalists with state appointed managers,
**not** workers self-management. In fact, as we discuss in [section
H.6.2](secH6.html#sech62) the party leaders repeatedly overruled the
factory committees' suggestions to build socialism based on their
management of the economy in favour of centralised state control.
Bakunin's fear of what would happen if a political revolution preceded a
social one came true. The working class continued to be exploited and
oppressed as before, first by the bourgeoisie and then by the new
bourgeoisie of state appointed managers armed with all the powers of the
old ones (plus a few more). Russia confirmed Bakunin's analysis that a
revolution must immediately combine political and economic goals in
order for it to be successful.

The experience of Bolshevik Russia also confirms Bakunin's prediction
that state socialism would simply be state capitalism. As Bakunin
stressed, the state *"is the government from above downwards of an
immense number of men [and women], very different from the point of view
of the degree of their culture, the nature of the countries or
localities that they inhabit, the occupations they follow, the interests
and aspirations directing them - the State is the government of all
these by one or another minority."* The state *"has always been the
patrimony of some privileged class"* and *"when all other classes have
exhausted themselves"* it *"becomes the patrimony of the bureaucratic
class."* The Marxist state *"will not content itself with administering
and governing the masses politically"* it will *"also administer the
masses economically, concentrating in the hands of the State the
production and distribution of wealth."* This will result in *"a new
class, a new hierarchy of real and counterfeit scientists and scholars,
and the world will be divided into a minority ruling in the name of
knowledge, and an immense ignorant majority. And then, woe unto the mass
of ignorant ones!"* Thus exploitation by a new bureaucratic class would
be the only result when the state becomes *"the sole proprietor"* and
*"the only banker, capitalist, organiser, and director of all national
labour, and the distributor of all its products."* [**Bakunin on
Anarchism**, pp. 317-8, p. 318 and p. 217] Subsequent anarchists have
tended to call such a regime **state capitalism** (see [section
H.3.13](secH3.html#sech313)).

The Bolshevik leadership's rejection of the factory committees and their
vision of socialism also confirmed Bakunin's fear that Marxism urges the
people *"not only not abolish the State, but, on the contrary, they must
strengthen it and enlarge it, and turn it over to . . . the leaders of
the Communist party . . . who will then liberate them in their own
way."* The economic regime imposed by the Bolsheviks, likewise,
confirmed Bakunin critique as the state *"control[led] all the commerce,
industry, agriculture, and even science. The mass of the people will be
divided into two armies, the agricultural and the industrial under the
direct command of the state engineers, who will constitute the new
privileged political-scientific class."* Unsurprisingly, this new
state-run economy was a disaster which, again, confirmed his warning
that unless this minority *"were endowed with omniscience, omnipresence,
and the omnipotence which the theologians attribute to God, [it] could
not possibly know and foresee the needs of its people, or satisfy with
an even justice those needs which are most legitimate and pressing."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 332, pp. 332-3 and p. 318]

Which brings us to the "dictatorship of the proletariat." While many
Marxists basically use this term to describe the defence of the
revolution and so argue that anarchists do not see the for that, this is
incorrect. Anarchists from Bakunin onwards have argued that a revolution
would have to defend itself from counter revolution and yet we reject
the concept totally (see [section H.2.1](secH2.html#sech21) for a
refutation of claims that anarchists think a revolution does not need
defending). To understand why Bakunin rejected the concept, we must
provide some historical context.

Anarchists in the nineteenth century rejected the idea of the
"dictatorship of the proletariat" in part because the proletariat was a
**minority** of working class people at the time. To argue for a
dictatorship of the proletariat meant to argue for the dictatorship of a
**minority** class, a class which excluded the majority of toiling
people. When Marx and Engels wrote the **Communist Manifesto**, for
example, over 80% of the population of France and Germany were peasants
or artisans - what they termed the "petit-bourgeois". This meant that
their claim that the *"proletarian movement is the self-conscious,
independent movement of the immense majority, in the interests of the
immense majority"* was simply not true. Rather, for Marx's life-time
(and for many decades afterwards) the proletarian movement was like
*"[a]ll previous movements,"* namely *"movements of minorities, or in
the interests of minorities."* Not that Marx and Engels were unaware of
this for they also noted that *"[i]n countries like France"* the
peasants *"constitute far more than half of the population."* In 1875
Marx commented that *"the majority of the 'toiling people' in Germany
consists of peasants, and not of proletarians."* He stressed elsewhere
around the same time that *"the peasant . . . forms a more of less
considerable majority . . . in the countries of the West European
continent."* [**The Marx-Engels Reader**, p. 482, p. 493, p. 536 and p.
543]

Clearly, then, Marx and Engels vision of proletarian revolution was one
which involved a minority dictating to the majority and so Bakunin
rejected it. His opposition rested on the fact that a "dictatorship of
the proletariat," at the time, actually meant a dictatorship by a
**minority** of working people and so a "revolution" which excluded the
majority of working people (i.e. artisans and peasants). As he argued in
1873:

> *"If the proletariat is to be the ruling class . . . then whom will it
> rule? There must be yet another proletariat which will be subject to
> this new rule, this new state. It may be the peasant rabble . . .
> which, finding itself on a lower cultural level, will probably be
> governed by the urban and factory proletariat."* [**Statism and
> Anarchy**, pp. 177-8]

For Bakunin, to advocate the "dictatorship of the proletariat" in an
environment where the vast majority of working people were peasants
would be a disaster. It is only when we understand this social context
that we can understand Bakunin's opposition to Marx's "dictatorship of
the proletariat" - it would be a dictatorship of a minority class over
the rest of the working population (he took it as a truism that the
capitalist and landlord classes should be expropriated and stopped from
destroying the revolution!). Bakunin continually stressed the need for a
movement and revolution of **all** working class people (see [section
H.2.7](secH2.html#sech27)) and that the peasants *"will join cause with
the city workers as soon as they become convinced that the latter do not
pretend to impose their will or some political or social order invented
by the cities for the greater happiness of the villages; they will join
cause as soon as they are assured that the industrial workers will not
take their lands away."* For an *"uprising by the proletariat alone
would not be enough; with that we would have only a political revolution
which would necessarily produce a natural and legitimate reaction on the
part of the peasants, and that reaction, or merely the indifference of
the peasants, would strangle the revolution of the cities."* [**The
Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 401 and p. 378]

This explains why the anarchists at the St. Imier Congress argued that
*"every political state can be nothing but organised domination for the
benefit of one class, to the detriment of the masses, and that should
the proletariat itself seize power, it would in turn become a new
dominating and exploiting class."* As the proletariat was a minority
class at the time, their concerns can be understood. For anarchists
then, and now, a social revolution has to be truly popular and involve
the majority of the population in order to succeed. Unsurprisingly, the
congress stressed the role of the proletariat in the struggle for
socialism, arguing that *"the proletariat of all lands . . . must create
the solidarity of revolutionary action . . . independently of and in
opposition to all forms of bourgeois politics."* Moreover, the aim of
the workers' movement was *"free organisations and federations . . .
created by the spontaneous action of the proletariat itself, [that is,
by] the trade bodies and the autonomous communes."* [quoted in **Bakunin
on Anarchism**, p. 438, p. 439 and p. 438]

Hence Bakunin's comment that *"the designation of the proletariat, the
world of the workers, as **class** rather than as **mass**"* was
*"deeply antipathetic to us revolutionary anarchists who unconditionally
advocate full popular emancipation."* To do so, he argued, meant
*"[n]othing more or less than a new aristocracy, that of the urban and
industrial workers, to the exclusion of the millions who make up the
rural proletariat and who . . . will in effect become subjects of this
great so-called popular State."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected
Writings**, pp. 253-4]

Again, the experiences of the Russian Revolution confirm Bakunin's
worries. The Bolsheviks implemented the dictatorship of the city over
the countryside, with disastrous results (see [section
H.6.2](secH6.html#sech62) for more details).

One last point on this subject. While anarchists reject the
"dictatorship of the proletariat" we clearly do not reject the key role
the proletariat must play in any social revolution (see [section
H.2.2](secH2.html#sech22) on why the Marxist assertion anarchists reject
class struggle is false). We only reject the idea that the proletariat
must dictate over other working people like peasants and artisans. We do
not reject the need for working class people to defend a revolution, nor
the need for them to expropriate the capitalist class nor for them to
manage their own activities and so society.

Then there is the issue of whether, even if the proletariat **does**
seize political power, whether the whole class can actually exercise it.
Bakunin raised the obvious questions:

> *"For, even from the standpoint of that urban proletariat who are
> supposed to reap the sole reward of the seizure of political power,
> surely it is obvious that this power will never be anything but a
> sham? It is bound to be impossible for a few thousand, let alone tens
> or hundreds of thousands of men to wield that power effectively. It
> will have to be exercised by proxy, which means entrusting it to a
> group of men elected to represent and govern them, which in turn will
> unfailingly return them to all the deceit and subservience of
> representative or bourgeois rule. After a brief flash of liberty or
> orgiastic revolution, the citizens of the new State will wake up
> slaves, puppets and victims of a new group of ambitious men."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, pp. 254-5]

He repeated this argument: *"What does it mean, 'the proletariat raised
to a governing class?' Will the entire proletariat head the government?
The Germans number about 40 million. Will all 40 millions be members of
the government? The entire nation will rule, but no one will be ruled.
Then there will be no government, no state; but if there is a state,
there will also be those who are ruled, there will be slaves."* Bakunin
argued that Marxism resolves this dilemma *"in a simple fashion. By
popular government they mean government of the people by a small number
of representatives elected by the people. So-called popular
representatives and rulers of the state elected by the entire nation on
the basis of universal suffrage - the last word of the Marxists, as well
as the democratic school - is a lie behind which lies the despotism of a
ruling minority is concealed, a lie all the more dangerous in that it
represents itself as the expression of a sham popular will."* [**Statism
and Anarchy**, p. 178]

So where does Marx stand on this question. Clearly, the self-proclaimed
followers of Marx support the idea of "socialist" governments (indeed,
many, including Lenin and Trotsky, went so far as to argue that party
dictatorship was essential for the success of a revolution - see [next
section](secH1.html#sech12)). Marx, however, is less clear. He argued,
in reply to Bakunin's question if all Germans would be members of the
government, that *"[c]ertainly, because the thing starts with the
self-government of the township."* However, he also commented that
*"[c]an it really be that in a trade union, for example, the entire
union forms its executive committee,"* suggesting that there **will** be
a division of labour between those who govern and those who obey in the
Marxist system of socialism. [**The Marx-Engels Reader**, p. 545 and p.
544] Elsewhere he talks about *"a socialist government"* coming *"to the
helm in a country"*. [**Collected Works**, vol. 46, p. 66] As we discuss
in [section H.3.10](secH3.html#sech310), both Marx and Engels saw
universal suffrage in a republic as expressing the political power of
the working class.

So Bakunin's critique holds, as Marx clearly saw the "dictatorship of
the proletariat" involving a socialist government having power. For
Bakunin, like all anarchists, if a political party is the government,
then clearly its leaders are in power, not the mass of working people
they claim to represent. Anarchists have, from the beginning, argued
that Marx made a grave mistake confusing working class power with the
state. This is because the state is the means by which the management of
people's affairs is taken from them and placed into the hands of a few.
It signifies delegated **power.** As such, the so-called "workers'
state" or "dictatorship of the proletariat" is a contradiction in terms.
Instead of signifying the power of the working class to manage society
it, in fact, signifies the opposite, namely the handing over of that
power to a few party leaders at the top of a centralised structure. This
is because *"all State rule, all governments being by their very nature
placed outside the people, must necessarily seek to subject it to
customs and purposes entirely foreign to it. We therefore declare
ourselves to be foes . . . of all State organisations as such, and
believe that the people can be happy and free, when, organised from
below upwards by means of its own autonomous and completely free
associations, without the supervision of any guardians, it will create
its own life."* [Bakunin, **Marxism, Freedom and the State**, p. 63]
Hence Bakunin's constant arguments for a decentralised, federal system
of workers councils organised from the bottom-up. Again, the
transformation of the Bolshevik government into a dictatorship **over**
the proletariat during the early stages of the Russian Revolution
supports Bakunin's critique of Marxism.

Related to this issue is Bakunin's argument that Marxism created a
privileged position for socialist intellectuals in both the current
social movement and in the social revolution. This was because Marx
stressed that his theory was a "scientific socialism" and, Bakunin
argued, that implied *"because thought, theory and science, at least in
our times, are in the possession of very few, these few ought to be the
leaders of social life"* and they, not the masses, should organise the
revolution *"by the dictatorial powers of this learned minority, which
presumes to express the will of the people."* This would be *"nothing
but a despotic control of the populace by a new and not at all numerous
aristocracy of real and pseudoscientists"* and so there would *"be a new
[ruling] class, a new hierarchy of real and counterfeit scientists and
scholars, and the world will be divided into a minority ruling in the
name of knowledge, and an immense ignorant majority. And then, woe unto
the mass of ignorant ones!"* Thus *"every state, even the
pseudo-People's State concocted by Mr. Marx, is in essence only a
machine ruling the masses from above, through a privileged minority of
conceited intellectuals who imagine that they know what the people need
and want better than do the people themselves."* The Russian anarchist
predicted that *"the organisation and the rule of the new society by
socialist savants"* would be *"the worse of all despotic governments!"*
[**Bakunin on Anarchism**, pp. 328-9, p. 331, p. 319, p. 338 and p. 295]
History proved Bakunin right, with the Bolshevik regime being precisely
that. As we discuss in [section H.5](secH5.html), Lenin's vanguardism
did produce such a result, with the argument that the party leadership
knew the objective needs of working class people better than they
themselves did being used to justify party dictatorship and the strict
centralisation of social life in the hands of its leadership.

Which brings us to the last issue, namely whether the revolution will be
decentralised or centralised. For Marx, the issue is somewhat confused
by his support for the Paris Commune and its federalist programme
(written, we must note, by a follower of Proudhon). However, in 1850,
Marx stood for extreme centralisation of power, arguing that the workers
*"must not only strive for a single and indivisible German republic, but
also within this republic for the most determined centralisation of
power in the hands of the state authority."* He argued that in a nation
like Germany *"where there is so many relics of the Middle Ages to be
abolished"* it *"must under no circumstances be permitted that every
village, every town and every province should put a new obstacle in the
path of revolutionary activity, which can proceed with full force from
the centre."* He stressed that *"[a]s in France in 1793 so today in
Germany it is the task of the really revolutionary party to carry
through the strictest centralisation."* [**The Marx-Engels Reader**, pp.
509-10] Lenin followed this aspect of Marx's ideas, arguing that *"Marx
was a centralist"* and applying this perspective both in the party and
once in power [**The Essential Works of Lenin**, p. 310]

Obviously, this issue dove-tails into the question of whether the whole
class exercises power under the "dictatorship of the proletariat." In a
centralised system, obviously, power **has to be** exercised by a few
(as Marx's argument in 1850 showed). Centralism, by its very nature
excludes the possibility of extensive participation in the decision
making process. Moreover, the decisions reached by such a body could not
reflect the real needs of society. In the words of Bakunin:

> *"What man, what group of individuals, no matter how great their
> genius, would dare to think themselves able to embrace and understand
> the plethora of interests, attitudes and activities so various in
> every country, every province, locality and profession."* [**Michael
> Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 240]

He stressed that *"the revolution should be and should everywhere remain
independent of the central point, which must be its expression and
product - not its source, guide and cause . . . the awakening of all
local passions and the awakening of spontaneous life at all points, must
be well developed in order for the revolution to remain alive, real and
powerful."* Anarchists reject centralisation because it destroys the
mass participation a revolution requires in order to succeed. Therefore
we do *"not accept, even in the process of revolutionary transition,
either constituent assemblies, provisional governments or so-called
revolutionary dictatorships; because we are convinced that revolution is
only sincere, honest and real in the hands of the masses, and that when
it is concentrated in those of a few ruling individuals it inevitably
and immediately becomes reaction."* Rather, the revolution *"everywhere
must be created by the people, and supreme control must always belong to
the people organised into a free federation of agricultural and
industrial associations . . . organised from the bottom upwards by means
of revolutionary delegation."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 179-80, p. 237 and p.
172]

This, we must stress, does not imply isolation. Bakunin always
emphasised the importance of federal organisation to co-ordinate
struggle and defence of the revolution. As he put it, all revolutionary
communes would need to federate in order *"to organise the necessary
common services and arrangements for production and exchange, to
establish the charter of equality, the basis of all liberty - a charter
utterly negative in character, defining what has to be abolished for
ever rather than the positive forms of local life which can be created
only by the living practice of each locality - and to organise common
defence against the enemies of the Revolution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 179]

Ironically, it is a note by Engels to the 1885 edition of Marx's 1850
article which shows the fallacy of the standard Marxist position on
centralisation and the validity of Bakunin's position. As Engels put it,
*"this passage is based on a misunderstanding"* and it was now *"a well
known fact that throughout the whole [Great French] revolution . . . the
whole administration of the departments, arrondissements and communes
consisted of authorities elected by the respective constituents
themselves, and that these authorities acted with complete freedom
within general state laws [and] that precisely this provincial and local
self-government . . . became the most powerful lever of the
revolution."* [**The Marx-Engels Reader**, p. 510f] Marx's original
comments imply the imposition of freedom by the centre on a population
not desiring it (and how could the centre be representative of the
majority in such a case?). Moreover, how could a revolution be truly
social if it was not occurring in the grassroots across a country?
Unsurprisingly, local autonomy has played a key role in every real
revolution.

As such, Bakunin has been proved right. Centralism has always killed a
revolution and, as he always argued, real socialism can only be worked
from below, by the people of every village, town, and city. The problems
facing the world or a revolution cannot be solved by a few people at the
top issuing decrees. They can only be solved by the active participation
of the mass of working class people, the kind of participation
centralism and government by their nature exclude.

Given Marx's support for the federal ideas of the Paris Commune, it can
be argued that Marxism is not committed to a policy of strict
centralisation (although Lenin, of course, argued that Marx **was** a
firm supporter of centralisation). What is true is, to quote Daniel
Gurin, that Marx's comments on the Commune differ *"noticeably from
Marx's writings of before and after 1871"* while Bakunin's were *"in
fact quite consistent with the lines he adopted in his earlier
writings."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 167] Indeed, as Bakunin
himself noted, while the Marxists *"saw all their ideas upset by the
uprising"* of the Commune, they *"found themselves compelled to take
their hats off to it. They went even further, and proclaimed that its
programme and purpose were their own, in face of the simplest logic and
their own true sentiments."* This modification of ideas by Marx in the
light of the Commune was not limited just to federalism, he also praised
its system of mandating recallable delegates. This was a position which
Bakunin had been arguing for a number of years previously but which Marx
had never advocated. In 1868, for example, Bakunin was talking about a
*"Revolutionary Communal Council"* composed of *"delegates . . . vested
with plenary but accountable and removable mandates."* [**Michael
Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 261 and pp. 170-1] As such, the Paris
Commune was a striking confirmation of Bakunin's ideas on many levels,
**not** Marx's (who adjusted his ideas to bring them in line with
Bakunin's!).

Since Bakunin, anarchists have deepen this critique of Marxism and, with
the experience of both Social-Democracy and Bolshevism, argue that he
predicted key failures in Marx's ideas. Given that his followers,
particularly Lenin and Trotsky, have emphasised (although, in many ways,
changed them) the centralisation and "socialist government" aspects of
Marx's thoughts, anarchists argue that Bakunin's critique is as relevant
as ever. Real socialism can only come from below.

For more on Bakunin's critique of Marxism, Mark Leier's excellent
biography of the Russian Anarchist (**Bakunin: The Creative Passion**)
is worth consulting, as is Brian Morris's **Bakunin: The Philosophy of
Freedom**. John Clark has two useful essays on this subject in his **The
Anarchist Moment** while Richard B. Saltman's **The Social and Political
Thought of Michael Bakunin** contains an excellent chapter on Bakunin
and Marx. A good academic account can be found in Alvin W. Gouldner's
*"Marx's Last Battle: Bakunin and the First International"* (**Theory
and Society**, Vol. 11, No. 6) which is a revised and shortened version
of a chapter of his **Against Fragmentation: the Origins of Marxism and
the Sociology of Intellectuals**. Obviously, though, Bakunin's original
writings should be the first starting point.

H.1.2 What are the key differences between Anarchists and Marxists?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

There are, of course, important similarities between anarchism and
Marxism. Both are socialist, oppose capitalism and the current state,
support and encourage working class organisation and action and see
class struggle as the means of creating a social revolution which will
transform society into a new one. However, the differences between these
socialist theories are equally important. In the words of Errico
Malatesta:

> "The important, fundamental dissension [between anarchists and
> Marxists] is [that] . . . [Marxist] socialists are authoritarians,
> anarchists are libertarians.
> "Socialists want power . . . and once in power wish to impose their
> programme on the people. . . Anarchists instead maintain, that
> government cannot be other than harmful, and by its very nature it
> defends either an existing privileged class or creates a new one; and
> instead of inspiring to take the place of the existing government
> anarchists seek to destroy every organism which empowers some to
> impose their own ideas and interests on others, for they want to free
> the way for development towards better forms of human fellowship which
> will emerge from experience, by everyone being free and, having, of
> course, the economic means to make freedom possible as well as a
> reality." [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 142]

The other differences derive from this fundamental one. So while there
are numerous ways in which anarchists and Marxists differ, their root
lies in the question of power. Socialists seek power (in the name of the
working class and usually hidden under rhetoric arguing that party and
class power are the same). Anarchists seek to destroy hierarchical power
in all its forms and ensure that everyone is free to manage their own
affairs (both individually and collectively). From this comes the
differences on the nature of a revolution, the way the working class
movement should organise and the tactics it should apply and so on. A
short list of these differences would include the question of the
"dictatorship of the proletariat", the standing of revolutionaries in
elections, centralisation versus federalism, the role and organisation
of revolutionaries, whether socialism can only come *"from below"* or
whether it is possible for it come *"from below"* and *"from above"* and
a host of others (i.e. some of the differences we indicated in the [last
section](secH1.html#sech11) during our discussion of Bakunin's critique
of Marxism). Indeed, there are so many it is difficult to address them
all here. As such, we can only concentrate on a few in this and the
following sections.

One of the key issues is on the issue of confusing party power with
popular power. The logic of the anarchist case is simple. In any system
of hierarchical and centralised power (for example, in a state or
governmental structure) then those at the top are in charge (i.e. are in
positions of power). It is **not** "the people," nor "the proletariat,"
nor "the masses," it is those who make up the government who have and
exercise real power. As Malatesta argued, government means *"the
delegation of power, that is the abdication of initiative and
sovereignty of all into the hands of a few"* and *"if . . . , as do the
authoritarians, one means government action when one talks of social
action, then this is still the resultant of individual forces, but only
of those individuals who form the government."* [**Anarchy**, p. 40 and
p. 36] Therefore, anarchists argue, the replacement of party power for
working class power is inevitable because of the nature of the state. In
the words of Murray Bookchin:

> "Anarchist critics of Marx pointed out with considerable effect that
> any system of representation would become a statist interest in its
> own right, one that at best would work against the interests of the
> working classes (including the peasantry), and that at worst would be
> a dictatorial power as vicious as the worst bourgeois state machines.
> Indeed, with political power reinforced by economic power in the form
> of a nationalised economy, a 'workers' republic' might well prove to
> be a despotism (to use one of Bakunin's more favourite terms) of
> unparalleled oppression . . .
> "Republican institutions, however much they are intended to express
> the interests of the workers, necessarily place policy-making in the
> hands of deputies and categorically do not constitute a 'proletariat
> organised as a ruling class.' If public policy, as distinguished from
> administrative activities, is not made by the people mobilised into
> assemblies and confederally co-ordinated by agents on a local,
> regional, and national basis, then a democracy in the precise sense of
> the term does not exist. The powers that people enjoy under such
> circumstances can be usurped without difficulty . . . [I]f the people
> are to acquire real power over their lives and society, they must
> establish - and in the past they have, for brief periods of time
> established - well-ordered institutions in which they themselves
> directly formulate the policies of their communities and, in the case
> of their regions, elect confederal functionaries, revocable and
> strictly controllable, who will execute them. Only in this sense can a
> class, especially one committed to the abolition of classes, be
> mobilised as a class to manage society." [*"The Communist Manifesto:
> Insights and Problems"*, pp. 14-17, **Black Flag**, no. 226, pp. 16-7]

This is why anarchists stress direct democracy (self-management) in free
federations of free associations. It is the only way to ensure that
power remains in the hands of the people and is not turned into an alien
power above them. Thus Marxist support for statist forms of organisation
will inevitably undermine the liberatory nature of the revolution.

Thus the **real** meaning of a workers state is simply that the
**party** has the real power, not the workers. That is nature of a
state. Marxist rhetoric tends to hide this reality. As an example, we
can point to Lenin's comments in October, 1921. In an essay marking the
fourth anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, Lenin stated that the
Soviet system *"provides the maximum of democracy for the workers and
peasants; at the same time, it marks a break with **bourgeois**
democracy and the rise of a new, epoch-making type of democracy, namely,
proletarian democracy, or the dictatorship of the proletariat."*
[**Collected Works**, vol. 33, p. 55] Yet Lenin's comments came just a
few months after factions within the Communist Party had been banned and
after the Kronstadt rebellion and a wave of strikes calling for free
soviet elections had been repressed. It was written years after Lenin
had asserted that *"[w]hen we are reproached with having established a
dictatorship of one party . . . we say, 'Yes, it is a dictatorship of
one party! This is what we stand for and we shall not shift from that
position . . .'"* [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 29, p. 535] And, of course, they
had not shifted from that position! Clearly, the term *"proletarian
democracy"* had a drastically different meaning to Lenin than to most
people!

The identification of party power and working class power reaches its
height (or, more correctly, depth) in the works of Lenin and Trotsky.
Lenin, for example, argued that *"the Communists' correct understanding
of his tasks"* lies in *"correctly gauging the conditions and the moment
when the vanguard of the proletariat can successfully assume power, when
it will be able - during and after the seizure of power - to win
adequate support from sufficiently broad strata of the working class and
of the non-proletarian working masses, and when it is able thereafter to
maintain, consolidate, and extend its rule by educating, training and
attracting ever broader masses of the working people."* Note, the
vanguard (the party) seizes power, **not** the masses. Indeed, he
stressed that the *"mere presentation of the question - 'dictatorship of
the party **or** dictatorship of the class: dictatorship (party) of the
leaders **or** dictatorship (party) of the masses?' - testifies to most
incredible and hopelessly muddled thinking"* and *"[t]o go so far . . .
as to contrast, **in general**, the dictatorship of the masses with a
dictatorship of the leaders is ridiculously absurd, and stupid."* [**The
Lenin Anthology**, p. 575, p. 567 and p. 568]

Lenin stressed this idea numerous times. For example, he argued that
*"the dictatorship of the proletariat cannot be exercised through an
organisation embracing the whole of the class, because in all capitalist
countries (and not only over here, in one of the most backward) the
proletariat is still so divided, so degraded, and so corrupted in parts
. . . that an organisation taking in the whole proletariat cannot
directly exercise proletarian dictatorship. It can be exercised only by
a vanguard . . . Such is the basic mechanism of the dictatorship of the
proletariat, and the essentials of transition from capitalism to
communism . . . for the dictatorship of the proletariat cannot be
exercised by a mass proletarian organisation."* [**Collected Works**,
vol. 32, p. 21] This position had became Communist orthodoxy both in
Russia and internationally since early 1919. The American socialist John
Reed, author of **Ten Days that Shook the World**, was a defender of
*"the value of centralisation"* and *"the dictatorship of a
revolutionary minority"* (noting that *"the Communist Party is supreme
in Russia"*). [**Shaking the World**, p. 238] Similarly with the likes
of Amedeo Bordiga, the first leader of the Communist Party in Italy.

Victor Serge, the ex-anarchist and enthusiastic convert to Bolshevism,
argued this mainstream Bolshevik position until the mid-1930s. In 1919,
it was a case that *"dictatorship"* was not some kind of "proletarian"
dictatorship by the masses. He, like the leading Bolsheviks, explicitly
argued against this. Yes, he wrote, *"if we are looking at what should,
that is at what **ought to**, be the case"* but this *"seems doubtful"*
in reality. *"For it appears that by force of circumstances one group is
obliged to impose itself on the others and to go ahead of them, breaking
them if necessary, in order then to exercise exclusive dictatorship."*
The militants *"leading the masses . . . cannot rely on the
consciousness, the goodwill or the determination of those they have to
deal with; for the masses who will follow them or surround them will be
warped by the old regime, relatively uncultivated, often unaware, torn
by feelings and instincts inherited from the past."* So
*"revolutionaries will have to take on the dictatorship without delay."*
The experience of Russia *"reveals an energetic and innovative minority
which is compelled to make up for the deficiencies in the education of
the backward masses by the use of compulsion."* And so the party *"is in
a sense the nervous system of the class. Simultaneously the
consciousness and the active, physical organisation of the dispersed
forces of the proletariat, which are often ignorant of themselves and
often remain latent or express themselves contradictorily."* And what of
the masses? What was their role? Serge was equally blunt. While the
party is *"supported by the entire working population,"* strangely
enough, *"it maintains its unique situation in dictatorial fashion"*
while the workers are *"[b]ehind"* the communists, *"sympathising
instinctively with the party and carrying out the menial tasks required
by the revolution."* [**Revolution in Danger**, p. 106, p. 92, p. 115,
p. 67, p. 66 and p. 6]

Such are the joys of socialist liberation. The party thinks for the
worker while they carry out the *"menial tasks"* of the revolution. Like
doing the work and following the orders - as in any class system.

Trotsky agreed with this lesson and in 1926 opined that the
*"dictatorship of the party does not contradict the dictatorship of the
class either theoretically or practically; but is the expression of it,
if the regime of workers' democracy is constantly developed more and
more."* [**The Challenge of the Left Opposition (1926-27)**, p. 76] The
obvious contradictions and absurdities of this assertion are all too
plain. Needless to say, when defending the concept of *"the dictatorship
of the party"* he linked it to Lenin (and so to Leninist orthodoxy):

> *"Of course, the foundation of our regime is the dictatorship of a
> class. But this in turn assumes . . . it is class that has come to
> self-consciousness through its vanguard, which is to say, through the
> party. Without this, the dictatorship could not exist . . .
> Dictatorship is the most highly concentrated function of function of a
> class, and therefore the basic instrument of a dictatorship is a
> party. In the most fundamental aspects a class realises its
> dictatorship through a party. That is why Lenin spoke not only of the
> dictatorship of the class but also the dictatorship of the party and,
> **in a certain sense**, made them identical."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
> 75-6]

He repeated this position on party dictatorship into the late 1930s,
long after it had resulted in the horrors of Stalinism:

> *"The revolutionary dictatorship of a proletarian party is for me not
> a thing that one can freely accept or reject: It is an objective
> necessity imposed upon us by the social realities - the class
> struggle, the heterogeneity of the revolutionary class, the necessity
> for a selected vanguard in order to assure the victory. The
> dictatorship of a party belongs to the barbarian prehistory as does
> the state itself, but we can not jump over this chapter, which can
> open (not at one stroke) genuine human history. . . The revolutionary
> party (vanguard) which renounces its own dictatorship surrenders the
> masses to the counter-revolution . . . Abstractly speaking, it would
> be very well if the party dictatorship could be replaced by the
> 'dictatorship' of the whole toiling people without any party, but this
> presupposes such a high level of political development among the
> masses that it can never be achieved under capitalist conditions. The
> reason for the revolution comes from the circumstance that capitalism
> does not permit the material and the moral development of the
> masses."* [**Writings of Leon Trotsky 1936-37**, pp. 513-4]

Significantly, this was the year after his apparent (and much belated)
embrace of soviet democracy in **The Revolution Betrayed**. Moreover, as
we discuss in [section H.3.8](secH3.html#sech38), he was just repeating
the same arguments he had made while in power during the Russian
Revolution. Nor was he the only one. Zinoviev, another leading
Bolshevik, argued in 1920 along the same lines:

> *"soviet rule in Russia could not have been maintained for three years
> - not even three weeks - without the iron dictatorship of the
> Communist Party. Any class conscious worker must understand that the
> dictatorship of the working class can be achieved only by the
> dictatorship of its vanguard, i.e., by the Communist Party . . . All
> questions of economic reconstruction, military organisation,
> education, food supply - all these questions, on which the fate of the
> proletarian revolution depends absolutely, are decided in Russia
> before all other matters and mostly in the framework of the party
> organisations . . . Control by the party over soviet organs, over the
> trade unions, is the single durable guarantee that any measures taken
> will serve not special interests, but the interests of the entire
> proletariat."* [quoted by Oskar Anweiler, **The Soviets**, pp. 239-40]

Three years later, at the Communist Party's congress, he made light of
*"comrades who think that the dictatorship of the party is a thing to be
realised in practice but not spoken about."* He went on to argue that
what was needed was *"a **single** powerful central committee which is
leader of everything . . . in this is expressed the dictatorship of the
party."* The Congress itself resolved that *"the dictatorship of the
working class cannot be assured otherwise than in the form of a
dictatorship of its leading vanguard, i.e., the Communist Party."*
[quoted by E.H. Carr, **The Bolshevik Revolution 1917-1923**, vol. 1, p.
236, pp. 236-7 and p. 237]

How these positions can be reconciled with workers' democracy, power or
freedom is not explained. As such, the idea that Leninism (usually
considered as mainstream Marxism) is inherently democratic or a
supporter of power to the people is clearly flawed. Equally flawed are
the attempts by Leninists to distance themselves from, and rationalise,
these positions in terms of the "objective circumstances" (such as civil
war) facing the Russian Revolution. As we discuss in [section
H.6](secH6.html), Bolshevik authoritarianism started **before** these
problems began and continued long after they ended (in part because the
policies pursued by the Bolshevik leadership had roots in their ideology
and, as a result, that ideology itself played a key role in the failure
of the revolution).

Ultimately, though, the leading lights of Bolshevism concluded from
their experiences that the dictatorship of the proletariat could only be
achieved by the dictatorship of the party and they generalised this
position for **all** revolutions. Even in the prison camps in the late
1920s and early 1930s, *"almost all the Trotskyists continued to
consider that 'freedom of party' would be 'the end of the revolution.'
'Freedom to choose one's party - that is Menshevism,' was the
Trotskyists' final verdict."* [Ante Ciliga, **The Russian Enigma**, p.
280] While few Leninists today would subscribe to this position, the
fact is when faced with the test of revolution the founders of their
ideology not only practised the dictatorship of the party, they raised
it to an ideological truism. Sadly, most modern day Trotskyists ignore
this awkward fact in favour of inaccurate claims that Trotsky's **Left
Opposition** *"framed a policy along [the] lines"* of *"returning to
genuine workers' democracy"*. [Chris Harman, **Bureaucracy and
Revolution in Eastern Europe**, p. 19] In reality, as "Left
Oppositionist" Victor Serge pointed out, *"the greatest reach of
boldness of the Left Opposition in the Bolshevik Party was to demand the
restoration of inner-Party democracy, and it never dared dispute the
theory of single-party government - by this time, it was too late."*
[**The Serge-Trotsky Papers**, p. 181]

Significantly, this position on party rule has its roots in the uneven
political development within the working class (i.e. that the working
class contains numerous political perspectives within it). As the party
(according to Leninist theory) contains the most advanced ideas (and,
again according to Leninist theory, the working class cannot reach
beyond a trade union consciousness by its own efforts), the party must
take power to ensure that the masses do not make "mistakes" or "waver"
(show "vacillation") during a revolution. From such a perspective to the
position of party dictatorship is not far (and a journey that all the
leading Bolsheviks, including Lenin and Trotsky did in fact take).

These arguments by leading Bolsheviks confirm Bakunin's fear that the
Marxists aimed for *"a tyranny of the minority over a majority in the
name of the people - in the name of the stupidity of the many and the
superior wisdom of the few."* [**Marxism, Freedom and the State**, p.
63]

In contrast, anarchists argue that precisely because of political
differences we need the fullest possible democracy and freedom to
discuss issues and reach agreements. Only by discussion and
self-activity can the political perspectives of those in struggle
develop and change. In other words, the fact Bolshevism uses to justify
its support for party power is the strongest argument against it. For
anarchists, the idea of a revolutionary government is a contradiction.
As Malatesta put it, *"if you consider these worthy electors as unable
to look after their own interests themselves, how is it that they will
know how to choose for themselves the shepherds who must guide them? And
how will they be able to solve this problem of social alchemy, of
producing a genius from the votes of a mass of fools?"* [**Anarchy**,
pp. 53-4] As such, anarchists think that power should be in the hands of
the masses themselves. Only freedom or the struggle for freedom can be
the school of freedom. That means that, to quote Bakunin, *"since it is
the people which must make the revolution everywhere . . . the ultimate
direction of it must at all times be vested in the people organised into
a free federation of agricultural and industrial organisations . . .
organised from the bottom up through revolutionary delegation."* [**No
God, No Masters**, vol. 1, pp. 155-6]

Clearly, then, the question of state/party power is one dividing
anarchists and most Marxists. Again, though, we must stress that
libertarian Marxists agree with anarchists on this subject and reject
the whole idea that rule/dictatorship of a party equals the dictatorship
of the working class. As such, the Marxist tradition as a whole does not
confuse this issue, although the majority of it does. So not all
Marxists are Leninists. A few (council communists, Situationists, and so
on) are far closer to anarchism. They also reject the idea of party
power/dictatorship, the use of elections, for direct action, argue for
the abolition of wage slavery by workers' self-management of production
and so on. They represent the best in Marx's work and should not be
lumped with the followers of Bolshevism. Sadly, they are in the
minority.

Finally, we should indicate other important areas of difference as
summarised by Lenin in his work **The State and Revolution**:

> *"The difference between the Marxists and the anarchists is this: 1)
> the former, while aiming at the complete abolition of the state,
> recognise that this aim can only be achieved after classes have been
> abolished by the socialist revolution, as the result of the
> establishment of socialism which leads to the withering away of the
> state. The latter want to abolish the state completely overnight,
> failing to understand the conditions under which the state can be
> abolished 2) the former recognise that after the proletariat has
> conquered political power it must utterly destroy the old state
> machine and substitute for it a new one consisting of the organisation
> of armed workers, after the type of the Commune. The latter, while
> advocating the destruction of the state machine, have absolutely no
> idea of **what** the proletariat will put in its place and **how** it
> will use its revolutionary power; the anarchists even deny that the
> revolutionary proletariat should utilise its state power, its
> revolutionary dictatorship; 3) the former demand that the proletariat
> be prepared for revolution by utilising the present state; the latter
> reject this."* [**Essential Works of Lenin**, p. 358]

We will discuss each of these points in the next three sections. Point
one will be discussed in [section H.1.3](secH1.html#sech13), the second
in [section H.1.4](secH1.html#sech14) and the third and final one in
[section H.1.5](secH1.html#sech15).

H.1.3 Why do anarchists wish to abolish the state *"overnight"*?
----------------------------------------------------------------

As indicated at the end of the [last section](secH1.html#sech12), Lenin
argued that while Marxists aimed *"at the complete abolition of the
state"* they *"recognise that this aim can only be achieved after
classes have been abolished by the socialist revolution"* while
anarchists *"want to abolish the state completely overnight."* This
issue is usually summarised by Marxists arguing that a new state is
required to replace the destroyed bourgeois one. This new state is
called by Marxists ***"the dictatorship of the proletariat"*** or a
workers' state. Anarchists reject this transitional state while Marxists
embrace it. Indeed, according to Lenin *"a Marxist is one who
**extends** the acceptance of the class struggle to the acceptance of
the **dictatorship of the proletariat**."* [**Essential Works of
Lenin**, p. 358 and p. 294]

So what does the "dictatorship of the proletariat" actually mean?
Generally, Marxists seem to imply that this term simply means the
defence of the revolution and so the anarchist rejection of the
dictatorship of the proletariat means, for Marxists, the denial the need
to defend a revolution. This particular straw man was used by Lenin in
**The State and Revolution** when he quoted Marx's article
*"Indifference to Politics"* to suggest that anarchists advocated
workers *"laying down their arms"* after a successful revolution. Such a
*"laying down [of] their arms"* would mean *"abolishing the state"*
while keeping their arms *"in order to crush the resistance of the
bourgeoisie"* would mean *"giv[ing] the state a revolutionary and
transitory form,"* so setting up *"their revolutionary dictatorship in
place of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie."* [Marx, quoted by Lenin,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 315]

That such an argument can be made, never mind repeated, suggests a lack
of honesty. It assumes that the Marxist and Anarchist definitions of
"the state" are identical. They are not. For anarchists the state,
government, means *"the delegation of power, that is the abdication of
initiative and sovereignty of all into the hands of a few."* [Malatesta,
**Anarchy**, p. 41] For Marxists, the state is *"an organ of class
**rule**, an organ for the **oppression** of one class by another."*
[Lenin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 274] That these definitions are in conflict is
clear and unless this difference is made explicit, anarchist opposition
to the "dictatorship of the proletariat" cannot be clearly understood.

Anarchists, of course, agree that the current state is the means by
which the bourgeois class enforces its rule over society. In Bakunin's
words, *"the political state has no other mission but to protect the
exploitation of the people by the economically privileged classes."*
[**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 221] *"Throughout history,
just as in our time, government is either the brutal, violent, arbitrary
rule of the few over the many or it is an organised instrument to ensure
that domination and privilege will be in the hands of those who . . .
have cornered all the means of life."* Under capitalism, as Malatesta
succulently put, the state is *"the bourgeoisie's servant and
**gendarme**."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 21 and p. 23] The reason why the state
is marked by centralised power is due to its role as the protector of
(minority) class rule. As such, a state cannot be anything but a
defender of minority power as its centralised and hierarchical structure
is designed for that purpose. If the working class really were running
society, as Marxists claim they would be in the "dictatorship of the
proletariat," then it would not be a state. As Bakunin put it: *"Where
all rule, there are no more ruled, and there is no State."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 223]

The idea that anarchists, by rejecting the "dictatorship of the
proletariat," also reject defending a revolution is false. We do not
equate the "dictatorship of the proletariat" with the need to defend a
revolution or expropriating the capitalist class, ending capitalism and
building socialism. Anarchists from Bakunin onwards have taken both of
these necessities for granted. As we discuss this particular Marxist
straw man in [section H.2.1](secH2.html#sech21), we will leave our
comments on anarchist awareness of the need to defend a revolution at
this.

Anarchists, then, do not reject defending a revolution and our
opposition to the so-called "revolutionary" or "socialist" state is not
based on this, regardless of what Marx and Lenin asserted. Rather, we
argue that the state can and must be abolished "overnight" during a
social revolution because any state, including the so-called
"dictatorship of the proletariat", is marked by hierarchical power and
can only empower the few at the expense of the many. The state will not
"wither away" as Marxists claim simply because it excludes, by its very
nature, the active participation of the bulk of the population and
ensures a new class division in society: those in power (the party) and
those subject to it (the working class). Georges Fontenis sums up
anarchist concerns on this issue:

> "The formula 'dictatorship of the proletariat' has been used to mean
> many different things. If for no other reason it should be condemned
> as a cause of confusion. With Marx it can just as easily mean the
> centralised dictatorship of the party which claims to represent the
> proletariat as it can the federalist conception of the Commune.
>
> "Can it mean the exercise of political power by the victorious working
> class? No, because the exercise of political power in the recognised
> sense of the term can only take place through the agency of an
> exclusive group practising a monopoly of power, separating itself from
> the class and oppressing it. And this is how the attempt to use a
> State apparatus can reduce the dictatorship of the proletariat to the
> dictatorship of the party over the masses.
>
> "But if by dictatorship of the proletariat is understood collective
> and direct exercise of 'political power', this would mean the
> disappearance of 'political power' since its distinctive
> characteristics are supremacy, exclusivity and monopoly. It is no
> longer a question of exercising or seizing political power, it is
> about doing away with it all together!
>
> "If by dictatorship is meant the domination of the majority by a
> minority, then it is not a question of giving power to the proletariat
> but to a party, a distinct political group. If by dictatorship is
> meant the domination of a minority by the majority (domination by the
> victorious proletariat of the remnants of a bourgeoisie that has been
> defeated as a class) then the setting up of dictatorship means nothing
> but the need for the majority to efficiently arrange for its defence
> its own social Organisation.
>
> [...]
>
> "The terms 'domination', 'dictatorship' and 'state' are as little
> appropriate as the expression 'taking power' for the revolutionary act
> of the seizure of the factories by the workers.
>
> We reject then as inaccurate and causes of confusion the expressions
> 'dictatorship of the proletariat', 'taking political power', 'workers
> state', 'socialist state' and 'proletarian state'." [**Manifesto of
> Libertarian Communism**, pp. 22-3]

So anarchists argue that the state has to be abolished "overnight"
simply because a state is marked by hierarchical power and the exclusion
of the bulk of the population from the decision making process. It
cannot be used to implement socialism simply because it is not designed
that way. To extend and defend a revolution a state is not required.
Indeed, it is a hindrance:

> "The mistake of authoritarian communists in this connection is the
> belief that fighting and organising are impossible without submission
> to a government; and thus they regard anarchists . . . as the foes of
> all organisation and all co-ordinated struggle. We, on the other hand,
> maintain that not only are revolutionary struggle and revolutionary
> organisation possible outside and in spite of government interference
> but that, indeed, that is the only effective way to struggle and
> organise, for it has the active participation of all members of the
> collective unit, instead of their passively entrusting themselves to
> the authority of the supreme leaders.
> "Any governing body is an impediment to the real organisation of the
> broad masses, the majority. Where a government exists, then the only
> really organised people are the minority who make up the government;
> and . . . if the masses do organise, they do so against it, outside
> it, or at the very least, independently of it. In ossifying into a
> government, the revolution as such would fall apart, on account of its
> awarding that government the monopoly of organisation and of the means
> of struggle." [Luigi Fabbri, *"Anarchy and 'Scientific' Communism"*,
> pp. 13-49, **The Poverty of Statism**, Albert Meltzer (ed.), p. 27]

This is because of the hierarchical nature of the state, its delegation
of power into the hands of the few and so a so-called "revolutionary"
government can have no other result than a substitution of the few (the
government) for the many (the masses). This, in turn, undermines the
mass participation and action from below that a revolution needs to
succeed and flourish. *"Instead of acting for themselves,"* Kropotkin
argued, *"instead of marching forward, instead of advancing in the
direction of the new order of things, the people, confiding in their
governors, entrusted to them the charge of taking the initiative."*
However, social change is the product of *"the people in action"* and
*"the brain of a few individuals [are] absolutely incapable of finding
solutions"* to the problems it will face *"which can only spring from
the life of the people."* For anarchists, a revolution *"is not a simple
change of governors. It is the taking possession by the people of all
social wealth"* and this cannot be achieved *"be decrees emanating from
a government."* This *"economic change"* will be *"so immense and so
profound"* that it is *"impossible for one or any individual to
elaborate the different social forms which must spring up in the society
of the future. This elaboration of new social forms can only be made by
the collective work of the masses"* and *"[a]ny authority external to it
will only be an obstacle*, a *"drag on the action of the people."* A
revolutionary state, therefore, *"becomes the greatest obstacle to the
revolution"* and to *"dislodge it"* requires the people *"to take up
arms, to make another revolution."* [**Anarchism**, p. 240, p. 241, pp.
247-8, p. 248, p. 249, p. 241 and p. 242] Which, we should stress, was
exactly what happened in Russia, where anarchists and others (such as
the Kronstadt rebels) called for a *"Third Revolution"* against the
Bolshevik state and the party dictatorship and state capitalism it had
created.

For anarchists, the abolition of the state does not mean rejecting the
need to extend or defend a revolution (quite the reverse!). It means
rejecting a system of organisation designed by and for minorities to
ensure their rule. To create a state (even a "workers' state") means to
delegate power away from the working class and eliminate their power in
favour of party power (*"the principle error of the [Paris] Commune, an
unavoidable error, since it derived from the very principle on which
power was constituted, was precisely that of being a government, and of
substituting itself for the people by force of circumstances."* [Elise
Reclus, quoted John P. Clark and Camille Martin, **Anarchy, Geography,
Modernity**, p. 72]).

In place of a state anarchists' argue for a free federation of workers'
organisations as the means of conducting a revolution (and the framework
for its defence). Most Marxists seem to confuse centralism and
federalism, with Lenin stating that *"if the proletariat and the poor
peasants take state power into their own hands, organise themselves
quite freely in communes, and unite the action of all the communes in
striking at capital . . . won't that be centralism? Won't that be the
most consistent democratic centralism and, moreover, proletarian
centralism?"* No, it would be federalism, the most consistent federalism
as advocated by Proudhon and Bakunin and, under the influence of the
former, suggested by the Paris Commune. Lenin argued that some *"simply
cannot conceive of the possibility of voluntary centralism, of the
voluntary fusion of the proletarian communes, for the sole purpose of
destroying bourgeois rule and the bourgeois state machine."* [**The
Lenin Anthology**, p. 348] Yet *"voluntary centralism"* is, at best,
just another why of describing federalism - assuming that "voluntary"
really means that, of course. At worse, and in practice, such centralism
simply places all the decision making at the centre, at the top, and all
that is left is for the communes to obey the decisions of a few party
leaders.

As we discuss in the [next section](secH1.html#sech14), anarchists see
this federation of workers' associations and communes (the framework of
a free society) as being based on the organisations working class people
create in their struggle against capitalism. These self-managed
organisations, by refusing to become part of a centralised state, will
ensure the success of a revolution.

H.1.4 Do anarchists have *"absolutely no idea"* of what to put in place of the state?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lenin's second claim was that anarchists, *"while advocating the
destruction of the state machine, have absolutely no idea of **what**
the proletariat will put in its place"* and compared this to the
Marxists who argued for a new state machine *"consisting of armed
workers, after the type of the [Paris] Commune."* [**Essential Works of
Lenin**, p. 358]

For anarchists, Lenin's assertion simply shows his unfamiliarity with
anarchist literature and need not be taken seriously - anyone familiar
with anarchist theory would simply laugh at such comments. Sadly, most
Marxists are **not** familiar with that theory, so we need to explain
two things. Firstly, anarchists have very clear ideas on what to
"replace" the state with (namely a federation of communes based on
working class associations). Secondly, that this idea is based on the
idea of armed workers, inspired by the Paris Commune (although predicted
by Bakunin).

Moreover, for anarchists Lenin's comment seems somewhat incredulous. As
George Barrett put it, in reply to the question *"if you abolish
government, what will you put it its place,"* this *"seems to an
Anarchist very much as if a patient asked the doctor, 'If you take away
my illness, what will you give me in its place?' The Anarchist's
argument is that government fulfils no useful purpose . . . It is the
headquarters of the profit-makers, the rent-takers, and of all those who
take from but who do not give to society. When this class is abolished
by the people so organising themselves to run the factories and use the
land for the benefit of their free communities, i.e. for their own
benefit, then the Government must also be swept away, since its purpose
will be gone. The only thing then that will be put in the place of
government will be the free organisation of the workers. When Tyranny is
abolished, Liberty remains, just as when disease is eradicated health
remains."* [**Objections to Anarchism**, p. 356]

Barrett's answer contains the standard anarchist position on what will
be the organisational basis of a revolutionary society, namely that the
*"only thing then that will be put in the place of government will be
the free organisation of the workers."* This is a concise summary of
anarchist theory and cannot be bettered. This vision, as we discuss in
[section I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23) in some detail, can be found in the
work of Bakunin, Kropotkin, Malatesta and a host of other anarchist
thinkers. Since anarchists from Bakunin onwards have stressed that a
federation of workers' associations would constitute the framework of a
free society, to assert otherwise (as Lenin did) is little more than a
joke or a slander. To quote Bakunin:

> *"The future social organisation must be made solely from the bottom
> up, by the free association or federation of workers, firstly in their
> unions, then in the communes, regions, nations and finally in a great
> federation, international and universal."* [**Michael Bakunin:
> Selected Writings**, p. 206]

Similar ideas can easily be found in the works of other anarchists.
While the actual names and specific details of these federations of
workers' associations may change (for example, the factory committees
and soviets in the Russian Revolution, the collectives in Spain, the
section assemblies in the French Revolution are a few of them) the basic
ideas are the same. Bakunin also pointed to the means of defence, a
workers' militia (the people armed, as per the Paris Commune - [section
H.2.1](secH2.html#sech21)).

A major difference between anarchism and Marxism which Lenin points to
is, clearly, false. Anarchists are well aware of what should *"replace"*
the bourgeois state and have always been so. The **real** difference is
simply that anarchists say what they mean while Lenin's "new" state did
not, in fact, mean working class power but rather party power.

As for Lenin's comment that we have *"absolutely no ideas"* of how the
working class *"will use its revolutionary power"* suggests more
ignorance, as we have urged working people to expropriate the
expropriators, reorganise production under workers' self-management and
start to construct society from the bottom upwards (a quick glance at
Kropotkin's **Conquest of Bread**, for example, would soon convince any
reader of the inaccuracy of Lenin's comment). This summary by the
anarchist Jura Federation (written in 1880) gives a flavour of anarchist
ideas on this subject:

> "The bourgeoisie's power over the popular masses springs from economic
> privileges, political domination and the enshrining of such privileges
> in the laws. So we must strike at the wellsprings of bourgeois power,
> as well as its various manifestations.
>
> "The following measures strike us as essential to the welfare of the
> revolution, every bit as much as armed struggle against its enemies:
>
> "The insurgents must confiscate social capital, landed estates, mines,
> housing, religious and public buildings, instruments of labour, raw
> materials, gems and precious stones and manufactured products:
>
> "All political, administrative and judicial authorities are to be
> deposed . . . What should the organisational measures of the
> revolution be?
>
> "Immediate and spontaneous establishment of trade bodies: provisional
> assumption by those of . . . social capital . . .: local federation of
> a trades bodies and labour organisation:
>
> "Establishment of neighbourhood groups and federations of same . . .
>
> "Organisation of the insurgent forces . . . the federation of all the
> revolutionary forces of the insurgent Communes . . . Federation of
> Communes and organisation of the masses, with an eye to the
> revolution's enduring until such time as all reactionary activity has
> been completely eradicated . . . Once trade bodies have been have been
> established, the next step is to organise local life. The organ of
> this life is to be the federation of trades bodies and it is this
> local federation which is to constitute the future Commune." [**No
> Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, pp. 246-7]

Clearly, anarchists do have some ideas on what the working class will
*"replace"* the state with and how it will use its *"revolutionary
power"*!

Similarly, Lenin's statement that *"the anarchists even deny that the
revolutionary proletariat should utilise its state power, its
revolutionary dictatorship"* again distorts the anarchist position. As
we argued in [the last section](secH1.html#sech13), our objection to the
"state power" of the proletariat is precisely **because** it cannot, by
its very nature as a state, actually allow the working class to manage
society directly (and, of course, it automatically excludes other
sections of the working masses, such as the peasantry and artisans). We
argued that, in practice, it would simply mean the dictatorship of a few
party leaders. This position, we must stress, was one Lenin himself was
arguing in the year after completing **State and Revolution** and so the
leading Bolsheviks confirmed the anarchist argument that the
"dictatorship of the proletariat" would, in fact, become a dictatorship
**over** the proletariat by the party.

Italian anarchist Camillo Berneri summed up the differences well:

> *"The Marxists . . . foresee the natural disappearance of the State as
> a consequence of the destruction of classes by the means of 'the
> dictatorship of the proletariat,' that is to say State Socialism,
> whereas the Anarchists desire the destruction of the classes by means
> of a social revolution which eliminates, with the classes, the State.
> The Marxists, moreover, do not propose the armed conquest of the
> Commune by the whole proletariat, but the propose the conquest of the
> State by the party which imagines that it represents the proletariat.
> The Anarchists allow the use of direct power by the proletariat, but
> they understand by the organ of this power to be formed by the entire
> corpus of systems of communist administration-corporate organisations
> [i.e. industrial unions], communal institutions, both regional and
> national-freely constituted outside and in opposition to all political
> monopoly by parties and endeavouring to a minimum administrational
> centralisation."* [*"Dictatorship of the Proletariat and State
> Socialism"*, pp. 51-2, **Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review**, no. 4,
> p. 52]

Clearly, Lenin's assertions are little more than straw men. Anarchists
are not only well aware of the need for a federation of working class
associations (workers' councils or soviets) to replace the state, they
were advocating it long before Lenin took up this perspective in 1917
(as we discuss in [section H.3.10](secH3.html#sech310)). The key
difference being, of course, anarchists meant it will Lenin saw it as a
means of securing Bolshevik party power.

Lastly, it should also be noted that Marxists, having taken so long to
draw the same conclusions as anarchists like Proudhon and Bakunin, have
tended to make a fetish of workers councils. As an example, we find
Chris Harman of the British SWP complaining that the Argentinean masses
organised themselves in the wrong way as part of their revolt against
neo-liberalism which started in December 2001. He states that the
*"neighbourhood committees and popular assemblies"* created by the
revolt *"express the need of those who have overthrown presidents to
organise themselves"* and notes *"they have certain similarities with
the characteristic forms of mass self organisation that arose in the
great working class struggles of the 20th century - the workers'
councils or soviets."* But, he stressed, *"they also have very important
differences from these."* Yet Harman's complaints show his own
confusions, seriously arguing that *"the popular assemblies are not yet
bodies of delegates. The people at them represent themselves, but do not
have an organic connection with some group of people who they represent
- and who can recall them if they do not carry out their will."*
[*"Argentina: rebellion at the sharp end of the world crisis"*, pp.
3-48, **International Socialism**, vol. 94, p. 25] That, of course, is
the whole point - they are popular **assemblies**! A popular assembly
does not "represent" anyone because its members govern themselves, i.e.
are directly democratic. They are the elemental bodies which recall any
delegates who do not implement their mandate! But given that Leninism
aims at party power, this concern for representation is perfectly
understandable, if lamentable.

So rather than celebrate this rise in mass self-management and
self-organisation, Harman complains that these *"popular assemblies are
not anchored in the workplaces where millions of Argentineans are still
drawn together on a daily basis to toil."* Need it be said that such an
SWP approved organisation will automatically exclude the unemployed,
housewives, the elderly, children and other working class people who
were taking part in the struggle? In addition, any capitalist crisis is
marked by rising unemployment, firms closing and so on. While workplaces
must and have been seized by their workers, it is a law of revolutions
that the economic disruption they cause results in increased
unemployment (in this Kropotkin's arguments in **The Conquest of Bread**
have been confirmed time and time again). Significantly, Harman admits
that they include *"organisations of unemployed workers"* as well as
*"that in some of the assemblies an important leading role is played by
unemployed activists shaped by their role in past industrial
struggles."* He does not, however, note that creating workers' councils
would end their active participation in the revolt. [**Op. Cit.**, p.
25]

That the Argentine working class formed organs of power which were not
totally dependent on the workplace was, therefore, a good sign. Factory
assemblies and federations must be formed but as a complement to, rather
than as a replacement of, the community assemblies. Harman states that
the assemblies were *"closer to the sections - the nightly district mass
meetings - of the French Revolution than to the workers' councils of
1905 and 1917 in Russia"* and complains that a *"21st century uprising
was taking the form of the archetypal 18th century revolution!"* [**Op.
Cit.**. p. 25 and p. 22] Did the Argentineans not realise that a 21st
century uprising should mimic *"the great working class struggles of the
20th century"*, particularly that which took place in a mostly
pre-capitalist Tsarist regime which was barely out of the 18th century
itself? Did they not realise that the leaders of the vanguard party know
better than themselves how they should organise and conduct their
struggles? That the people of the 21st century knew best how to organise
their own revolts is lost of Harman, who prefers to squeeze the
realities of modern struggles into the forms which Marxists took so long
to recognise in the first place. Given that anarchists have been
discussing the possibilities of community assemblies for some time,
perhaps we can expect Leninists to recognise their importance in a few
decades? After all, the Bolsheviks in Russia were slow to realise the
significance of the soviets in 1905 so Harman's position is hardly
surprising.

So, it is easy to see what anarchists think of Lenin's assertion that
*"Anarchism had failed to give anything even approaching a true solution
of the concrete political problems, **viz**., must the old state machine
be **smashed**? and **what** should supersede it?"* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
350] We simply point out that Lenin was utterly distorting the anarchist
position on social revolution. Revolutionary anarchists had, since the
1860s, argued that workers' councils (soviets) could be both a weapon of
class struggle against capitalism and the state as well as the framework
of the future (libertarian) socialist society. Lenin only came to
superficially similar conclusions in 1917. Which means that when he
talked of workers' councils, Lenin was only repeating Bakunin - the
difference being we anarchists mean it!

H.1.5 Why do anarchists reject *"utilising the present state"*?
---------------------------------------------------------------

This is another key issue, the question of Marxists demanding (in the
words of Lenin) *"that the proletariat be prepared for revolution by
utilising the present state"* while anarchists *"reject this."*
[**Essential Works of Lenin**, p. 358] By this, Lenin meant the taking
part of socialists in bourgeois elections, standing candidates for
office and having socialist representatives in Parliament and other
local and national state bodies. In other words, what Marx termed
*"political action"* and the Bolsheviks *"revolutionary
Parliamentarianism."*

For anarchists, the use of elections does not "prepare" the working
class for revolution (i.e. managing their own affairs and society).
Rather, it prepares them to follow leaders and let others act for them.
In the words of Rudolf Rocker:

> *"Participation in the politics of the bourgeois States has not
> brought the labour movement a hair's-breadth nearer to Socialism, but
> thanks to this method, Socialism has almost been completely crushed
> and condemned to insignificance . . . Participation in parliamentary
> politics has affected the Socialist Labour movement like an insidious
> poison. It destroyed the belief in the necessity of constructive
> Socialist activity, and, worse of all, the impulse to self-help, by
> inoculating people with the ruinous delusion that salvation always
> comes from above."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 54]

While electoral ("political") activity ensures that the masses become
accustomed to following leaders and letting them act on their behalf,
anarchists' support direct action as *"the best available means for
preparing the masses to manage their own personal and collective
interests; and besides, anarchists feel that even now the working people
are fully capable of handling their own political and administrative
interests."* Political action, in contrast, needs centralised
*"authoritarian organisations"* and results in *"ceding power by all to
someone, the delegate, the representative"*. "For direct pressure put
against the ruling classes by the masses, the Socialist Party has
substituted representation" and *"instead of fostering the class
struggle . . . it has adopted class collaboration in the legislative
arena, without which all reforms would remain a vain hope."* [Luigi
Galleani, **The End of Anarchism?**, pp. 13-4, p. 14 and p. 12]

Anarchists, therefore, argue that we need to reclaim the power which has
been concentrated into the hands of the state. That is why we stress
direct action. Direct action means action by the people themselves, that
is action directly taken by those directly affected. Through direct
action, we dominate our own struggles, it is we who conduct it, organise
it, manage it. We do not hand over to others our own acts and task of
self-liberation. That way, we become accustomed to managing our own
affairs, creating alternative, libertarian, forms of social organisation
which can become a force to resist the state, win reforms and,
ultimately, become the framework of a free society. In other words,
direct action creates organs of self-activity (such as community
assemblies, factory committees, workers' councils, and so on) which, to
use Bakunin's words, are *"creating not only the ideas but also the
facts of the future itself."*

The idea that socialists standing for elections somehow prepares working
class people for revolution is simply wrong. Utilising the state,
standing in elections, only prepares people for following leaders - it
does not encourage the self-activity, self-organisation, direct action
and mass struggle required for a social revolution. Moreover, as Bakunin
predicted use of elections has a corrupting effect on those who use it.
The history of radicals using elections has been a long one of betrayal
and the transformation of revolutionary parties into reformist ones (see
[section J.2.6](secJ2.html#secj26) for more discussion). Using the
existing state ensures that the division at the heart of existing
society (namely a few who govern and the many who obey) is reproduced in
the movements trying to abolish it. It boils down to handing effective
leadership to special people, to "leaders," just when the situation
requires working people to solve their own problems and take matters
into their own hands:

> "The Social Question will be put . . . long before the Socialists have
> conquered a few seats in Parliament, and thus the solution of the
> question will be actually in the hands of the workmen [and women]
> themselves . . .
> "Under the influence of government worship, they may try to nominate a
> new government . . . and they may entrust it with the solution of all
> difficulties. It is so simple, so easy, to throw a vote into the
> ballot-box, and to return home! So gratifying to know that there is
> somebody who will arrange your own affairs for the best, while you are
> quietly smoking your pipe and waiting for orders which you have only
> to execute, not to reason about." [Kropotkin, **Act for Yourselves**,
> p. 34]

Only the struggle for freedom (or freedom itself) can be the school for
freedom, and by placing power into the hands of leaders, utilising the
existing state ensures that socialism is postponed rather than prepared
for. As such, strikes and other forms of direct action *"are of enormous
value; they create, organise, and form a workers' army, an army which is
bound to break down the power of the bourgeoisie and the State, and lay
the ground for a new world."* [Bakunin, **The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, pp. 384-5] In contrast, utilising the present state only
trains people in following leaders and so socialism *"lost its creative
initiative and became an ordinary reform movement . . . content with
success at the polls, and no longer attributed any importance to social
upbuilding."* [Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, p. 55]

Which highlights another key problem with the notion of utilising the
present state as Marxist support for electioneering is somewhat at odds
with their claims of being in favour of collective, mass action. There
is nothing more isolated, atomised and individualistic than voting. It
is the act of one person in a box by themselves. It is the total
opposite of collective struggle. The individual is alone before, during
and after the act of voting. Indeed, unlike direct action, which, by its
very nature, throws up new forms of organisation in order to manage and
co-ordinate the struggle, voting creates no alternative social
structures. Nor can it as it is not based on nor does it create
collective action or organisation. It simply empowers an individual (the
elected representative) to act on behalf of a collection of other
individuals (the voters). Such delegation will hinder collective
organisation and action as the voters expect their representative to act
and fight for them - if they did not, they would not vote for them in
the first place!

Given that Marxists usually slander anarchists as "individualists" the
irony is delicious!

If we look at the anti-Poll-Tax campaign in the UK in the late 1980s and
early 1990s, we can see what would happen to a mass movement which
utilised electioneering. The various left-wing parties, particularly
Militant (now the Socialist Party) spent a lot of time and effort
lobbying Labour Councillors not to implement the tax (with no success).
Let us assume they had succeeded and the Labour Councillors had refused
to implement the tax (or "socialist" candidates had been elected to stop
it). What would have happened? Simply that there would not have been a
mass movement or mass organisation based on non-payment, nor
self-organised direct action to resist warrant sales, nor community
activism of any form. Rather, the campaign would have consisted to
supporting the councillors in their actions, mass rallies in which the
leaders would have informed us of their activities on our behalf and,
perhaps, rallies and marches to protest any action the government had
inflicted on them. The leaders may have called for some form of mass
action but this action would not have come from below and so not a
product of working class self-organisation, self-activity and
self-reliance. Rather, it would have been purely re-active and a case of
follow the leader, without the empowering and liberating aspects of
taking action by yourself, as a conscious and organised group. It would
have replaced the struggle of millions with the actions of a handful of
leaders.

Of course, even discussing this possibility indicates how remote it is
from reality. The Labour Councillors were not going to act - they were
far too "practical" for that. Years of working within the system, of
using elections, had taken their toll decades ago. Anarchists, of
course, saw the usefulness of picketing the council meetings, of
protesting against the Councillors and showing them a small example of
the power that existed to resist them if they implemented the tax. As
such, the picket would have been an expression of direct action, as it
was based on showing the power of our direct action and class
organisations. Lobbying, however, was building illusions in "leaders"
acting for us and based on pleading rather than defiance. But, then
again, Militant desired to replace the current leaders with themselves
and so had an interest in promoting such tactics and focusing the
struggle on leaders and whether they would act for people or not.

Unfortunately, the Socialists never really questioned **why** they had
to lobby the councillors in the first place - if utilising the existing
state **was** a valid radical or revolutionary tactic, why has it always
resulted in a de-radicalising of those who use it? This would be the
inevitable results of any movement which "complements" direct action
with electioneering. The focus of the movement will change from the base
to the top, from self-organisation and direct action from below to
passively supporting the leaders. This may not happen instantly, but
over time, just as the party degenerates by working within the system,
the mass movement will be turned into an electoral machine for the party
- even arguing against direct action in case it harms the election
chances of the leaders. Just as the trade union leaders have done again
and again in Britain and elsewhere.

So anarchists point to the actual record of Marxists *"utilising the
present state"*. Murray Bookchin's comments about the German Social
Democrats are appropriate here:

> *"[T]he party's preoccupation with parliamentarism was taking it ever
> away from anything Marx had envisioned. Instead of working to
> overthrow the bourgeois state, the SPD, with its intense focus on
> elections, had virtually become an engine for getting votes and
> increasing its Reichstag representation within the bourgeois state . .
> . The more artful the SPD became in these realms, the more its
> membership and electorate increased and, with the growth of new
> pragmatic and opportunistic adherents, the more it came to resemble a
> bureaucratic machine for acquiring power under capitalism rather than
> a revolutionary organisation to eliminate it."* [**The Third
> Revolution**, vol. 2, p. 300]

The reality of working within the state soon transformed the party and
its leadership, as Bakunin predicted. If we look at Leninism, we
discover a similar failure to consider the evidence:

> *"From the early 1920s on, the Leninist attachment to pre-WWI social
> democratic tactics such as electoral politics and political activity
> within pro-capitalist labour unions dominated the perspectives of the
> so-called Communist. But if these tactics were correct ones, why
> didn't they lead to a less dismal set of results? We must be
> materialists, not idealists. What was the actual outcome of the
> Leninist strategies? Did Leninist strategies result in successful
> proletarian revolutions, giving rise to societies worthy of the human
> beings that live in them? The revolutionary movement in the inter-war
> period was defeated."* [Max Anger, *"The Spartacist School of
> Falsification"*, pp. 50-2, **Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed**, no.
> 43, pp. 51-2]

As Scottish Anarchist Ethel McDonald argued in 1937, the tactics urged
by Lenin were a disaster in practice:

> *"At the Second Congress of the Third International, Moscow, a comrade
> who is with us now in Spain, answering Zinoviev, urged faith in the
> syndicalist movement in Germany and the end of parliamentary
> communism. He was ridiculed. Parliamentarianism, communist
> parliamentarianism, but still parliamentarianism would save Germany.
> And it did . . . Saved it from Socialism. Saved it for Fascism.
> Parliamentary social democracy and parliamentary communism have
> destroyed the socialist hope of Europe, has made a carnage of human
> liberty. In Britain, parliamentarianism saved the workers from
> Socialism . . . Have you not had enough of this huge deception? Are
> you still prepared to continue in the same old way, along the same old
> lines, talking and talking and doing nothing?"* [*"The Volunteer
> Ban"*, pp. 72-5, **Workers City**, Farquhar McLay (ed.), p. 74]

When the Nazis took power in 1933 in Germany the 12 million Socialist
and Communist voters and 6 million organised workers took no action. In
Spain, it was the anarcho-syndicalist CNT which lead the battle against
fascism on the streets and helped create one of the most important
social revolutions the world has seen. The contrast could not be more
clear. And many Marxists urge us to follow Lenin's advice today!

All in all, the history of socialists actually using elections has been
a dismal failure and was obviously a failure long before 1917.
Subsequent experience has only confirmed that conclusion. Rather than
prepare the masses for revolution, it has done the opposite. As we argue
in [section J.2](secJ2.html), this is to be expected. That Lenin could
still argue along these lines even after the rise of reformism
("revisionism") in the 1890s and the betrayal of social democracy in
1914 indicates a lack of desire to learn the lessons of history.

The negative effects of *"utilising"* the present state are, sometimes,
acknowledged by Marxists although this rarely interferes with their
support for standing in elections. Thus we find that advocate of
"revolutionary" parliamentarianism, Trotsky, noting that *[i]f
parliamentarianism served the proletariat to a certain extent as a
training school for revolution, then it also served the bourgeoisie to a
far greater extent as the school of counter-revolutionary strategy.
Suffice it to say that by means of parliamentarianism the bourgeoisie
was able so to educate the Social Democracy that it is today [1924] the
main prop of private property."* [**Lessons of October**, pp. 170-1] Of
course, the followers of Lenin and Trotsky are made of sterner stuff
than those of Marx and Engels and so utilising the same tactics will
have a different outcome. As one-time syndicalist William Gallacher put
it in reply to Lenin's question *"[i]f the workers sent you to represent
them in Parliament, would you become corrupt?"*: *"No, I'm sure that
under no circumstances could the bourgeoisie corrupt me."* [quoted by
Mark Shipway, **Anti-Parliamentary Communism**, p. 21] Mere will-power,
apparently, is sufficient to counteract the pressures and influences of
parliamentarianism which Marx and Engels, unlike Bakunin, failed to
predict but whose legacy still haunts the minds of those who claim to be
*"scientific socialists"* and so, presumably, base their politics on
facts and experience rather than wishful thinking.

This is why anarchists reject the notion of radicals utilising the
existing state and instead urge direct action and solidarity outside of
bourgeois institutions. Only this kind of struggle creates the spirit of
revolt and new popular forms of organisation which can fight and replace
the hierarchical structures of capitalist society. Hence anarchists
stress the need of working class people to *"rely on themselves to get
rid of the oppression of Capital, without expecting that the same thing
can be done for them by anybody else. The emancipation of the workmen
[and women] must be the act of the workmen [and women] themselves."*
[Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 32] Only this kind of movement and struggle
can maximise the revolutionary potential of struggles for reforms within
capitalism. As history shows, the alternative has repeatedly failed.

It should be noted, however, that not all Marxists have refused to
recognise the lessons of history. Libertarian Marxists, such as council
communists, also reject *"utilising the present state"* to train the
proletariat for revolution (i.e. for socialists to stand for elections).
Lenin attacked these Marxists who had drawn similar conclusions as the
anarchists (**after** the failure of social-democracy) in his 1920
diatribe **Left-wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder**. In that
pamphlet he used the experiences of the Bolsheviks in semi-Feudal
Tsarist Russia to combat the conclusions drawn by socialists in the
advanced capitalist countries with sizeable social democratic parties.
Lenin's arguments for revolutionary Parliamentarianism did not convince
the anti-Parliamentarians who argued that its *"significance lies not in
its content, but in the person of the author, for the arguments are
scarcely original and have for the most part already been used by others
. . . their fallacy resides mainly in the equation of the conditions,
parties, organisations and parliamentary practice of Western Europe with
their Russian counterparts."* [Anton Pannekoek, **Pannekoek and Gorter's
Marxism**, p. 143] While anarchists would disagree with the underlying
assumption that Marx was right in considering parliamentarianism as
essential and it only became problematic later, we would agree
whole-heartedly with the critique presented (unsurprisingly, as we made
it first).

Pannekoek's article along with Herman Gorter's **Open Letter to Comrade
Lenin** are essential reading for those who are taken in with Lenin's
arguments, along with the chapter on *"Socialism"* in Alexander
Berkman's **What is Anarchism?**. Interestingly, the Comintern asked
Berkman to translate Lenin's **Left-Wing Communism** and he agreed until
he read its contents. He then said he would continue if he could write a
rebuttal, a request which was rejected. For anarchists, placing the word
"revolutionary" in front of "parliamentarianism" does not provide a
shield against the negative influences and pressures which naturally
arise by utilising that tactic. Given the sorry history of radicals
doing so, this is unsurprising. What is surprising is how so many
Marxists are willing to ignore that history in favour of Lenin's
pamphlet.

H.1.6 Why do anarchists try to *"build the new world in the shell of the old"*?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Another key difference between anarchists and Marxists is on how the
movement against capitalism should organise in the here and now.
Anarchists argue that it should prefigure the society we desire - namely
it should be self-managed, decentralised, built and organised from the
bottom-up in a federal structure. This perspective can be seen from the
justly famous *"Circular of the Sixteen"* issued at the Sonvillier
congress by the libertarian wing of the First International:

> *"The future society must be nothing else than the universalisation of
> the organisation that the International has formed for itself. We must
> therefore take care to make this organisation as close as possible to
> our ideal. How could one want an equalitarian and free society to
> issue from an authoritarian organisation? It is impossible. The
> International, the embryo of the future human society is held to be
> henceforward, the faithful image of our principles of liberty and of
> federation, and is considered to reject any principle tending to
> authority and dictatorship."* [quoted by K.J. Kenafick, **Michael
> Bakunin and Karl Marx**, pp. 262-3]

Anarchists apply this insight to all organisations they take part in,
stressing that the only way we can create a self-managed society is by
self-managing our own struggles and organisations today. It is an
essential part of our politics that we encourage people to *"learn how
to participate in the life of the organisation and to do without leaders
and permanent officials"* and *"practice direct action,
decentralisation, autonomy and free initiative."* This flows logically
from our politics, as it is *"obvious that anarchists should seek to
apply to their personal and political lives this same principle upon
which, they believe, the whole of human society should be based."*
[Malatesta, **The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 94] In this way we turn our
class organisations (indeed, the class struggle itself) into practical
and effective *"schools of anarchism"* in which we learn to manage our
own affairs without hierarchy and bosses and so popular organisations
become the cells of the new society:

> *"Libertarian forms of organisation have the enormous responsibility
> of trying to resemble the society they are seeking to develop. They
> can tolerate no disjunction between ends and means. Direct action, so
> integral to the management of a future society, has its parallel in
> the use of direct action to change society. Communal forms, so
> integral to the structure of a future society, have their parallel in
> the use of communal forms - collectives, affinity groups, and the like
> - to change society. The ecological ethics, confederal relationships,
> and decentralised structures we would expect to find in a future
> society, are fostered by the values and networks we try to use in
> achieving an ecological society."* [Murray Bookchin, **The Ecology of
> Freedom**, pp. 446-7]

Marxists reject this argument. Instead they stress the importance of
centralisation and consider the anarchist argument as utopian. For
effective struggle, strict centralisation is required as the capitalist
class and state is also centralised. In other words, to fight for
socialism there is a need to organise in a way which the capitalists
have utilised - to fight fire with fire. Unfortunately they forget to
extinguish a fire you have to use water. Adding more flame will only
increase the combustion, **not** put it out!

Of course, Marx and Engels misrepresented the anarchist position. They
asserted that the anarchist position implied that the Paris Communards
*"would not have failed if they had understood that the Commune was 'the
embryo of the future human society' and had cast away all discipline and
all arms, that is, the things which must disappear when there are no
more wars!"* [**Collected Works**, vol. 23, p. 115] Needless to say this
is simply a slander on the anarchist position particularly as anarchists
are well aware of the need to defend a revolution (see [section
H.2.1](secH2.html#sech21)) and the need for **self**-discipline (see
[section H.4](secH4.html)). Anarchists, as the Circular makes clear,
recognise that we cannot totally reflect the future and so the current
movement can only be *"as near as possible to our ideal."* Thus we have
to do things, such as fighting the bosses, rising in insurrection,
smashing the state or defending a revolution, which we would not have to
do in a socialist society. However, we can do these things in a manner
which is consistent with our values and our aims. For example, a strike
can be run in two ways. Either it can be managed via assemblies of
strikers and co-ordinated by councils of elected, mandated and
recallable delegates or it can be run from the top-down by a few trade
union leaders. The former, of course, is the anarchist way and it
reflects *"the future human society"* (and, ironically, is paid
lip-service to by Marxists).

Such common sense, unfortunately, was lacking in Marx and Engels, who
instead decided to utter nonsense for a cheap polemical point. Neither
answered the basic point - how do people become able to manage society
if they do not directly manage their own organisations and struggles
today? How can a self-managed society come about unless people practice
it in the here and now? Can people create a socialist society if they do
not implement its basic ideas in their current struggles and
organisations? Equally, it would be churlish to note that the Commune's
system of federalism by mandated delegates had been advocated by Bakunin
for a number of years before 1871 and, unsurprisingly, he took the
revolt as a striking, if incomplete, confirmation of anarchism (see
[section A.5.1](secA5.html#seca51)).

The Paris Commune, it must be stressed, brought the contradictions of
the Marxist attacks on anarchism to the surface. It is deeply sad to
read, say, Engels attacking anarchists for holding certain position yet
praising the 1871 revolution when it implement exactly the same ideas.
For example, in his deeply inaccurate diatribe *"The Bakuninists at
Work"*, Engels was keen to distort the federalist ideas of anarchism,
dismissing *"the so-called principles of anarchy, free federation of
independent groups."* [**Collected Works**, vol. 23, p. 297] Compare
this to his praise for the Paris Commune which, he gushed, refuted the
Blanquist notion of a revolution sprung by a vanguard which would create
*"the strictest, dictatorial centralisation of all power in the hands of
the new revolutionary government."* Instead the Commune *"appealed to
[the provinces] to form a free federation of all French Communes . . . a
national organisation which for the first time was really created by the
nation itself. It was precisely the oppressing power of the former
centralised government . . . which was to fall everywhere, just as it
had fallen in Paris."* [**Selected Writings**, pp. 256-7]

Likewise, Engels praised the fact that, to combat the independence of
the state from society, the Commune introduced wages for officials the
same as that *"received by other workers"* and the use of *"the binding
mandate to delegates to representative bodies."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 258]
Compare this to Engels attack on anarchist support for binding mandates
(which, like our support for free federation, pre-dated the Commune).
Then it was a case of this being part of Bakunin's plans to control the
international *"for a secret society . . . there is nothing more
convenient than the imperative mandate"* as all its members vote one
way, while the others will *"contradict one another."* Without these
binding mandates, *"the common sense of the independent delegates will
swiftly unite them in a common party against the party of the secret
society."* Obviously the notion that delegates from a group should
reflect the wishes of that group was lost on Engels. He even questioned
the utility of this system for *"if all electors gave their delegates
imperative mandates concerning all points in the agenda, meetings and
debates of the delegates would be superfluous."* [**Collected Works**,
vol. 22, p. 281 and p. 277] It should be noted that Trotsky shared
Engels dislike of "representatives" being forced to actually represent
the views of their constituents within the party. [**In Defense of
Marxism**, pp. 80-1]

Clearly a *"free federation"* of Communes and binding mandates are bad
when anarchists advocate them but excellent when workers in revolt
implement them! Why this was the case Engels failed to explain. However,
it does suggest that anarchist ideas that we must reflect the future in
how we organise today is no hindrance to revolutionary change and, in
fact, reflects what is required to turn a revolt into a genuine social
revolution.

Engels asserted that the anarchist position meant that *"the proletariat
is told to organise not in accordance with the requirements of the
struggle . . . but according to the vague notions of a future society
entertained by some dreamers."* [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 23, p. 66] In this
he was wrong, as he failed to understand that the anarchist position was
produced by the class struggle itself. He failed to understand how that
struggle reflects our aspirations for a better world, how we see what is
wrong with modern society and seek to organise to end such abuses rather
than perpetuate them in new forms. Thus the trade unions which Bakunin
argued would be the basis of a free society are organised from the
bottom-up and based upon the direct participation of the workers. This
form of organisation was not forced upon the workers by some
intellectuals thinking they were a good idea. Rather they were created
to fight the bosses and reflected the fact that workers were sick of
being treating as servants and did not wish to see that repeated in
their own organisations.

As Bakunin argued, when a union delegates authority to its officials it
may be *"very good for the committees, but [it is] not at all favourable
for the social, intellectual, and moral progress of the collective power
of the International."* The committees *"substituted their own will and
their own ideas for that of the membership"* while the membership
expressed *"indifference to general problems"* and left *"all problems
to the decisions of committees."* This could only be solved by
*"call[ing] general membership meetings,"* that is *"popular
assemblies."* Bakunin goes on to argue that the *"organisation of the
International, having as its objective not the creation of new despotism
but the uprooting of all domination, will take on an essentially
different character than the organisation of the State."* This must be
the *"organisation of the trade sections and their representation by the
Chambers of Labour"* and these *"bear in themselves the living seeds of
the new society which is to replace the old world. They are creating not
only the ideas, but also the facts of the future itself."* [**Bakunin on
Anarchism**, pp. 246-7 and p. 255]

Ou Shengbai, a Chinese anarchist, argued that libertarians *"deeply feel
that the causes of popular misery are these: (1) Because of the present
political system power is concentrated in a few hands with the result
that the majority of the people do not have the opportunity for free
participation. (2) Because of the capitalist system all means of
production are concentrated in the hands of the capitalists with the
results that the benefits that ought to accrue to labourers are usurped
by capitalists.* [quoted by Arif Dirlik, **Anarchism in the Chinese
Revolution**, p. 235] Does it make much sense to organise in ways which
reflect these problems? Surely the reason why people become socialists
is because they seek to change society, to give the mass of the
population an opportunity for free participation and to manage their own
affairs. Why destroy those hopes and dreams by organising in a way which
reflects the society we oppose rather than the one we desire?

Ultimately, Engels dismissed the practical experiences of working class
people, dismissed our ability to create a better world and our ability
to dream. In fact, he seems to think there is some division of labour
between *"the proletariat"* who do the struggling and *"some dreamers"*
who provide the ideas. The notion that working class people can both
struggle **and** dream was lost on him, as was the notion that our
dreams shape our struggles and our struggles shape our dreams. People
resist oppression and exploitation because we want to determine what
goes on in our lives and to manage our own affairs. In that process, we
create new forms of organisation which allows that to happen, ones that
reflect our dreams of a better world. This is not in opposition to the
needs of the struggle, as Engels asserted, but are rather an expression
of it. To dismiss this process, to advocate organisational methods which
are the very antithesis of what working class people have shown,
repeatedly, what they want, is the height of arrogance and, ultimately,
little more than a dismissal of the hopes, dreams and creative
self-activity of working class people. As libertarian socialist
Cornelius Castoriadis put it:

> *"the organisation's inspiration can come only from the socialist
> structures created by the working class in the course of its own
> history. It must let itself be guided by the principles on which the
> soviet and the factory council were founded . . . the principles of
> workers' management must govern the operation and structure of the
> organisation. Apart from them, there are only capitalist principles,
> which, as we have seen, can only result in the establishment of
> capitalist relationships."* [**Political and Social Writings**, vol.
> 2, pp. 217-8]

Ironically enough, given their own and their followers claims of
Marxism's proletarian core, it was Marx and Engels who were at odds with
the early labour movement, **not** Bakunin and the anarchists. Historian
Gwyn A. Williams notes in the early British labour movement there were
*"to be no leaders"* and the organisations were *"consciously modelled
on the civil society they wished to create."* [**Artisans and
Sans-Culottes**, p. 72] Lenin, unsurprisingly, dismissed the fact that
the British workers *"thought it was an indispensable sign of democracy
for all the members to do all the work of managing the unions"* as
*"primitive democracy"* and *"absurd."* He also complained about *"how
widespread is the 'primitive' conception of democracy among the masses
of the students and workers"* in Russia. [**Essential Works of Lenin**,
pp. 162-3] Clearly, the anarchist perspective reflects the ideas the
workers' movement before it degenerates into reformism and bureaucracy
while Marxism reflects it during this process of degeneration. Needless
to say, the revolutionary nature of the early union movement clearly
shows who was correct!

Anarchists, in other words, simply generalised the experiences of the
workers in struggle and Bakunin and his followers were expressing a
common position held by many in the International. Even Marx paid
lip-service to this when he stated *"in contrast to old society . . . a
new society is springing up"* and the *"Pioneer of that new society is
the International Working Men's Association."* [**Selected Works**, p.
263] Clearly, considering the International as the embryo of the future
society is worthy only of scorn as the correct position is to consider
it merely as a pioneer!

As such, libertarians *"lay no claims to originality in proposing this
[kind of prefigurative organisation]. In every revolution, during most
strikes and daily at the level of workshop organisation, the working
class resorts to this type of direct democracy."* [Maurice Brinton,
**For Workers' Power**, p. 48] Given how Marxists pay lip-service to
such forms of working class self-organisation, it seems amusing to hear
them argue that this is correct for everyone else but not themselves and
their own organisations! Apparently, the same workers who are expected
to have the determination and consciousness necessary to overthrow
capitalism and create a new world in the future are unable to organise
themselves in a socialist manner today. Instead, we have to tolerate
so-called "revolutionary" organisations which are just as hierarchical,
top-down and centralised as the system which provoked our anger at its
injustice in the first and which we are trying to end!

Related to this is the fact that Marxists (particularly Leninists)
favour centralisation while anarchists favour decentralisation within a
federal organisation. Anarchists do not think that decentralisation
implies isolation or narrow localism. We have always stressed the
importance of federalism to co-ordinate decisions. Power would be
decentralised, but federalism ensures collective decisions and action.
Under centralised systems, anarchists argue, power is placed into the
hands of a few leaders. Rather than the real interests and needs of the
people being co-ordinated, centralism simply means the imposition of the
will of a handful of leaders, who claim to "represent" the masses.
Co-ordination from below, in other words, is replaced by coercion from
above in the centralised system and the needs and interests of all are
replaced by those of a few leaders at the centre.

Such a centralised, inevitably top-down, system can only be
counter-productive, both practically and in terms of generating
socialist consciousness:

> "Bolsheviks argue that to fight the highly centralised forces of
> modern capitalism requires an equally centralised type of party. This
> ignores the fact that capitalist centralisation is based on coercion
> and force and the exclusion of the overwhelming majority of the
> population from participating in any of its decisions . . .
>
> "The very structure of these organisations ensures that their
> personnel do not think for themselves, but unquestioningly carry out
> the instructions of their superiors . . .
>
> "Advocates of 'democratic centralism' insist that it is the only type
> of organisations which can function effectively under conditions of
> illegality. This is nonsense. The 'democratic centralist' organisation
> particularly vulnerable to police persecution. When all power is
> concentrated in the hands of the leaders, their arrest immediately
> paralyses the whole organisation. Members trained to accept
> unquestioningly the instruction of an all-wise Central Committee will
> find it very difficult to think and act for themselves. The
> experiences of the German Communist Party [under the Nazis] confirm
> this. With their usual inconsistency, the Trotskyists even explain the
> demise of their Western European sections during World War II by
> telling people how their leaders were murdered by the Gestapo!"
> [Maurice Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 43]

As we discuss in depth in [section H.5](secH5.html) the Leninist
vanguard party does, ironically, create in embryo a new world simply
because once in power it refashions society in **its** image. However,
no anarchist would consider such a centralised, hierarchical top-down
class system rooted in bureaucratic power as being remotely desirable or
remotely socialist.

Therefore anarchists *"recognised neither the state nor pyramidal
organisation"* Kropotkin argued, while Marxists *"recognised the state
and pyramidal methods of organisation"* which *"stifled the
revolutionary spirit of the rank-and-file workers."* [**Conquest of
Bread and Other Writings**, p. 212] The Marxist perspective inevitably
places power into the hands of a few leaders, who then decree which
movements to support and encourage based on what is best for the long
term benefit of the party itself rather than the working class. Thus we
find Engels arguing while Marxists were *"obliged to support every
**real** popular movement"* they also had to ensure *"that the scarcely
formed nucleus of our proletarian Party is not sacrificed in vain and
that the proletariat is not decimated in futile local revolts,"* for
example *"a blood-letting like that of 1871 in Paris."* [Marx and
Engels, **The Socialist Revolution**, p. 294 and p. 320] This produces a
conservative approach to social struggle, with mass actions and
revolutionary situations ignored or warned against because of the
potential harm it could inflict on the party. Unsurprisingly, every
popular revolution has occurred against the advice of the so-called
"revolutionary" Marxist leadership including the Paris Commune and the
1917 February revolution in Russia (even the October seize of power was
done in the face of resistance from the Bolshevik party machine).

It is for these reasons that anarchists *"[a]s much as is humanly
possible . . . try to reflect the liberated society they seek to
achieve"* and *"not slavishly duplicate the prevailing system of
hierarchy, class and authority."* Rather than being the abstract dreams
of isolated thinkers, these *"conclusions . . . emerge from an exacting
study of past revolutions, of the impact centralised parties have had on
the revolutionary process"* and history has more than confirmed the
anarchist warning that the *"revolutionary party, by duplicating these
centralistic, hierarchical features would reproduce hierarchy and
centralism in the post revolutionary society."* [Murray Bookchin,
**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 138, p. 139 and p. 137] Moreover, we
base our arguments on how social movements should organise on the
experiences of past struggles, of the forms of organisation
spontaneously produced by those struggles and which, therefore, reflect
the needs of those struggles and the desire for a better way of life
which produced them. Ultimately, no one knows when a revolution turns
the hopes and aspirations of today into tomorrow's reality and it would
be wise to have some experience of managing our own affairs before hand.

By failing to understand the importance of applying a vision of a free
society to the current class struggle, Marxists help ensure that society
never is created. By copying bourgeois methods within their
"revolutionary" organisations (parties and unions) they ensure bourgeois
ends (inequality and oppression).

H.1.7 Haven't you read Lenin's *"State and Revolution"*?
--------------------------------------------------------

This question is often asked of people who critique Marxism,
particularly its Leninist form. Lenin's **State and Revolution** is
often considered his most democratic work and Leninists are quick to
point to it as proof that Lenin and those who follow his ideas are not
authoritarian. As such, it is an important question. So how do
anarchists reply when people point them to Lenin's work as evidence of
the democratic (even libertarian) nature of Marxism? Anarchists reply in
two ways.

Firstly, we argue many of the essential features of Lenin's ideas are to
be found in anarchist theory and, in fact, had been aspects of anarchism
for decades **before** Lenin put pen to paper. Bakunin, for example,
talked about mandated delegates from workplaces federating into workers'
councils as the framework of a (libertarian) socialist society in the
1860s as well as popular militias to defend a revolution. Moreover, he
was well aware that revolution was a **process** rather than an event
and so would take time to develop and flourish. Hence Murray Bookchin:

> *"Bakunin, Kropotkin, and Malatesta were not so naive as to believe
> that anarchism could be established over night. In imputing this
> notion to Bakunin, Marx and Engels wilfully distorted the Russian
> anarchist's views. Nor did the anarchists . . . believe that abolition
> of the state involved 'laying down of arms' immediately after the
> revolution, to use Marx's obscurantist choice of terms, thoughtlessly
> repeated by Lenin in **State and Revolution**. Indeed, much that
> passes for 'Marxism' in **State and Revolution** is pure anarchism -
> for example, the substitution of revolutionary militias for
> professional armed bodies and the substitution of organs of
> self-management for parliamentary bodies. What is authentically
> Marxist in Lenin's pamphlet is the demand for 'strict centralism,' the
> acceptance of a 'new' bureaucracy, and the identification of soviets
> with a state."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 137]

That this is the case is hidden in Lenin's work as he deliberately
distorts anarchist ideas in it (see sections [H.1.3](secH1.html#sech13)
and [H.1.4](secH1.html#sech14) for example). Therefore, when Marxists
ask whether anarchist have read Lenin's **State and Revolution** we
reply by arguing that most of Lenin's ideas were first expressed by
anarchists and his work just strikes anarchists as little more than a
re-hash of many of our own ideas but placed in a statist context which
totally and utterly undermines them in favour of party rule.

Secondly, anarchists argue that regardless of what Lenin argued for in
**State and Revolution**, he did not apply those ideas in practice
(indeed, he did the exact opposite). Therefore, the question of whether
we have read Lenin's work simply drives home how the ideological nature
and theoretical bankruptcy of Leninism. This is because the person is
asking you to evaluate their politics based on what they say rather than
on what they do, like any politician.

To use an analogy, what would you say to a politician who has cut
welfare spending by 50% and increased spending on the military and who
argues that this act is irrelevant and that you should look at their
manifesto which states that they were going to do the opposite? You
would dismiss this argument as laughable and them as liars as you would
evaluate them by their actions, not by what they say. Leninists, by
urging you to read Lenin's **State and Revolution** are asking you to
evaluate them by what their manifesto says and ignore what they did.
Anarchists, on the other hand, ask you to evaluate the Leninist
manifesto by comparing it to what they actually did in power. Such an
evaluation is the only means by which we can judge the validity of
Leninist claims and politics.

As we discuss the role of Leninist ideology in the fate of the Russian
Revolution in [section H.6](secH6.html) we will provide a summary of
Lenin's claims in his famous work **State and Revolution** and what he
did in practice here. Suffice to say the difference between reality and
rhetoric was extremely large and, therefore, it is a damning indictment
of Bolshevism. Post-October, the Bolsheviks not only failed to introduce
the ideas of Lenin's book, they in fact introduced the exact opposite.
As one historian puts it:

> *"To consider 'State and Revolution' as the basic statement of Lenin's
> political philosophy - which non-Communists as well as Communists
> usually do - is a serious error. Its argument for a utopian anarchism
> never actually became official policy. The Leninism of 1917 . . . came
> to grief in a few short years; it was the revived Leninism of 1902
> which prevailed as the basis for the political development of the
> USSR."* [Robert V. Daniels, **The Conscience of the Revolution**, pp.
> 51-2]

Daniels is being far too lenient with the Bolsheviks. It was not, in
fact, *"a few short years"* before the promises of 1917 were broken. In
some cases, it was a few short hours. In others, a few short months.
However, in a sense Daniels is right. It did take until 1921 before all
hope for saving the Russian Revolution finally ended.

Simply put, if the **State and Revolution** is the manifesto of
Bolshevism, then not a single promise in that work was kept by the
Bolsheviks when they got into power. As such, Lenin's work cannot be
used to evaluate Bolshevik ideology as Bolshevism paid no attention to
it once it had taken state power. While Lenin and his followers chant
rhapsodies about the Soviet State (this 'highest and most perfect system
of democracy") they quickly turned its democratic ideas into a
fairy-tale, and an ugly fairy-tale at that, by simply ignoring it in
favour of party power (and party dictatorship). To state the obvious, to
quote theory and not relate it to the practice of those who claim to
follow it is a joke. If you look at the actions of the Bolsheviks after
the October Russian Revolution you cannot help draw the conclusion that
Lenin's **State and Revolution** has nothing to do with Bolshevik policy
and presents a false image of what Leninists desire. As such, we must
present a comparison between rhetoric and realty.

In order to show that this is the case, we need to summarise the main
ideas contained in Lenin's work. Moreover, we need to indicate what the
Bolsheviks did, in fact, do. Finally, we need to see if the various
rationales justifying these actions hold water.

So what did Lenin argue for in **State and Revolution**? Writing in the
mid-1930s, anarchist Camillo Berneri summarised the main ideas of that
work as follows:

> *"The Leninist programme of 1917 included these points: the
> discontinuance of the police and standing army, abolition of the
> professional bureaucracy, elections for all public positions and
> offices, revocability of all officials, equality of bureaucratic wages
> with workers' wages, the maximum of democracy, peaceful competition
> among the parties within the soviets, abolition of the death
> penalty."* [*"The Abolition and Extinction of the State,"* pp. 50-1,
> **Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review**, no. 4, p. 50]

As he noted, *"[n]ot a single one of the points of this programme has
been achieved."* This was, of course, under Stalinism and most Leninists
will concur with Berneri. However what Leninists tend not to mention is
that by the end of the 7 month period of Bolshevik rule before the start
of the civil war (i.e., from November 1917 to May 1918) none of these
points existed. So, as an example of what Bolshevism "really" stands for
it seems strange to harp on about a work which was never really
implemented when the its author was in a position to do so (i.e. before
the onslaught of a civil war Lenin thought was inevitable anyway!).
Similarly, if **State and Revolution** indicates the features a
"workers' state" must have then, by May 1918, Russia did not have such a
state and so, logically, it can only be considered as such only if we
assume that the good intentions of its rulers somehow overcome its
political and economic structure (which, sadly, **is** the basic
Trotskyist defence of Leninism against Stalinism!).

To see that Berneri's summary is correct, we need to quote Lenin
directly. Obviously the work is a wide ranging defence of Lenin's
interpretation of Marxist theory on the state. As it is an attempt to
overturn decades of Marxist orthodoxy, much of the work is quotes from
Marx and Engels and Lenin's attempts to enlist them for his case (we
discuss this issue in [section H.3.10](secH3.html#sech310)). Equally, we
need to ignore the numerous straw men arguments about anarchism Lenin
inflicts on his reader. Here we simply list the key points as regards
Lenin's arguments about his "workers' state" and how the workers would
maintain control of it:

> 1) Using the Paris Commune as a prototype, Lenin argued for the
> abolition of *"parliamentarianism"* by turning *"representative
> institutions from mere 'talking shops' into working bodies."* This
> would be done by removing *"the division of labour between the
> legislative and the executive."* [**Essential Works of Lenin**, p. 304
> and p. 306]
>
> 2) *"All officials, without exception, to be elected and subject to
> recall **at any time**"* and so *"directly responsible to their
> constituents."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 302 and p. 306]
>
> 3) The *"immediate introduction of control and superintendence by
> **all,** so that **all** shall become 'bureaucrats' for a time and so
> that, therefore, **no one** can become a 'bureaucrat'."* Proletarian
> democracy would *"take immediate steps to cut bureaucracy down to the
> roots . . . to the complete abolition of bureaucracy"* as the
> *"**essence** of bureaucracy"* is officials becoming transformed*"
> into privileged persons divorced from the masses and **superior to**
> the masses."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 355 and p. 360]
>
> 4) There should be no *"special bodies of armed men"* standing apart
> from the people *"since the majority of the people itself suppresses
> its oppressors, a 'special force' is no longer necessary."* Using the
> example of the Paris Commune, Lenin suggested this meant *"abolition
> of the standing army"* by the *"armed masses."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 275,
> p. 301 and p. 339]
>
> 5) The new (workers) state would be *"the organisation of violence
> for the suppression of . . . the exploiting class, i.e. the
> bourgeoisie. The toilers need a state only to overcome the resistance
> of the exploiters"* who are *"an insignificant minority,"* that is
> *"the landlords and the capitalists."* This would see *"an immense
> expansion of democracy . . . for the poor, democracy for the people"*
> while, simultaneously, imposing *"a series of restrictions on the
> freedom of the oppressors, the exploiters, the capitalists . . . their
> resistance must be broken by force: it is clear that where there is
> suppression there is also violence, there is no freedom, no
> democracy."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 287 and pp. 337-8]

This would be implemented after the current, bourgeois, state had been
smashed. This would be the *"dictatorship of the proletariat"* and be
*"the introduction of complete democracy for the people."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 355] However, the key practical ideas on what the new
"semi-state" would be are contained in these five points. He generalised
these points, considering them valid for all countries.

The first point as the creation of "working bodies", the combining of
legislative and executive bodies. The first body to be created by the
Bolshevik revolution was the "Council of People's Commissars" (CPC) This
was a government separate from and above the Central Executive Committee
(CEC) of the soviets congress which, in turn, was separate from and
above the national soviet congress. It was an executive body elected by
the soviet congress, but the soviets themselves were not turned into
"working bodies." The promises of Lenin's **State and Revolution** did
not last the night.

The Bolsheviks, it must be stressed, clearly recognised that the Soviets
had alienated their power to this body with the party's Central
Committee arguing in November 1917 that *"it is impossible to refuse a
purely Bolshevik government without treason to the slogan of the power
of the Soviets, since a majority at the Second All-Russian Congress of
Soviets . . . handed power over to this government."* [contained in
Robert V. Daniels (ed.), **A Documentary History of Communism**, vol. 1,
pp. 128-9] However, it could be argued that Lenin's promises were kept
as the new government simply gave itself legislative powers four days
later. Sadly, this is not the case. In the Paris Commune the delegates
of the people took executive power into their own hands. Lenin reversed
this and his executive took legislative power from the hands of the
people's delegates. As we discuss in [section H.6.1](secH6.html#sech61),
this concentration of power into executive committees occurred at all
levels of the soviet hierarchy.

What of the next principle, namely the election and recall of all
officials? This lasted slightly longer, namely around 5 months. By March
of 1918, the Bolsheviks started a systematic campaign against the
elective principle in the workplace, in the military and even in the
soviets. In the workplace, Lenin was arguing for appointed one-man
managers *"vested with dictatorial powers"* by April 1918 (see [section
H.3.14](secH3.html#sech314)). In the military, Trotsky simply decreed
the end of elected officers in favour of appointed officers. As far as
the soviets go, the Bolsheviks were refusing to hold elections because
they *"feared that the opposition parties would show gains."* When
elections were held, *"Bolshevik armed force usually overthrew the
results"* in provincial towns. Moreover, the Bolsheviks *"pack[ed] local
soviets"* with representatives of organisations they controlled *"once
they could not longer count on an electoral majority."* [Samuel Farber,
**Before Stalinism**, p. 22, p. 24 and p. 33] This kind of packing was
even practised at the national level when the Bolsheviks gerrymandered a
Bolshevik majority at the Fifth Congress of Soviets. So much for
competition among the parties within the soviets! And as far as the
right of recall went, the Bolsheviks only supported this when the
workers were recalling the opponents of the Bolsheviks, not when the
workers were recalling them.

Then there was the elimination of bureaucracy. The new state soon had a
new bureaucratic and centralised system quickly emerge around it. Rather
than immediately cutting the size and power of the bureaucracy, it
*"grew by leaps and bounds. Control over the new bureaucracy constantly
diminished, partly because no genuine opposition existed. The alienation
between 'people' and 'officials,' which the soviet system was supposed
to remove, was back again. Beginning in 1918, complaints about
'bureaucratic excesses,' lack of contact with voters, and new
proletarian bureaucrats grew louder and louder."* [Oskar Anweiler, **The
Soviets**, p. 242] So the rise of a state bureaucracy started
immediately with the seizure of power by the Bolsheviks, particularly as
the state's functions grew to include economic decisions as well as
political ones. Instead of the state starting to *"wither away"* it
grew:

> *"The old state's political apparatus was 'smashed,' but in its place
> a new bureaucratic and centralised system emerged with extraordinary
> rapidity. After the transfer of government to Moscow in March 1918 it
> continued to expand . . . As the functions of the state expanded so
> did the bureaucracy, and by August 1918 nearly a third of Moscow's
> working population were employed in offices. The great increase in the
> number of employees . . . took place in early to mid-1918 and,
> thereafter, despite many campaigns to reduce their number, they
> remained a steady proportion of the falling population"* [Richard
> Sakwa, *"The Commune State in Moscow in 1918,"* pp. 429-449, **Slavic
> Review**, vol. 46, no. 3/4, pp. 437-8]

This, anarchists would stress, is an inherent feature of centralised
system. As such, this rise of bureaucracy confirmed anarchist
predictions that centralisation will recreate bureaucracy. After all,
some means were required to gather, collate and provide information by
which the central bodies made their decisions. Overtime, this permanent
collection of bodies would become the real power in the state, with the
party members nominally in charge really under the control of an
unelected and uncontrolled officialdom. Thus a necessary side-effect of
Bolshevik centralism was bureaucracy and it soon became the real power
in the state (and, ultimately, in the 1920s became the social base for
the rise of Stalin). This is to be expected as any state *"is already a
privileged class and cut off from the people"* and would *"seek to
extend its powers, to be beyond public control, to impose its own
policies and to give priority to special interests."* Moreover, *"what
an all-powerful, oppressive, all-absorbing oligarchy must be one which
has at its services, that is at its disposal, all social wealth, all
public services."* [Malatesta, **Anarchy**, p. 36 and p. 37]

Then there is the fourth point, namely the elimination of the standing
army, the suppression of *"special bodies of armed men"* by the *"armed
masses."* This promise did not last two months. On the 20th of December,
1917, the Council of People's Commissars decreed the formation of a
political (secret) police force, the *"Extraordinary Commission to Fight
Counter-Revolution."* This was more commonly known by the Russian
initials of the first two terms of its official name: The Cheka.

While it was initially a small organisation, as 1918 progressed it grew
in size and activity. The Cheka soon became a key instrument of
Bolshevik rule and it was most definitely a *"special body of armed
men"* and not the same as the *"armed workers."* In other words, Lenin's
claims in **State and Revolution** did not last two months and in under
six months the Bolshevik state had a mighty group of *"armed men"* to
impose its will. This is not all. The Bolsheviks also conducted a
sweeping transformation of the military within the first six months of
taking power. During 1917, the soldiers and sailors (encouraged by the
Bolsheviks and other revolutionaries) had formed their own committees
and elected officers. In March 1918, Trotsky simply abolished all this
by decree and replaced it with appointed officers (usually ex-Tsarist
ones). In this way, the Red Army was turned from a workers' militia
(i.e. an armed people) into a *"special body"* separate from the general
population.

So instead of eliminating a *"special force"* above the people, the
Bolsheviks did the opposite by creating a political police force (the
Cheka) and a standing army (in which elections were a set aside by
decree). These were special, professional, armed forces standing apart
from the people and unaccountable to them. Indeed, they were used to
repress strikes and working class unrest which refutes the idea that
Lenin's "workers' state" would simply be an instrument of violence
directed at the exploiters. As the Bolsheviks lost popular support, they
turned the violence of the "worker's state" against the workers (and, of
course, the peasants). When the Bolsheviks lost soviet elections, force
was used to disband them. Faced with strikes and working class protest
during this period, the Bolsheviks responded with state violence (see
[section H.6.3](secH6.html#sech63)). So, as regards the claim that the
new ("workers") state would repress only the exploiters, the truth was
that it was used to repress whoever opposed Bolshevik power, including
workers and peasants. If, as Lenin stressed, *"where there is
suppression there is also violence, there is no freedom, no democracy"*
then there cannot be working class freedom or democracy if the "workers'
state" is suppressing that class.

As can be seen, after the first six months of Bolshevik rule not a
single measure advocated by Lenin in **State and Revolution** existed in
"revolutionary" Russia. Some of the promises were broken quite quickly
(overnight, in one case). Most took longer. Yet Leninists may object by
noting that many Bolshevik degrees did, in fact, reflect **State and
Revolution**. For example, the democratisation of the armed forces was
decreed in late December 1917. However, this was simply acknowledging
the existing revolutionary gains of the military personnel. Similarly,
the Bolsheviks passed a decree on workers' control which, again, simply
acknowledged the actual gains by the grassroots (and, in fact, limited
them for further development).

Yet this cannot be taken as evidence of the democratic nature of
Bolshevism as most governments faced with a revolutionary movement will
acknowledge and "legalise" the facts on the ground (until such time as
they can neutralise or destroy them). For example, the Provisional
Government created after the February Revolution also legalised the
revolutionary gains of the workers (for example, legalising the soviets,
factory committees, unions, strikes and so forth). The real question is
whether Bolshevism continued to encourage these revolutionary gains once
it had consolidated its power. It did not. Indeed, it can be argued that
the Bolsheviks simply managed to do what the Provisional Government it
replaced had failed to do, namely destroy the various organs of popular
self-management created by the revolutionary masses. So the significant
fact is not that the Bolsheviks recognised the gains of the masses but
that their toleration of the application of what their followers say
were their real principles did not last long and, significantly, the
leading Bolsheviks did not consider the abolition of such principles as
harming the "communist" nature of the regime.

We have stressed this period for a reason. This was the period
**before** the out-break of major Civil War and thus the policies
applied show the actual nature of Bolshevism, it's essence if you like.
This is a significant period as most Leninists blame the failure of
Lenin to live up to his promises on this even. In reality, the civil war
was **not** the reason for these betrayals - simply because it had not
started yet. Each of the promises were broken in turn months before the
civil war happened. *"All Power to the Soviets"* became, very quickly,
"All Power to the Bolsheviks." Unsurprisingly, as this was Lenin's aim
all along and so we find him in 1917 continually repeating this basic
idea (see [section H.3.3](secH3.html#sech33)).

Given this, the almost utter non-mention of the party and its role in
**State and Revolution** is deeply significant. Given the emphasis that
Lenin had always placed on the party, it's absence is worrying. When the
party is mentioned in that work, it is done so in an ambiguous manner.
For example, Lenin noted that *"[b]y educating the workers' party,
Marxism educates the vanguard of the proletariat which is capable of
assuming power and of **leading the whole people** to socialism, of
directing and organising the new order."* It is not clear whether it is
the vanguard or the proletariat as a whole which assumes power. Later,
he stated that *"the dictatorship of the proletariat"* was *"the
organisation of the vanguard of the oppressed as the ruling class for
the purpose of crushing the oppressors."* [**Essential Works of Lenin**,
p. 288 and p. 337] Based on subsequent Bolshevik practice after the
party seized power, it seems clear that it is the vanguard which assumes
power rather than the whole class.

As such, given this clear and unambiguous position throughout 1917 by
Lenin, it seems incredulous, to say the least, for Leninist Tony Cliff
to assert that *"[t]o start with Lenin spoke of the **proletariat,** the
**class** - not the Bolshevik Party - assuming state power."*
[**Lenin**, vol. 3, p. 161] Surely the title of one of Lenin's most
famous pre-October essays, usually translated as *"Can the Bolsheviks
Retain State Power?"*, should have given the game away? As would,
surely, quoting numerous calls by Lenin for the Bolsheviks to seize
power? Apparently not.

Where does that leave Lenin's **State and Revolution**? Well, modern-day
Leninists still urge us to read it, considering it his greatest work and
the best introduction to what Leninism really stands for. For example,
we find Leninist Tony Cliff calling that book *"Lenin's real testament"*
while, at the same time, acknowledging that its *"message . . . which
was the guide for the first victorious proletarian revolution, was
violated again and again during the civil war."* Not a very good
*"guide"* or that convincing a *"message"* if it was not applicable in
the very circumstances it was designed to be applied in (a bit like
saying you have an excellent umbrella but it only works when it is not
raining). Moreover, Cliff is factually incorrect. As we discuss in
[section H.6](secH6.html), the Bolsheviks *"violated"* that *"guide"*
before the civil war started (i.e. when *"the victories of the
Czechoslovak troops over the Red Army in June 1918, that threatened the
greatest danger to the Soviet republic,"* to quote Cliff). [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 161 and p. 18] Similarly, much of the economic policies
implemented by the Bolsheviks had their roots in that book and the other
writings by Lenin from 1917.

The conclusions of dissent Marxist Samuel Farber seem appropriate here.
As he puts it, *"the very fact that a Sovnarkom had been created as a
separate body from the CEC [Central Executive Committee] of the soviets
clearly indicates that, Lenin's **State and Revolution**
notwithstanding, the separation of at least the top bodies of the
executive and the legislative wings of the government remained in effect
in the new Soviet system."* This suggests *"that **State and
Revolution** did not play a decisive role as a source of policy
guidelines for 'Leninism in power.'"* After all, *"immediately after the
Revolution the Bolsheviks established an executive power . . . as a
clearly separate body from the leading body of the legislature . . .
Therefore, some sections of the contemporary Left appear to have greatly
overestimated the importance that **State and Revolution** had for
Lenin's government. I would suggest that this document . . . can be
better understood as a distant, although doubtless sincere [!],
socio-political vision . . . as opposed to its having been a
programmatic political statement, let alone a guide to action, for the
period immediately after the successful seizure of power."* [**Op.
Cit.**, pp. 20-1 and p. 38]

That is **one** way of looking at it. Another would be to draw the
conclusion that a *"distant . . . socio-political vision"* drawn up to
sound like a *"guide to action"* which was then immediately ignored is,
at worse, little more than a deception, or, at best, a theoretical
justification for seizing power in the face of orthodox Marxist dogma.
Whatever the rationale for Lenin writing his book, one thing is true -
it was never implemented. Strange, then, that Leninists today urge use
to read it to see what "Lenin really wanted." Particularly given that so
few of its promises were actually implemented (those that were just
recognised the facts on the ground) and **all** of were no longer
applied in less than six months after the seize of power.

It will be objected in defence of Leninism that it is unfair to hold
Lenin responsible for the failure to apply his ideas in practice. The
terrible Civil War, in which Soviet Russia was attacked by numerous
armies, and the resulting economic chaos meant that the objective
circumstances made it impossible to implement his democratic ideas. This
argument contains flaws. Firstly, as we indicated above, the
undemocratic policies of the Bolsheviks started **before** the start of
the Civil War (so suggesting that the hardships of the Civil War were
not to blame). Secondly, Lenin himself mocked those who argued that
revolution was out of the question because of difficult circumstances
and so to blame these for the failure of the Bolsheviks to apply the
ideas in **State and Revolution** means to argue that those ideas are
inappropriate for a revolution (which, we must stress, is what the
leading Bolsheviks actually **did** end up arguing by their support for
party dictatorship). You cannot have it both ways.

Lenin at no time indicated in **State and Revolution** that it was
impossible or inapplicable to apply those ideas during a revolution in
Russia (quite the reverse!). Given that Marxists, including Lenin, argue
that a "dictatorship of the proletariat" is required to defend the
revolution against capitalist resistance it seems incredulous to argue
that Lenin's major theoretical work on that regime was impossible to
apply in precisely the circumstances it was designed for.

All in all, discussing Lenin's **State and Revolution** without
indicating that the Bolsheviks failed to implement its ideas (indeed,
did the exact opposite) suggests a lack of honesty. It also suggests
that the libertarian ideas Lenin appropriated in that work could not
survive being grafted onto the statist ideas of mainstream Marxism. In
the words of historian Marc Ferro:

> *"In a way, **The State and Revolution** even laid the foundations and
> sketched out the essential features of an alternative to Bolshevik
> power, and only the pro-Leninist tradition has used it, almost to
> quieten its conscience, because Lenin, once in power, ignored its
> conclusions. The Bolsheviks, far from causing the state to wither
> away, found endless reasons for justifying its enforcement."*
> [**October 1917**, pp. 213-4]

Anarchists would suggest that this alternative was anarchism. The
Russian Revolution shows that a workers state, as anarchists have long
argued, means minority power, not working class self-management of
society. As such, Lenin's work indicates the contradictory nature of
Marxism - while claiming to support democratic/libertarian ideals they
promote structures (such as centralised states) which undermine those
values in favour of party rule. The lesson is clear, only libertarian
means can ensure libertarian ends and they have to be applied
consistently within libertarian structures to work. To apply them to
statist ones will simply fail.
