H.6 Why did the Russian Revolution fail?
========================================

The greatest myth of Marxism must surely be the idea that the Russian
Revolution failed solely due to the impact of objective factors. While
the date Leninists consider the revolution to have become beyond reform
varies (over time it has moved backwards towards 1917 as the
authoritarianism under Lenin and Trotsky has become better known), the
actual reasons are common. For Leninists, the failure of the revolution
was the product of such things as civil war, foreign intervention,
economic collapse and the isolation and backwardness of Russia and
**not** Bolshevik ideology. Bolshevik authoritarianism, then, was forced
upon the party by difficult objective circumstances. It follows that
there are no fundamental problems with Leninism and so it is a case of
simply applying it again, hopefully in more fortuitous circumstances.

Anarchists are not impressed by this argument and we will show why by
refuting common Leninist explanations for the failure of the revolution.
For anarchists, Bolshevik ideology played its part, creating social
structures (a new state and centralised economic organisations) which
not only disempowered the masses but also made the objective
circumstances being faced much worse. Moreover, we argue, vanguardism
could not help turn the rebels of 1917 into the ruling elite of 1918. We
explore these arguments and the evidence for them in this section.

For those who argue that the civil war provoked Bolshevik policies, the
awkward fact is that many of the features of war communism, such as the
imposition of one-man management and centralised state control of the
economy, were already apparent before war communism. As one historian
argues, *"[f]rom the first days of Bolshevik power there was only a weak
correlation between the extent of 'peace' and the mildness or severity
of Bolshevik rule, between the intensity of the war and the intensity of
proto-war communist measures . . . Considered in ideological terms there
was little to distinguish the 'breathing space' (April-May 1918) from
the war communism that followed."* Unsurprisingly, then, *"the breathing
space of the first months of 1920 after the victories over Kolchak and
Denikin . . . saw their intensification and the militarisation of
labour"* and, in fact, *"no serious attempt was made to review the
aptness of war communist policies."* Ideology *"constantly impinged on
the choices made at various points of the civil war . . . Bolshevik
authoritarianism cannot be ascribed simply to the Tsarist legacy or to
adverse circumstances."* [Richard Sakwa, **Soviet Communists in Power**,
p. 24, p. 27 and p. 30] The inherent tendencies of Bolshevism were
revealed by the civil war, a war which only accelerated the development
of what was implicit (and, often, not so implicit) in Bolshevik ideology
and its vision of socialism, the state and the role of the party.

Thus *"the effective conclusion of the Civil War at the beginning of
1920 was followed by a more determined and comprehensive attempt to
apply these so-called War Communism policies rather than their
relaxation"* and so the *"apogee of the War Communism economy occurred
after the Civil War was effectively over."* With the fighting over Lenin
*"forcefully raised the introduction of one-man management . . . Often
commissars fresh from the Red Army were drafted into management
positions in the factories."* By the autumn of 1920, one-man management
was in 82% of surveyed workplaces. This *"intensification of War
Communism labour policies would not have been a significant development
if they had continued to be applied in the same haphazard manner as in
1919, but in early 1920 the Communist Party leadership was no longer
distracted by the Civil War from concentrating its thoughts and efforts
on the formulation and implementation of its labour policies."* While
the *" experience of the Civil War was one factor predisposing
communists towards applying military methods"* to the economy in early
1920, *"ideological considerations were also important."* [Jonathan
Aves, **Workers Against Lenin**, p. 2, p. 17, p. 15, p. 30, p. 17 and p.
11]

So it seems incredulous for Leninist John Rees to assert, for example,
that *"[w]ith the civil war came the need for stricter labour discipline
and for . . . 'one man management'. Both these processes developed lock
step with the war."* [*"In Defence of October,"* pp. 3-82,
**International Socialism**, no. 52, p. 43] As we discuss in the [next
section](secH6.html#sech61), Lenin was advocating both of these
**before** the outbreak of civil war in May 1918 **and** after it was
effectively over. Indeed he explicitly, both before and after the civil
war, stressed that these policies were being implemented because the
lack of fighting meant that the Bolsheviks could turn their full
attention to building socialism. How these facts can be reconciled with
claims of policies being in *"lock step"* with the civil war is hard to
fathom.

Part of the problem is the rampant confusion within Leninist circles as
to when the practices condemned as Stalinism actually started. For
example, Chris Harman (of the UK's SWP) in his summary of the rise
Stalinism asserted that after *"Lenin's illness and subsequent death"*
the *"principles of October were abandoned one by one."* Yet the
practice of, and ideological commitment to, party dictatorship, one-man
management in industry, banning opposition groups/parties (as well as
factions within the Communist Party), censorship, state repression of
strikes and protests, piece-work, Taylorism, the end of independent
trade unions and a host of other crimes against socialism were all
implemented under Lenin and normal practice at the time of his death. In
other words, the *"principles of October"* were abandoned under, and by,
Lenin. Which, incidentally, explains why, Trotsky *"continued to his
death to harbour the illusion that somehow, despite the lack of workers'
democracy, Russia was a 'workers' state.'"* [**Bureaucracy and
Revolution in Eastern Europe**, p. 14 and p. 20] Simply put, there had
been no workers' democracy when Trotsky held state power and he
considered that regime a *"workers' state"*. The question arises why
Harman thinks Lenin's Russia was some kind of "workers' state" if
workers' democracy is the criteria by which such things are to be
judged.

From this it follows that, unlike Leninists, anarchists do not judge a
regime by who happens to be in office. A capitalist state does not
become less capitalist just because a social democrat happens to be
prime minister or president. Similarly, a regime does not become state
capitalist just because Stalin is in power rather than Lenin. While the
Marxist analysis concentrates on the transfer of state power from one
regime to another, the anarchist one focuses on the transfer of power
from the state and bosses to working class people. What makes a regime
socialist is the social relationships it has, not the personal opinions
of those in power. Thus if the social relationships under Lenin are
similar to those under Stalin, then the nature of the regime is similar.
That Stalin's regime was far more brutal, oppressive and exploitative
than Lenin's does not change the underlying nature of the regime. As
such, Chomsky is right to point to *"the techniques of use of
terminology to delude"* with respect to the Bolshevik revolution. Under
Lenin and Trotsky, *"a popular revolution was taken over by a managerial
elite who immediately dismantled all the socialist institutions."* They
used state power to *"create a properly managed society, run by smart
intellectuals, where everybody does his job and does what he's told . .
. That's Leninism. That's **the exact opposite of socialism**. If
socialism means anything, it means workers' control of production and
then on from there. That's the first thing they destroyed. So why do we
call it socialism?"* [**Language and Politics**, p. 537]

To refute in advance one obvious objection to our argument, the
anarchist criticism of the Bolsheviks is **not** based on the utopian
notion that they did not create a fully functioning (libertarian)
communist society. As we discussed [section H.2.5](secH2.html#sech25),
anarchists have never thought a revolution would immediately produce
such an outcome. As Emma Goldman argued, she had not come to Russia
*"expecting to find Anarchism realised"* nor did she *"expect Anarchism
to follow in the immediate footsteps of centuries of despotism and
submission."* Rather, she *"hope[d] to find in Russia at least the
beginnings of the social changes for which the Revolution had been
fought"* and that *"the Russian workers and peasants as a whole had
derived essential social betterment as a result of the Bolshevik
regime."* Both hopes were dashed. [**My Disillusionment in Russia**, p.
xlvii] Equally, anarchists were, and are, well aware of the problems
facing the revolution, the impact of the civil war and economic
blockade. Indeed, both Goldman and Berkman used these (as Leninists
still do) to rationalise their support for the Bolsheviks, in spite of
their authoritarianism (for Berkman's account see **The Bolshevik Myth**
[pp. 328-31]). Their experiences in Russia, particularly after the end
of the civil war, opened their eyes to the impact of Bolshevik ideology
on its outcome.

Nor is it a case that anarchists have no solutions to the problems
facing the Russian Revolution. As well as the negative critique that
statist structures are unsuitable for creating socialism, particularly
in the difficult economic circumstances that affects every revolution,
anarchists stressed that genuine social construction had to be based on
the people's own organisations and self-activity. This was because, as
Goldman concluded, the state is a *"menace to the constructive
development of the new social structure"* and *"would become a dead
weight upon the growth of the new forms of life."* Therefore, she
argued, only the *"industrial power of the masses, expressed through
their libertarian associations - Anarchosyndicalism - is alone able to
organise successfully the economic life and carry on production"* If the
revolution had been made a la Bakunin rather than a la Marx *"the result
would have been different and more satisfactory"* as (echoing Kropotkin)
Bolshevik methods *"conclusively demonstrated how a revolution should
**not** be made."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 253-4 and p. liv]

It should also be mentioned that the standard Leninist justification for
party dictatorship is that the opposition groups supported the
counter-revolution or took part in armed rebellions against "soviet
power" (i.e., the Bolsheviks). Rees, for example, asserts that some
Mensheviks *"joined the Whites. The rest alternated between accepting
the legitimacy of the government and agitating for its overthrow. The
Bolsheviks treated them accordingly."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 65] However,
this is far from the truth. As one historian noted, while the *"charge
of violent opposition would be made again and again"* by the Bolsheviks,
along with being *"active supporters of intervention and of
counter-revolution"*, in fact this *"charge was untrue in relation to
the Mensheviks, and the Communists, if they ever believed it, never
succeeded in establishing it."* A few individuals did reject the
Menshevik *"official policy of confining opposition to strictly
constitutional means"* and they were *"expelled from the party, for they
had acted without its knowledge."* [Leonard Schapiro, **The Origin of
the Communist Autocracy**, p. 193] Significantly, the Bolsheviks
annulled their June 14th expulsion of the Mensheviks from the soviets on
the 30th of November of the same year, 1918. [E. H. Carr, **The
Bolshevik Revolution**, vol. 1, p. 180]

By *"agitating"* for the *"overthrow"* of the Bolshevik government, Rees
is referring to the Menshevik tactic of standing for election to soviets
with the aim of securing a majority and so forming a new government!
Unsurprisingly, the sole piece of evidence presented by Rees is a quote
from historian E.H. Carr: *"If it was true that the Bolshevik regime was
not prepared after the first few months to tolerate an organised
opposition, it was equally true that no opposition party was prepared to
remain within legal limits. The premise of dictatorship was common to
both sides of the argument."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 190] Yet this *"judgment
ignores"* the Mensheviks whose policy of legal opposition: *"The charge
that the Mensheviks were not prepared to remain within legal limits is
part of the Bolsheviks’ case; it does not survive an examination of the
facts."* [Schapiro, **Op. Cit.**, p. 355fn]

As regards the SRs, this issue is more complicated. The right-SRs
welcomed and utilised the rebellion of the Czech Legion in May 1918 to
reconvene the Constituent Assembly (within which they had an
overwhelming majority and which the Bolsheviks had dissolved). After the
White General Kolchak overthrew this government in November 1918 (and so
turned the civil war into a Red against White one), most right-SRs sided
with the Bolsheviks and, in return, the Bolsheviks restated them to the
soviets in February 1919. [Carr, **Op. Cit.**, p. 356 and p. 180] It
must be stressed that, contra Carr, the SRs aimed for a democratically
elected government, not a dictatorship (and definitely not a White one).
With the Left-SRs, it was the Bolsheviks who denied them their majority
at the Fifth All-Congress of Soviets. Their rebellion was **not** an
attempted coup but rather an attempt to force the end of the
Brest-Litovsk treaty with the Germans by restarting the war (as
Alexander Rabinowitch proves beyond doubt in his **The Bolsheviks in
Power**). It would be fair to say that the anarchists, most SRs, the
Left SRs and Mensheviks were not opposed to the revolution, they were
opposed to Bolshevik policy.

Ultimately, as Emma Goldman came to conclude, *"what [the Bolsheviks]
called 'defence of the Revolution' was really only the defence of
[their] party in power."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 57]

At best it could be argued that the Bolsheviks had no alternative but to
impose their dictatorship, as the other socialist parties would have
succumbed to the Whites and so, eventually, a White dictatorship would
have replaced the Red one. This was why, for example, Victor Serge
claimed he sided with the Communists against the Kronstadt sailors even
though the latter had right on their side for *"the country was
exhausted, and production practically at a standstill; there was no
reserves of any kind . . . The working-class **elite** that had been
moulded in the struggle against the old regime was literally decimated.
. . . If the Bolshevik dictatorship fell, it was only a short step to
chaos . . . and in the end, through the sheer force of events, another
dictatorship, this time anti-proletarian."* [**Memoirs of a
Revolutionary**, pp. 128-9]

This, however, is shear elitism and utterly violates the notion that
socialism is the self-emancipation of the working class. Moreover, it
places immense faith on the goodwill of those in power - a utopian
position. Equally, it should not be forgotten that both the Reds and
Whites were anti-working class. At best it could be argued that the Red
repression of working class protests and strikes as well as opposition
socialists would not have been as terrible as that of the Whites, but
that is hardly a good rationale for betraying the principles of
socialism. Yes, libertarians can agree with Serge that embracing
socialist principles may not work. Every revolution is a gamble and may
fail. As libertarian socialist Ante Ciliga correctly argued:

> *"Let us consider, finally, one last accusation which is commonly
> circulated: that action such as that at Kronstadt could have
> **indirectly** let loose the forces of the counter-revolution. It is
> **possible** indeed that even by placing itself on a footing of
> workers' democracy the revolution might have been overthrown; but what
> is **certain** is that it has perished, and that it has perished on
> account of the policy of its leaders. The repression of Kronstadt, the
> suppression of the democracy of workers and soviets by the Russian
> Communist party, the elimination of the proletariat from the
> management of industry, and the introduction of the NEP, already
> signified the death of the Revolution."* [*"The Kronstadt Revolt"*,
> pp. 330-7, **The Raven**, no, 8, p. 333 p. 335]

So it should be stressed that no anarchist would argue that if an
anarchist path had been followed then success would have automatically
followed. It is possible that the revolution would have failed but one
thing is sure: by following the Bolshevik path it **did** fail. While
the Bolsheviks may have remained in power at the end of the civil war,
the regime was a party dictatorship preceding over a state capitalist
economy. In such circumstances, there could no further development
towards socialism and, unsurprisingly, there was none. Ultimately, as
the rise of Stalin showed, the notion that socialism could be
constructed without basic working class freedom and self-government was
a baseless illusion.

As we will show, the notion that objective circumstances (civil war,
economic collapse, and so on) cannot fully explain the failure of the
Russian Revolution. This becomes clear once the awkward fact that
Bolshevik authoritarianism and state capitalist policies started before
the outbreak of civil war is recognised (see [section
H.6.1](secH6.html#sech61)); that their ideology inspired and shaped the
policies they implemented and these policies themselves made the
objective circumstances worse (see [section H.6.2](secH6.html#sech62));
and that the Bolsheviks had to repress working class protest and strikes
against them throughout the civil war, so suggesting a social base
existed for a genuinely socialist approach (see [section
H.6.3](secH6.html#sech63)).

Finally, there is a counter-example which, anarchists argue, show the
impact of Bolshevik ideology on the fate of the revolution. This is the
anarchist influenced Makhnovist movement (see Peter Arshinov's **The
History of the Makhnovist Movement** or Alexandre Skirda's **Nestor
Makhno Anarchy's Cossack** for more details). Defending the revolution
in the Ukraine against all groups aiming to impose their will on the
masses, the Makhnovists were operating in the same objective conditions
facing the Bolsheviks - civil war, economic disruption, isolation and so
forth. However, the policies the Makhnovists implemented were radically
different than those of the Bolsheviks. While the Makhnovists called
soviet congresses, the Bolsheviks disbanded them. The former encouraged
free speech and organisation, the latter crushed both. While the
Bolsheviks raised party dictatorship and one-man management to
ideological truisms, the Makhnovists stood for and implemented
workplace, army, village and soviet self-management. As one historian
suggests, far from being necessary or even functional, Bolshevik
policies *"might even have made the war more difficult and more costly.
If the counter-example of Makhno is anything to go by then [they]
certainly did."* [Christopher Read, **From Tsar to Soviets**, p. 265]
Anarchists argue that it shows the failure of Bolshevism cannot be put
down to purely objective factors like the civil war: the politics of
Leninism played their part.

Needless to say, this section can only be a summary of the arguments and
evidence. It does not pretend to be a comprehensive account of the
revolution or civil war. It concentrates on the key rationales by modern
day Leninists to justify Bolshevik actions and policies. We do so simply
because it would be impossible to cover every aspect of the revolution
and because these rationales are one of the main reasons why Leninist
ideology has not been placed in the dustbin of history where it belongs.
For further discussion, see [the appendix on the Russian
Revolution](append4.html) or Voline's **The Unknown Revolution**,
Alexander Berkman's **The Russian Tragedy** and **The Bolshevik Myth**,
Emma Goldman's **My Disillusionment in Russia** or Maurice Brinton's
essential **The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control**.

H.6.1 Can objective factors explain the failure of the Russian Revolution?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Leninist John Rees recounts the standard argument, namely that the
objective conditions in Russia meant that the *"subjective factor"* of
Bolshevik ideology *"was reduced to a choice between capitulation to the
Whites or defending the revolution with whatever means were at hands.
Within these limits Bolshevik policy was decisive. But it could not wish
away the limits and start with a clean sheet."* From this perspective,
the key factor was the *"vice-like pressure of the civil war"* which
*"transformed the state"* as well as the *"Bolshevik Party itself."*
Industry was *"reduced . . . to rubble"* and the *"bureaucracy of the
workers' state was left suspended in mid-air, its class based eroded and
demoralised."* [*"In Defence of October,"* pp. 3-82, **International
Socialism**, no. 52, p. 30, p. 70, p. 66 and p. 65]

Due to these factors, argue Leninists, the Bolsheviks became dictators
**over** the working class and **not** due to their political ideas.
Anarchists are not convinced by this analysis, arguing that is factually
and logically flawed.

The first problem is factual. Bolshevik authoritarianism started
**before** the start of the civil war and major economic collapse.
Whether it is soviet democracy, workers' economic self-management,
democracy in the armed forces or working class power and freedom
generally, the fact is the Bolsheviks had systematically attacked and
undermined it from the start. They also, as we indicate in [section
H.6.3](secH6.html'sech63) repressed working class protests and strikes
along with opposition groups and parties. As such, it is difficult to
blame something which had not started yet for causing Bolshevik
policies.

Although the Bolsheviks had seized power under the slogan *"All Power to
the Soviets,"* as we noted in [section H.3.11](secH3.html#sech311) the
facts are the Bolsheviks aimed for party power and only supported
soviets as long as they controlled them. To maintain party power, they
had to undermine the soviets and they did. This onslaught on the soviets
started quickly, in fact overnight when the first act of the Bolsheviks
was to create an executive body, the the Council of People's Commissars
(or Sovnarkon), over and above the soviets. This was in direct
contradiction to Lenin's **The State and Revolution**, where he had used
the example of the Paris Commune to argue for the merging of executive
and legislative powers. Then, a mere four days after this seizure of
power by the Bolsheviks, the Sovnarkom unilaterally took for itself
legislative power simply by issuing a decree to this effect: *"This was,
effectively, a Bolshevik coup d’état that made clear the government's
(and party's) pre-eminence over the soviets and their executive organ.
Increasingly, the Bolsheviks relied upon the appointment from above of
commissars with plenipotentiary powers, and they split up and
reconstituted fractious Soviets and intimidated political opponents."*
[Neil Harding, **Leninism**, p. 253]

The highest organ of soviet power, the Central Executive Committee
(VTsIK) was turned into little more than a rubber stamp, with its
Bolshevik dominated presidium using its power to control the body. Under
the Bolsheviks, the presidium was converted *"into the **de facto**
centre of power within VTsIK."* It *"began to award representations to
groups and factions which supported the government. With the VTsIK
becoming ever more unwieldy in size by the day, the presidium began to
expand its activities"* and was used *"to circumvent general meetings."*
Thus the Bolsheviks were able *"to increase the power of the presidium,
postpone regular sessions, and present VTsIK with policies which had
already been implemented by the Sovnarkon. Even in the presidium itself
very few people determined policy."* [Charles Duval, *"Yakov M. Sverdlov
and the All-Russian Central Executive Committee of Soviets (VTsIK)"*,
pp. 3-22, **Soviet Studies**, vol. XXXI, no. 1, p.7, p. 8 and p. 18]

At the grassroots, a similar process was at work with oligarchic
tendencies in the soviets increasing post-October and *"[e]ffective
power in the local soviets relentlessly gravitated to the executive
committees, and especially their presidia. Plenary sessions became
increasingly symbolic and ineffectual."* The party was *"successful in
gaining control of soviet executives in the cities and at **uezd** and
**guberniya** levels. These executive bodies were usually able to
control soviet congresses, though the party often disbanded congresses
that opposed major aspects of current policies."* Local soviets *"had
little input into the formation of national policy"* and *"[e]ven at
higher levels, institutional power shifted away from the soviets."*
[Carmen Sirianni, **Workers' Control and Socialist Democracy**, p. 204
and p. 203] In Moscow, for example, power in the soviet *"moved away
from the plenum to ever smaller groups at the apex."* The presidium,
created in November 1917, *"rapidly accrued massive powers."* [Richard
Sakwa, **Soviet Communists in Power**, p. 166]

The Bolshevik dominated soviet executives used this power to maintain a
Bolshevik majority, by any means possible, in the face of popular
disillusionment with their regime. In Saratov, for example, *"as early
as the spring of 1918 . . . workers clashed with the soviet"* while in
the April soviet elections, as elsewhere, the Bolsheviks' *"powerful
majority in the Soviet began to erode"* as moderate socialists
*"criticised the nondemocratic turn Bolshevik power has taken and the
soviet's loss of their independence."* [Donald J. Raleigh,
**Experiencing Russia's Civil War**, p. 366 and p. 368] While the
influence of the Mensheviks *"had sunk to insignificance by October
1917"*, the *"unpopularity of government policy"* changed that and by
the *"middle of 1918 the Mensheviks could claim with some justification
that large numbers of the industrial working class were now behind them,
and that but for the systematic dispersal and packing of the soviets,
and the mass arrests at workers' meeting and congresses, their party
could have one power by its policy of constitutional opposition."* The
soviet elections in the spring of 1918 across Russia saw *"arrests,
military dispersal, even shootings"* whenever Mensheviks *"succeeded in
winning majorities or a substantial representation."* [Leonard Schapiro,
**The Origin of the Communist Autocracy**, p. 191]

One such technique to maintain power was to postpone new soviet
elections, another was to gerrymander the soviets to ensure their
majority. The Bolsheviks in Petrograd, for example, faced *"demands from
below for the immediate re-election"* of the Soviet. However, before the
election, the Bolshevik Soviet confirmed new regulations *"to help
offset possible weaknesses"* in their *"electoral strength in
factories."* The *"most significant change in the makeup of the new
soviet was that numerically decisive representation was given to
agencies in which the Bolsheviks had overwhelming strength, among them
the Petrograd Trade Union Council, individual trade unions, factory
committees in closed enterprises, district soviets, and district
non-party workers' conferences."* This ensured that *"[o]nly 260 of
roughly 700 deputies in the new soviet were to be elected in factories,
which guaranteed a large Bolshevik majority in advance"* and so the
Bolsheviks *"contrived a majority"* in the new Soviet long before
gaining 127 of the 260 factory delegates. Then there is *"the nagging
question of how many Bolshevik deputies from factories were elected
instead of the opposition because of press restrictions, voter
intimidation, vote fraud, or the short duration of the campaign."* The
SR and Menshevik press, for example, were reopened *"only a couple of
days before the start of voting."* Moreover, *"Factory Committees from
closed factories could and did elect soviet deputies (the so-called dead
souls), one deputy for each factory with more than one thousand workers
at the time of shutdown"* while the electoral assemblies for unemployed
workers *"were organised through Bolshevik-dominated trade union
election commissions."* Overall, then, the Bolshevik election victory
*"was highly suspect, even on the shop floor."* [Alexander Rabinowitch,
**The Bolsheviks in Power**, pp. 248-9, p. 251 and p. 252] This meant
that it was *"possible for one worker to be represented in the soviet
five times . . . without voting once."* Thus the soviet *"was no longer
a popularly elected assembly: it had been turned into an assembly of
Bolshevik functionaries."* [Vladimir N. Brovkin, **The Mensheviks After
October**, p. 240]

When postponing and gerrymandering failed, the Bolsheviks turned to
state repression to remain in power. For all the provincial soviet
elections in the spring and summer of 1918 for which data is available,
there was an *"impressive success of the Menshevik-SR block"* followed
by *"the Bolshevik practice of disbanding soviets that came under
Menshevik-SR control."* The *"subsequent wave of anti-Bolshevik
uprisings"* were repressed by force. [Brovkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 159]
Another historian also notes that by the spring of 1918 *"Menshevik
newspapers and activists in the trade unions, the Soviets, and the
factories had made a considerable impact on a working class which was
becoming increasingly disillusioned with the Bolshevik regime, so much
so that in many places the Bolsheviks felt constrained to dissolve
Soviets or prevent re-elections where Mensheviks and Socialist
Revolutionaries had gained majorities."* [Israel Getzler, **Martov**, p.
179]

When the opposition parties raised such issues at the VTsIK, it had no
impact. In April 1918, one deputy *"protested that non-Bolshevik
controlled soviets were being dispersed by armed force, and wanted to
discuss the issue."* The chairman *"refus[ed] to include it in the
agenda because of lack of supporting material"* and requested such
information be submitted to the presidium of the soviet. The majority
(i.e. the Bolsheviks) *"supported their chairman"* and the facts were
*"submitted . . . to the presidium, where they apparently remained."*
[Charles Duval, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 13-14] Given that the VTsIK was meant
to be the highest soviet body between congresses, this lack of concern
clearly shows the Bolshevik contempt for soviet democracy.

The Bolsheviks also organised rural poor committees, opposed to by all
other parties (particularly the Left-SRs). The Bolshevik leadership
*"was well aware that the **labouring peasantry**, largely represented
in the countryside by the Left Socialist-Revolutionary party, would be
excluded from participation."* These committees were *"subordinated to
central policy and thus willing to implement a policy opposing the
interests of the mass of the peasants"* and were also used for the
*"disbandment of the peasants' soviets in which Bolshevik representation
was low or nil"*. It should be noted that between March and August 1918
*"the Bolsheviks were losing power not only in favour of the Left
Socialist-Revolutionaries"* but also *"in favour of non-party people."*
[Silvana Malle, **The Economic Organisation of War Communism,
1918-1921**, pp. 366-7]

Unsurprisingly, the same contempt was expressed at the fifth All-Russian
Soviet Congress in July 1918 when the Bolshevik gerrymandered it to
maintain their majority. The Bolsheviks banned the Mensheviks in the
context of political loses **before** the Civil War, which gave the
Bolsheviks an excuse and they *"drove them underground, just on the eve
of the elections to the Fifth Congress of Soviets in which the
Mensheviks were expected to make significant gains"*. While the
Bolsheviks *"offered some formidable fictions to justify the
expulsions"* there was *"of course no substance in the charge that the
Mensheviks had been mixed in counter-revolutionary activities on the
Don, in the Urals, in Siberia, with the Czechoslovaks, or that they had
joined the worst Black Hundreds."* [Getzler, **Op. Cit.**, p. 181]

With the Mensheviks and Right-SRs banned from the soviets, popular
disenchantment with Bolshevik rule was expressed by voting Left-SR. The
Bolsheviks ensured their majority in the congress and, therefore, a
Bolshevik government by gerrymandering it has they had the Petrograd
soviet. Thus *"electoral fraud gave the Bolsheviks a huge majority of
congress delegates"*. In reality, *"the number of legitimately elected
Left SR delegates was roughly equal to that of the Bolsheviks."* The
Left-SRs expected a majority but did not include *"roughly 399
Bolsheviks delegates whose right to be seated was challenged by the Left
SR minority in the congress's credentials commission."* Without these
dubious delegates, the Left SRs and SR Maximalists would have
outnumbered the Bolsheviks by around 30 delegates. This ensured *"the
Bolshevik's successful fabrication of a large majority in the Fifth
All-Russian Congress of Soviets."* [Rabinowitch, **Op. Cit.**, p. 396,
p. 288, p. 442 and p. 308] Moreover, the Bolsheviks also *"allowed
so-called committees of poor peasants to be represented at the congress.
. . This blatant gerrymandering ensured a Bolshevik majority . . .
Deprived of their democratic majority the Left SRs resorted to terror
and assassinated the German ambassador Mirbach."* [Geoffrey Swain, **The
Origins of the Russian Civil War**, p. 176] The Bolsheviks falsely
labelled this an uprising against the soviets and the Left-SRs joined
the Mensheviks and Right-SRs in being made illegal. It is hard not to
agree with Rabinowitch when he comments that *"however understandable
framed against the fraudulent composition of the Fifth All-Russian
Congress of Soviets and the ominous developments at the congresses's
start"* this act *"offered Lenin a better excuse than he could possibly
have hoped for to eliminate the Left SRs as a significant political
rival."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 308]

So before the start of the civil war all opposition groups, bar the
Left-SRs, had suffered some form of state repression by the hands of the
Bolshevik regime (the Bolsheviks had attacked the anarchist movement in
April, 1918 [Paul Avrich, **The Russian Anarchists**, pp. 184-5]).
Within six weeks of it starting **every** opposition group had been
excluded from the soviets. Significantly, in spite of being,
effectively, a one-party state Lenin later proclaimed that soviet power
*"is a million times more democratic than the most democratic bourgeois
republic"* and pointed to the 6th Congress of Soviets in November with
its 97% of Bolsheviks! [**Collected Works**, vol. 28, p. 248 and p. 303]

A similar authoritarian agenda was aimed at the armed forces and
industry. Trotsky simply abolished the soldier's committees and elected
officers, stating that *"the principle of election is politically
purposeless and technically inexpedient, and it has been, in practice,
abolished by decree."* [**How the Revolution Armed**, vol. 1, p. 47] The
death penalty for disobedience was restored, along with, more gradually,
saluting, special forms of address, separate living quarters and other
privileges for officers. Somewhat ironically, nearly 20 years later,
Trotsky himself lamented how the *"demobilisation of the Red Army of
five million played no small role in the formation of the bureaucracy.
The victorious commanders assumed leading posts in the local Soviets, in
economy, in education, and they persistently introduced everywhere that
regime which had ensured success in the civil war."* For some reason he
failed to mention who had introduced that very regime, although he felt
able to state, without shame, that the *"commanding staff needs
democratic control. The organisers of the Red Army were aware of this
from the beginning, and considered it necessary to prepare for such a
measure as the election of commanding staff."* [**The Revolution
Betrayed**, p. 90 and p. 211] So it would be churlish to note that *"the
root of the problem lay in the very organisation of the army on
traditional lines, for which Trotsky himself had been responsible, and
against which the Left Communists in 1918 had warned."* [Richard Sakwa,
**Soviet Communists in Power**, p. 231]

In industry, Lenin, as we discussed in [section
H.3.14](secH3.html#sech314), started to champion one-man management
armed with *"dictatorial"* powers in April, 1918. Significantly, he
argued that his new policies were **not** driven by the civil war for
*"[i]n the main . . . the task of suppressing the resistance of the
exploiters was fulfilled"* (since *"(approximately) February 1918."*).
The task *"now coming to the fore"* was that of *"organising [the]
**administration** of Russia."* It *"has become the main and central
task"* precisely **because** of *"the peace which has been achieved -
despite its extremely onerous character and extreme instability"* and so
*"the Russian Soviet Republic has gained an opportunity to concentrate
its efforts for a while on the most important and most difficult aspect
of the socialist revolution, namely, the task of organisation."* This
would involve imposing one-man management, that is *"individual
executives"* with *"dictatorial powers (or 'unlimited' powers)"* as
there was *"absolutely **no** contradiction in principle between Soviet
(**that is**, socialist) democracy and the exercise of dictatorial
powers by individuals."* [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 27, p. 242, p. 237, p. 267
and p. 268]

Trotsky concurred, arguing in the same speech which announced the
destruction of military democracy that workplace democracy *"is not the
last word in the economic constructive work of the proletariat"*. The
*"next step must consist in self-limitation of the collegiate
principle"* and its replacement by *"[p]olitical collegiate control by
the Soviets"*, i.e. the state control Lenin had repeatedly advocated in
1917. However *"for executive functions we must appoint technical
specialists."* He ironically called this the working class *"throwing
off the one-man management principles of its masters of yesterday"* and
failed to recognise it was imposing the one-man management principles of
new masters. As with Lenin, the destruction of workers' power at the
point of production was of little concern for what mattered was that
*"with power in our hands, we, the representatives of the working
class"* would introduce socialism. [**How the Revolution Armed**, vol.
1, p. 37 and p. 38]

In reality, the Bolshevik vision of socialism simply replaced private
capitalism with state capitalism, taking control of the economy out of
the hands of the workers and placing it into the hands of the state
bureaucracy. As one historian correctly summarises the s-called workers'
state *"oversaw the reimposition of alienated labour and hierarchical
social relations. It carried out this function in the absence of a
ruling class, and them played a central role in ushering that class into
existence - a class which subsequently ruled not through its ownership
of private property but through its 'ownership' of the state. That state
was antagonistic to the forces that could have best resisted the retreat
of the revolution, i.e. the working class."* [Simon Pirani, **The
Russian Revolution in Retreat, 1920-24**, p. 240]

Whether it is in regards to soviet, workplace or army democracy or the
rights of the opposition to organise freely and gather support, the
facts are the Bolsheviks had systematically eliminated them **before**
the start of the civil war. So when Trotsky asserted that *"[i]n the
beginning, the party had wished and hoped to preserve freedom of
political struggle within the framework of the Soviets"* but that it was
civil war which *"introduced stern amendments into this calculation,"*
he was rewriting history. Rather than being *"regarded not as a
principle, but as an episodic act of self-defence"* the opposite is the
case. As we note in [section H.3.8](secH3.html#sech38) from roughly
October 1918 onwards, the Bolsheviks **did** raise party dictatorship to
a *"principle"* and did not care that this was *"obviously in conflict
with the spirit of Soviet democracy."* Trotsky was right to state that
*"on all sides the masses were pushed away gradually from actual
participation in the leadership of the country."* [**The Revolution
Betrayed**, p. 96 and p. 90] He was just utterly wrong to imply that
this process happened **after** the end of the civil war rather than
before its start and that the Bolsheviks did not play a key role in so
doing. Thus, *"in the soviets and in economic management the embryo of
centralised and bureaucratic state forms had already emerged by
mid-1918."* [Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 96-7]

It may be argued in objection to this analysis that the Bolsheviks faced
resistance from the start and, consequently, civil war existed from the
moment Lenin seized power and to focus attention on the events of late
May 1918 gives a misleading picture of the pressures they were facing.
After all, the Bolsheviks had the threat of German Imperialism and there
were a few (small) White Armies in existence as well as conspiracies to
combat. However, this is unconvincing as Lenin himself pointed to the
ease of Bolshevik success post-October. On March 14th, 1918, Lenin had
proclaimed that *"the civil war was one continuous triumph for Soviet
power"* and in June argued that *"the Russian bourgeoisie was defeated
in open conflict . . . in the period from October 1917 to February and
March 1918"*. [**Collected Works**, vol. 27, p. 174 and p. 428] It can
be concluded that the period up until March 1918 was not considered by
the Bolsheviks themselves as being so bad as requiring the adjustment of
their politics. This explains why, as one historian notes, that the
*"revolt of the Czechoslovak Legion on 25 May 1918 is often considered
to be the beginning of full-scale military activity. There followed a
succession of campaigns."* This is reflected in Bolshevik policy as
well, with war communism *"lasting from about mid-1918 to March 1921."*
[Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, p. 22 and p. 19]

Significantly, the introduction of one-man management was seen not as an
emergency measure forced upon the Bolsheviks by dire circumstances of
civil war but rather as a natural aspect of building socialism itself.
In March, 1918, for example, Lenin argued that civil war *"became a
fact"* on October, 25, 1917 and *"[i]n this civil war . . . victory was
achieved with . . . extraordinary ease . . . The Russia revolution was a
continuous triumphal march in the first months."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
88-9] Looking back at this time from April 1920, Lenin reiterated his
position (*"Dictatorial powers and one-man management are not
contradictory to socialist democracy."*) while also stressing that this
was not forced upon the Bolsheviks by civil war. Discussing how, again,
the civil war was ended and it was time to build socialism he argued
that the *"whole attention of the Communist Party and the Soviet
government is centred on peaceful economic development, on problems of
the dictatorship and of one-man management . . . When we tackled them
for the first time in 1918, there was no civil war and no experience to
speak of."* So it was *"not only experience"* of civil war, argued Lenin
*"but something more profound . . . that has induced us now, as it did
two years ago, to concentrate all our attention on labour discipline."*
[**Op. Cit.**, vol. 30, p. 503 and p. 504] Trotsky also argued that
Bolshevik policy was not conditioned by the civil war (see [section
H.3.14](secH3.html#sech314)).

As historian Jonathan Aves notes, *"the Communist Party took victory as
a sign of the correctness of its ideological approach and set about the
task of economic construction on the basis of an intensification of War
Communism policies."* [**Workers Against Lenin**, p. 37] In addition,
this perspective flowed, as we argue in the [next
section](secH6.html#sech62), from the Bolshevik ideology, from its
vision of socialism, rather than some alien system imposed upon an
otherwise healthy set of ideas.

Of course, this can be ignored in favour of the argument that party rule
was required for the revolution to succeed. That would be a defendable,
if utterly incorrect, position to take. It would, however, also
necessitate ripping up Lenin's **State and Revolution** as it is clearly
not relevant to a socialist revolution nor can it be considered as the
definitive guide of what Leninism really stands for, as Leninists like
to portray it to this day. Given that this is extremely unlikely to
happen, it is fair to suggest that claims that the Bolsheviks faced
"civil war" from the start, so justifying their authoritarianism, can be
dismissed as particularly unconvincing special pleading. Much the same
can be said for the "objective conditions" produced by the May 1918 to
October 1920 civil war argument in general.

Then there is the logical problem. Leninists say that they are
revolutionaries. As we noted in [section H.2.1](secH2.html#sech21), they
inaccurately mock anarchists for not believing that a revolution needs
to defend itself. Yet, ironically, their whole defence of Bolshevism
rests on the *"exceptional circumstances"* produced by the civil war
they claim is inevitable. If Leninism cannot handle the problems
associated with actually conducting a revolution then, surely, it should
be avoided at all costs. This is particularly the case as leading
Bolsheviks all argued that the specific problems their latter day
followers blame for their authoritarianism were natural results of any
revolution and, consequently, unavoidable. Lenin, for example, in 1917
mocked those who opposed revolution because *"the situation is
exceptionally complicated."* He noted *"the development of the
revolution itself **always** creates an **exceptionally** complicated
situation"* and that it was an *"incredibly complicated and painful
process."* In fact, it was *"the most intense, furious, desperate class
war and civil war. Not a single great revolution in history has taken
place without civil war. And only a 'man in a muffler' can think that
civil war is conceivable without an 'exceptionally complicated
situation.'"* *"If the situation were not exceptionally complicated
there would be no revolution."* [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 26, pp. 118-9]

He reiterated this in 1918, arguing that *"every great revolution, and a
socialist revolution in particular, even if there is no external war, is
inconceivable without internal war, i.e., civil war, which is even more
devastating than external war, and involves thousands and millions of
cases of wavering and desertion from one side to another, implies a
state of extreme indefiniteness, lack of equilibrium and chaos."* [**Op.
Cit.**, vol. 27, p. 264] He even argued that revolution in an advanced
capitalist nations would be far more devastating and ruinous than in
Russia. [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 28, p. 298]

Therefore, Lenin stressed, *"it will never be possible to build
socialism at a time when everything is running smoothly and tranquilly;
it will never be possible to realise socialism without the landowners
and capitalists putting up a furious resistance."* Those *"who believe
that socialism can be built at a time of peace and tranquillity are
profoundly mistaken: it will be everywhere built at a time of
disruption, at a time of famine. That is how it must be."* Moreover,
*"not one of the great revolutions of history has taken place"* without
civil war and *"without which not a single serious Marxist has conceived
the transition from capitalism to socialism."* Obviously, *"there can be
no civil war - the inevitable condition and concomitant of socialist
revolution - without disruption."* [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 27, p. 520, p.
517, p. 496 and p. 497]

Moreover, anarchists had long argued that a revolution would be
associated with economic disruption, isolation and civil war and,
consequently, had developed their ideas to take these into account. For
example, Kropotkin was *"certain that the coming Revolution . . . will
burst upon us in the middle of a great industrial crisis . . . There are
millions of unemployed workers in Europe at this moment. It will be
worse when Revolution has burst upon us . . . The number of the
out-of-works will be doubled as soon as barricades are erected in Europe
and the United States . . . we know that in time of Revolution exchange
and industry suffer most from the general upheaval . . . A Revolution in
Europe means, then, the unavoidable stoppage of at least half the
factories and workshops."* The *"smallest attack upon property will
bring in its train the complete disorganisation"* of the capitalist
economy. This meant that society *"itself will be forced to take
production in hand . . . and to reorganise it to meet the needs of the
whole people."* [**The Conquest of Bread**, pp. 69-70] This prediction
was a common feature of Kropotkin's politics (as can be seen from, say,
his *"The First Work of the Revolution"* [**Act for Yourselves**, pp.
56-60]).

Revolutionary anarchism, then, is based on a clear understanding of the
nature of a social revolution, the objective problems it will face and
the need for mass participation and free initiative to solve them. So it
must, therefore, be stressed that the very *"objective factors"*
supporters of Bolshevism use to justify the actions of Lenin and Trotsky
were predicted correctly by anarchists decades beforehand and integrated
into our politics. Moreover, anarchists had developed their ideas on
social revolution to make sure that these inevitable disruptions would
be minimised. By stressing the need for self-management, mass
participation, self-organisation and free federation, anarchism showed
how a free people could deal with the difficult problems they would face
(as we discuss in the [section H.6.2](secH6.html#sech62) there is
substantial evidence to show that Bolshevik ideology and practice made
the problems facing the Russian revolution much worse than they had to
be).

It should also be noted that every revolution has confirmed the
anarchist analysis. For example, the German Revolution after 1918 faced
an economic collapse which was, relatively, just as bad as that facing
Russia the year before. The near revolution produced extensive political
conflict, including civil war, which was matched by economic turmoil.
Taking 1928 as the base year, the index of industrial production in
Germany was slightly lower in 1913, namely 98 in 1913 to 100 in 1928. In
1917, the index was 63 and by 1918, it was 61 (i.e. industrial
production had dropped by nearly 40%). In 1919, it fell again to 37,
rising to 54 in 1920 and 65 in 1921. Thus, in 1919, the *"industrial
production reached an all-time low"* and it *"took until the late 1920s
for [food] production to recover its 1912 level."* [V. R. Berghahn,
**Modern Germany**, p. 258, pp. 67-8 and p. 71] In Russia, the index for
large scale industry fell to 77 in 1917 from 100 in 1913, falling again
to 35 in 1918, 26 in 1919 and 18 in 1920. [Tony Cliff, **Lenin**, vol.
3, p. 86]

Strangely, Leninists do not doubt that the spread of the Russian
Revolution to Germany would have allowed the Bolsheviks more leeway to
avoid authoritarianism and so save the Revolution. Yet this does not
seem likely given the state of the German economy. Comparing the two
countries, there is a similar picture of economic collapse. In the year
the revolution started, production had fallen by 23% in Russia (from
1913 to 1917) and by 43% in Germany (from 1913 to 1918). Once revolution
had effectively started, production fell even more. In Russia, it fell
to 65% of its pre-war level in 1918, in Germany it fell to 62% of its
pre-war level in 1919. However, no Leninist argues that the German
Revolution was impossible or doomed to failure. Similarly, no Leninist
denies that a socialist revolution was possible during the depths of the
Great Depression of the 1930s or to post-world war two Europe, marked as
it was by economic collapse. This was the case in 1917 as well, when
economic crisis had been a fact of Russian life throughout the year.
This did not stop the Bolsheviks calling for revolution and seizing
power. Nor did this crisis stop the creation of democratic working class
organisations, such as soviets, trade unions and factory committees
being formed nor did it stop mass collective action. It appears,
therefore, that while the economic crisis of 1917 did not stop the
development of socialist tendencies to combat it, the seizure of power
by a socialist party did.

To conclude, it seems hypocritical in the extreme for Leninists to blame
difficult circumstances for the failure of the Russian Revolution. As
Lenin himself argued, the Bolsheviks *"never said that the transition
from capitalism to socialism would be easy. It will invoke a whole
period of violent civil war, it will involve painful measures."* They
knew *"that the transition from capitalism to socialism is a struggle of
an extremely difficult kind"* and so *"[i]f there ever existed a
revolutionary who hoped that we could pass to the socialist system
without difficulties, such a revolutionary, such a socialist, would not
be worth a brass farthing."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 431, p. 433 and pp.
432-3] He would have been surprised to discover that many of his own
followers would be *"such a socialist"*!

Consequently, it is not hard to conclude that for Leninists difficult
objective circumstances place socialism off the agenda only when they
are holding power. So even if we ignore the extensive evidence that
Bolshevik authoritarianism started before the civil war, the logic of
the Leninist argument is hardly convincing. Yet it does have advantages,
for by focusing attention on the civil war, Leninists also draw
attention away from Bolshevik ideology and tactics. As Peter Kropotkin
recounted to Emma Goldman this simply cannot be done:

> *"the Communists are a political party firmly adhering to the idea of
> a centralised State, and that as such they were bound to misdirect the
> course of the Revolution . . . [Their policies] have paralysed the
> energies of the masses and have terrorised the people. Yet without the
> direct participation of the masses in the reconstruction of the
> country, nothing essential could be accomplished . . . They created a
> bureaucracy and officialdom . . . [which were] parasites on the social
> body . . . It was not the fault of any particular individual: rather
> it was the State they had created, which discredits every
> revolutionary ideal, stifles all initiative, and sets a premium on
> incompetence and waste . . . Intervention and blockade were bleeding
> Russia to death, and were preventing the people from understanding the
> real nature of the Bolshevik regime."* [**My Disillusionment in
> Russia**, p. 99]

Obviously, if the "objective" factors do not explain Bolshevik
authoritarianism and the failure of the revolution we are left with the
question of which aspects of Bolshevik ideology impacted negatively on
the revolution. As Kropotkin's comments indicate, anarchists have good
reason to argue that one of the greatest myths of state socialism is the
idea that Bolshevik ideology played no role in the fate of the Russian
Revolution. We turn to this in the [next section](secH6.html#sech62).

H.6.2 Did Bolshevik ideology influence the outcome of the Russian Revolution?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

As we discussed in the [last section](secH6.html#sech61), anarchists
reject the Leninist argument that the failure of Bolshevism in the
Russian Revolution can be blamed purely on the difficult objective
circumstances they faced. As Noam Chomsky summarises:

> "In the stages leading up to the Bolshevik coup in October 1917, there
> **were** incipient socialist institutions developing in Russia -
> workers' councils, collectives, things like that. And they survived to
> an extent once the Bolsheviks took over - but not for very long; Lenin
> and Trotsky pretty much eliminated them as they consolidated their
> power. I mean, you can argue about the **justification** for
> eliminating them, but the fact is that the socialist initiatives were
> pretty quickly eliminated.
> "Now, people who want to justify it say, 'The Bolsheviks had to do it'
> - that's the standard justification: Lenin and Trotsky had to do it,
> because of the contingencies of the civil war, for survival, there
> wouldn't have been food otherwise, this and that. Well, obviously the
> question is, was that true. To answer that, you've got to look at the
> historical facts: I don't think it was true. In fact, I think the
> incipient socialist structures in Russia were dismantled **before**
> the really dire conditions arose . . . But reading their own writings,
> my feeling is that Lenin and Trotsky knew what they were doing, it was
> conscious and understandable." [**Understanding Power**, p. 226]

Chomsky is right on both counts. The attack on the basic building blocks
of genuine socialism started before the civil war. Moreover, it did not
happen by accident. The attacks were rooted in the Bolshevik vision of
socialism. As Maurice Brinton concluded:

> *"there is a clear-cut and incontrovertible link between what happened
> under Lenin and Trotsky and the later practices of Stalinism . . . The
> more one unearths about this period the more difficult it becomes to
> define - or even to see - the 'gulf' allegedly separating what
> happened in Lenin's time from what happened later. Real knowledge of
> the facts also makes it impossible to accept . . . that the whole
> course of events was 'historically inevitable' and 'objectively
> determined'. Bolshevik ideology and practice were themselves important
> and sometimes decisive factors in the equation, at every critical
> stage of this critical period."* [**The Bolsheviks and Workers'
> Control**, p. 84]

This is not to suggest that the circumstances played no role in the
development of the revolution. It is simply to indicate that Bolshevik
ideology played its part as well by not only shaping the policies
implemented but also how the results of those policies themselves
contributed to the circumstances being faced. This is to be expected,
given that the Bolsheviks were the ruling party and, consequently, state
power was utilised to implement their policies, policies which, in turn,
were influenced by their ideological preferences and prejudices.
Ultimately, to maintain (as Leninists do) that the ideology of the
ruling party played no (or, at best, a minor) part hardly makes sense
logically nor, equally importantly, can it be supported once even a
basic awareness of the development of the Russian Revolution is known.

A key issue is the Bolsheviks support for centralisation. Long before
the revolution, Lenin had argued that within the party it was a case of
*"the transformation of the power of ideas into the power of authority,
the subordination of lower Party bodies to higher ones."* [**Collected
Works**, vol. 7, p. 367] Such visions of centralised organisation were
the model for the revolutionary state and, once in power, they did not
disappoint. Thus, *"for the leadership, the principle of maximum
centralisation of authority served more than expedience. It consistently
resurfaced as the image of a peacetime political system as well."*
[Thomas F. Remington, **Building Socialism in Bolshevik Russia**, p. 91]

However, by its very nature centralism places power into a few hands and
effectively eliminates the popular participation required for any
successful revolution to develop. The power placed into the hands of the
Bolshevik government was automatically no longer in the hands of the
working class. So when Leninists argue that "objective" circumstances
forced the Bolsheviks to substitute their power for that of the masses,
anarchists reply that this substitution had occurred the moment the
Bolsheviks centralised power and placed it into their own hands. As a
result, popular participation and institutions began to wither and die.
Moreover, once in power, the Bolsheviks were shaped by their new
position and the social relationships it created and, consequently,
implemented policies influenced and constrained by the hierarchical and
centralised structures they had created.

This was not the only negative impact of Bolshevik centralism. It also
spawned a bureaucracy. As we noted in [section
H.1.7](secH1.html#sech17), the rise of a state bureaucracy started
immediately with the seizure of power. Thus *"red tape and vast
administrative offices typified Soviet reality"* as the Bolsheviks
*"rapidly created their own [state] apparatus to wage the political and
economic offensive against the bourgeoisie and capitalism. As the
functions of the state expanded, so did the bureaucracy"* and so
*"following the revolution the process of institutional proliferation
reached unprecedented heights . . . a mass of economic organisations
[were] created or expanded."* [Richard Sakwa, **Soviet Communists in
Power**, p. 190 and p. 191] This was a striking confirmation of the
anarchist analysis which argued that a new bureaucratic class develops
around any centralised body. This body would soon become riddled with
personal influences and favours, so ensuring that members could be
sheltered from popular control while, at the same time, exploiting its
power to feather their own nest. Overtime, this permanent collection of
bodies would become the real power in the state, with the party members
nominally in charge really under the control of an unelected and
uncontrolled officialdom. This was recognised by Lenin in 1922:

> *"If we take Moscow with its 4,700 Communists in responsible
> positions, and if we take that huge bureaucratic machine, that
> gigantic heap, we must ask: who is directing whom? I doubt very much
> whether it can truthfully be said that the Communists are directing
> that heap. To tell the truth, they are not directing, they are being
> directed."* [**The Lenin Anthology**, p. 527]

By the end of 1920, there were five times more state officials than
industrial workers (5,880,000 were members of the state bureaucracy).
However, the bureaucracy had existed since the start. In Moscow, in
August 1918, state officials represented 30 per cent of the workforce
there and by 1920 the general number of office workers *"still
represented about a third of those employed in the city"* (200,000 in
November, 1920, rising to 228,000 in July, 1921 and, by October 1922, to
243,000). [Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 191-3] And with bureaucracy came the
abuse of it simply because it held **real** power:

> *"The prevalence of bureaucracy, of committees and commissions . . .
> permitted, and indeed encouraged, endless permutations of corrupt
> practices. These raged from the style of living of communist
> functionaries to bribe-taking by officials. With the power of
> allocation of scare resources, such as housing, there was an
> inordinate potential for corruption."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 193]

The growth in **power** of the bureaucracy should not, therefore, come
as a major surprise given that it had existed from the start in sizeable
numbers. Yet, for the Bolsheviks *"the development of a bureaucracy"*
was a puzzle, *"whose emergence and properties mystified them."* It
should be noted that, *"[f]or the Bolsheviks, bureaucratism signified
the escape of this bureaucracy from the will of the party as it took on
a life of its own."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 182 and p. 190] This was the key.
They did not object the usurpation of power by the party (indeed they
placed party dictatorship at the core of their politics and
universalised it to a general principle for **all** "socialist"
revolutions). Nor did they object to the centralisation of power and
activity (and so the bureaucratisation of life). As such, the Bolsheviks
failed to understand how their own politics helped the rise of this new
ruling class. They failed to understand the links between centralism and
bureaucracy. Bolshevik nationalisation and centralism (as well as being
extremely inefficient) also ensured that the control of society,
economic activity and its product would be in the hands of the state
and, so, class society would continue. Unsurprisingly, complaints by
working class people about the privileges enjoyed by Communist Party and
state officials were widespread.

Another problem was the Bolshevik vision of (centralised) democracy.
Trotsky is typical. In April 1918 he argued that once elected the
government was to be given total power to make decisions and appoint
people as required as it is *"better able to judge in the matter than"*
the masses. The sovereign people were expected to simply obey their
public servants until such time as they *"dismiss that government and
appoint another."* Trotsky raised the question of whether it was
possible for the government to act *"against the interests of the
labouring and peasant masses?"* And answered no! Yet it is obvious that
Trotsky's claim that *"there can be no antagonism between the government
and the mass of the workers, just as there is no antagonism between the
administration of the union and the general assembly of its members"* is
just nonsense. [**Leon Trotsky Speaks**, p. 113] The history of trade
unionism is full of examples of committees betraying their membership.
Needless to say, the subsequent history Lenin's government shows that
there can be *"antagonism"* between rulers and ruled and that
appointments are always a key way to further elite interests.

This vision of top-down "democracy" can, of course, be traced back to
Marx and Lenin (see sections [H.3.2](secH3.html#sech32) and
[H.3.3](secH3.html#sech33)). By equating centralised, top-down decision
making by an elected government with "democracy," the Bolsheviks had the
ideological justification to eliminate the functional democracy
associated with the soviets, factory committees and soldiers committees.
The Bolshevik vision of democracy became the means by which real
democracy was eliminated in area after area of Russian working class
life. Needless to say, a state which eliminates functional democracy in
the grassroots will not stay democratic in any meaningful sense for
long.

Nor does it come as too great a surprise to discover that a government
which considers itself as *"better able to judge"* things than the
people finally decides to annul any election results it dislikes. As we
discussed in [section H.5](secH5.html), this perspective is at the heart
of vanguardism, for in Bolshevik ideology the party, not the class, is
in the final analysis the repository of class consciousness. This means
that once in power it has a built-in tendency to override the decisions
of the masses it claimed to represent and justify this in terms of the
advanced position of the party (as historian Richard Sakwa notes a
*"lack of identification with the Bolshevik party was treated as the
absence of political consciousness altogether"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 94]).
Combine this with a vision of "democracy" which is highly centralised
and which undermines local participation then we have the necessary
foundations for the turning of party power into party dictatorship.

Which brings us to the next issue, namely the Bolshevik idea that the
party should seize power, not the working class as a whole, equating
party power with popular power. The question instantly arises of what
happens if the masses turn against the party? The gerrymandering,
disbanding and marginalisation of the soviets in the spring and summer
of 1918 answers that question (see [last section](secH6.html#sech61)).
It is not a great step to party dictatorship **over** the proletariat
from the premises of Bolshevism. In a clash between soviet democracy and
party power, the Bolsheviks consistently favoured the latter - as would
be expected given their ideology.

This can be seen from the Bolsheviks' negative response to the soviets
of 1905. At one stage the Bolsheviks demanded the St. Petersburg soviet
accept the Bolshevik political programme and then disband. The rationale
for these attacks is significant. The St. Petersburg Bolsheviks were
convinced that *"only a strong party along class lines can guide the
proletarian political movement and preserve the integrity of its
program, rather than a political mixture of this kind, an indeterminate
and vacillating political organisation such as the workers council
represents and cannot help but represent."* [quoted by Anweiler, **The
Soviets**, p. 77] In other words, the soviets could not reflect workers'
interests because they were elected by the workers! The implications of
this perspective became clear in 1918, as are its obvious roots in
Lenin's arguments in **What is to be Done?**. As one historian argues,
the 1905 position on the soviets *"is of particular significance in
understanding the Bolshevik's mentality, political ambitions and **modus
operandi.**"* The Bolshevik campaign *"was repeated in a number of
provincial soviets"* and *"reveals that from the outset the Bolsheviks
were distrustful of, if not hostile towards the Soviets, to which they
had at best an instrumental and always party-minded attitude."* The
Bolsheviks actions showed an *"ultimate aim of controlling [the soviets]
and turning them into one-party organisations, or, failing that, of
destroying them."* [Israel Getzler, *"The Bolshevik Onslaught on the
Non-Party 'Political Profile' of the Petersburg Soviet of Workers'
Deputies October-November 1905"*, **Revolutionary History**, pp.
123-146, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 124-5]

That the mainstream of Bolshevism expressed this perspective once in
power goes without saying, but even dissident Communists expressed
identical views. Left-Communist V. Sorin argued in 1918 that the *"party
is in every case and everywhere superior to the soviets . . . The
soviets represent labouring democracy in general; and its interest, and
in particular the interests of the petty bourgeois peasantry, do not
always coincide with the interests of the proletariat."* [quoted by
Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, p. 182] As one historian notes, *"[a]ccording to
the Left Communists . . . the party was the custodian of an interest
higher than that of the soviets."* Unsurprisingly, in the party there
was *"a general consensus over the principles of party dictatorship for
the greater part of the [civil] war. But the way in which these
principles were applied roused increasing opposition."* [Sakwa, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 182 and p. 30] This consensus existed in all the so-called
opposition (including the **Workers' Opposition** and Trotsky's **Left
Opposition** in the 1920s). The ease with which the Bolsheviks embraced
party dictatorship is suggestive of a fundamental flaw in their
political perspective which the problems of the revolution, combined
with lost of popular support, simply exposed.

Then there is the Bolshevik vision of socialism. As we discussed in
[section H.3.12](secH3.html#sech312), the Bolsheviks, like other
Marxists at the time, saw the socialist economy as being built upon the
centralised organisations created by capitalism. They confused state
capitalism with socialism. The former, Lenin wrote in May 1917, *"is a
complete **material** preparation for socialism, the threshold of
socialism"* and so socialism *"is nothing but the next step forward from
state capitalist monopoly."* It is *"merely state-capitalist monopoly
**which is made to serve the interests of the whole people** and has to
that extent **ceased** to be capitalist monopoly."* [**Collected
Works**, vol. 25, p. 359 and p. 358] A few months later, he was talking
about how the institutions of state capitalism could be taken over and
used to create socialism. Unsurprisingly, when defending the need for
state capitalism in the spring of 1918 against the "Left Communists,"
Lenin stressed that he gave his *"'high' appreciation of state
capitalism . . . **before** the Bolsheviks seized power."* And, as Lenin
noted, his praise for state capitalism can be found in his **State and
Revolution** and so it was *"significant that [his opponents] did
**not** emphasise **this**"* aspect of his 1917 ideas. [**Op. Cit.**,
vol. 27, p. 341 and p. 354] Unsurprisingly, modern-day Leninists do not
emphasise that element of Lenin's ideas either.

Given this perspective, it is unsurprising that workers' control was not
given a high priority once the Bolsheviks seized power. While in order
to gain support the Bolsheviks **had** paid lip-service to the idea of
workers' control, as we noted in [section H.3.14](secH3.html#sech314)
the party had always given that slogan a radically different
interpretation than the factory committees had. While the factory
committees had seen workers' control as being exercised directly by the
workers and their class organisations, the Bolshevik leadership saw it
in terms of state control in which the factory committees would play, at
best, a minor role. Given who held actual power in the new regime, it is
unsurprising to discover which vision was actually introduced:

> *"On three occasions in the first months of Soviet power, the
> [factory] committee leaders sought to bring their model into being. At
> each point the party leadership overruled them. The result was to vest
> both managerial **and** control powers in organs of the state which
> were subordinate to the central authorities, and formed by them."*
> [Thomas F. Remington, **Building Socialism in Bolshevik Russia**, p.
> 38]

Given his vision of socialism, Lenin's rejection of the factory
committee's model comes as no surprise. As Lenin put it in 1920, the
*"domination of the proletariat consists in the fact that the landowners
and capitalists have been deprived of their property . . . The
victorious proletariat has abolished property . . . and therein lies its
domination as a class. The prime thing is the question of property."*
[**Op. Cit.**, vol. 30, p. 456] As we proved in [section
H.3.13](secH3.html#sech313), the Bolsheviks had no notion that socialism
required workers' self-management of production and, unsurprisingly,
they, as Lenin had promised, built from the top-down their system of
unified administration based on the Tsarist system of central bodies
which governed and regulated certain industries during the war. The
**Supreme Economic Council** (Vesenka) was set up in December of 1917,
and *"was widely acknowledged by the Bolsheviks as a move towards
'statisation' (ogosudarstvleniye) of economic authority."* During the
early months of 1918, the Bolsheviks began implementing their vision of
"socialism" and the Vesenka began *"to build, from the top, its 'unified
administration' of particular industries. The pattern is informative"*
as it *"gradually took over"* the Tsarist state agencies such as the
**Glakvi** (as Lenin had promised) *"and converted them . . . into
administrative organs subject to [its] direction and control."* The
Bolsheviks *"clearly opted"* for the taking over of *"the institutions
of bourgeois economic power and use[d] them to their own ends."* This
system *"necessarily implies the perpetuation of hierarchical relations
within production itself, and therefore the perpetuation of class
society."* [Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 22, p. 36 and p. 22] Thus the
Supreme Council of the National Economy *"was an expression of the
principle of centralisation and control from above which was peculiar to
the Marxist ideology."* In fact, it is *"likely that the arguments for
centralisation in economic policy, which were prevalent among Marxists,
determined the short life of the All-Russian Council of Workers'
Control."* [Silvana Malle, **The Economic Organisation of War Communism,
1918-1921**, p. 95 and p. 94]

Moreover, the Bolsheviks had systematically stopped the factory
committee organising together, using their controlled unions to come
*"out firmly against the attempt of the Factory Committees to form a
national organisation."* The unions *"prevented the convocation of a
planned All-Russian Congress of Factory Committees.* [I. Deutscher,
quoted by Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 19] Given that one of the key
criticisms of the factory committees by leading Bolsheviks was their
"localism", this blocking of co-ordination is doubly damning.

At this time Lenin *"envisaged a period during which, in a workers'
state, the bourgeoisie would still retain the formal ownership and
effective management of most of the productive apparatus"* and workers'
control *"was seen as the instrument"* by which the *"capitalists would
be coerced into co-operation."* [Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 13] The
Bolsheviks turned to one-management in April, 1918 (it was applied first
on the railway workers). As the capitalists refused to co-operate, with
many closing down their workplaces, the Bolsheviks were forced to
nationalise industry and place it fully under state control in late June
1918. This saw state-appointed "dictatorial" managers replacing the
remaining capitalists (when it was not simply a case of the old boss
being turned into a state manager). The Bolshevik vision of socialism as
nationalised property replacing capitalist property was at the root of
the creation of state capitalism within Russia. This was very
centralised and very inefficient:

> *"it seems apparent that many workers themselves . . . had now come to
> believe . . . that confusion and anarchy [sic!] **at the top** were
> the major causes of their difficulties, and with some justification.
> The fact was that Bolshevik administration was chaotic . . . Scores of
> competitive and conflicting Bolshevik and Soviet authorities issued
> contradictory orders, often brought to factories by armed Chekists.
> The Supreme Economic Council. . . issu[ed] dozens of orders and
> pass[ed] countless directives with virtually no real knowledge of
> affairs."* [William G. Rosenberg, **Russian Labour and Bolshevik
> Power**, p. 116]

Faced with the chaos that their own politics, in part, had created, like
all bosses, the Bolsheviks blamed the workers. Yet abolishing the
workers' committees resulted in *"a terrifying proliferation of
competitive and contradictory Bolshevik authorities, each with a claim
of life or death importance . . . Railroad journals argued plaintively
about the correlation between failing labour productivity and the
proliferation of competing Bolshevik authorities."* Rather than
improving things, Lenin's one-man management did the opposite, *"leading
in many places . . . to a greater degree of confusion and indecision"*
and *"this problem of contradictory authorities clearly intensified,
rather than lessened."* Indeed, the *"result of replacing workers'
committees with one man rule . . . on the railways . . . was not
directiveness, but distance, and increasing inability to make decisions
appropriate to local conditions. Despite coercion, orders on the
railroads were often ignored as unworkable."* It got so bad that *"a
number of local Bolshevik officials . . . began in the fall of 1918 to
call for the restoration of workers' control, not for ideological
reasons, but because workers themselves knew best how to run the line
efficiently, and might obey their own central committee's directives if
they were not being constantly countermanded."* [William G. Rosenberg,
**Workers' Control on the Railroads**, p. D1208, p. D1207, p. D1213 and
pp. D1208-9]

That it was Bolshevik policies and not workers' control which was to
blame for the state of the economy can be seen from what happened
**after** Lenin's one-man management was imposed. The centralised
Bolshevik economic system quickly demonstrated how to **really**
mismanage an economy. The Bolshevik onslaught against workers' control
in favour of a centralised, top-down economic regime ensured that the
economy was handicapped by an unresponsive system which wasted the local
knowledge in the grassroots in favour of orders from above which were
issued in ignorance of local conditions. Thus the **glavki** *"did not
know the true number of enterprises in their branch"* of industry. To
ensure centralism, customers had to go via a central orders committee,
which would then past the details to the appropriate **glavki** and,
unsurprisingly, it was *"unable to cope with these enormous tasks"*. As
a result, workplaces often *"endeavoured to find less bureaucratic
channels"* to get resources and, in fact, the *"comparative efficiency
of factories remaining outside the **glavki** sphere increased."* In
summary, the *"shortcomings of the central administrations and
**glavki** increased together with the number of enterprises under their
control"*. [Malle, **Op. Cit.**, p. 232, p. 233 and p. 250] In summary:

> *"The most evident shortcoming . . . was that it did not ensure
> central allocation of resources and central distribution of output, in
> accordance with any priority ranking . . . materials were provided to
> factories in arbitrary proportions: in some places they accumulated,
> whereas in others there was a shortage. Moreover, the length of the
> procedure needed to release the products increased scarcity at given
> moments, since products remained stored until the centre issued a
> purchase order on behalf of a centrally defined customer. Unused stock
> coexisted with acute scarcity. The centre was unable to determine the
> correct proportions among necessary materials and eventually to
> enforce implementation of the orders for their total quantity. The gap
> between theory and practice was significant."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 233]

Thus there was a clear *"gulf between the abstraction of the principles
on centralisation and its reality."* This was recognised at the time
and, unsuccessfully, challenged. Provincial delegates argued that
*"[w]aste of time was . . . the effect of strict compliance of vertical
administration . . . semi-finished products [were] transferred to other
provinces for further processing, while local factories operating in the
field were shut down"* (and given the state of the transport network,
this was a doubly inefficient). The local bodies, knowing the grassroots
situation, *"had proved to be more far-sighted than the centre."* For
example, flax had been substituted for cotton long before the centre had
issued instructions for this. Arguments reversing the logic
centralisation were raised: *"there was a lot of talk about scarcity of
raw materials, while small factories and mills were stuffed with them in
some provinces: what's better, to let work go on, or to make plans?"*
These *"expressed feelings . . . about the inefficiency of the **glavk**
system and the waste which was visible locally."* Indeed, *"the
inefficiency of central financing seriously jeopardised local
activity."* While *"the centre had displayed a great deal of
conservatism and routine thinking,"* the localities *"had already found
ways of rationing raw materials, a measure which had not yet been
decided upon at the centre."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.269, p. 270 and pp.
272-3]

This did not result in changes as such demands *"challenged . . . the
central directives of the party"* which *"approved the principles on
which the **glavk** system was based"* and *"the maximum centralisation
of production."* Even the *"admission that some of the largest works had
been closed down, owning to the scarcity of raw materials and fuel, did
not induce the economists of the party to question the validity of
concentration, although in Russia at the time impediments due to lack of
transport jeopardised the whole idea of convergence of all productive
activity in a few centres."* The party leadership *"decided to
concentrate the tasks of economic reconstruction in the hands of the
higher organs of the state."* Sadly, *"the **glavk** system in Russia
did not work . . . Confronted with production problems, the central
managers needed the collaboration of local organs, which they could not
obtain both because of reciprocal suspicion and because of a lack of an
efficient system of information, communications and transport. But the
failure of **glavkism** did not bring about a reconsideration of the
problems of economic organisation . . . On the contrary, the ideology of
centralisation was reinforced."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 271 and p. 275]

The failings of centralisation can be seen from the fact that in
September 1918, the Supreme Economic Council (SEC) chairman reported
that *"approximately eight hundred enterprises were known to have been
nationalised and another two hundred or so were presumed to be
nationalised but were not registered as such. In fact, well over two
thousand enterprises had been taken over by this time."* The *"centre's
information was sketchy at best"* and *"efforts by the centre to exert
its power more effectively would provoke resistance from local
authorities."* [Thomas F. Remington, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 58-9] This kind
of clashing could not help but occur when the centre had no real
knowledge nor understanding of local conditions:

> *"Organisations with independent claims to power frequently ignored
> it. It was deluged with work of an ad hoc character . . . Demands for
> fuel and supplies piled up. Factories demanded instructions on
> demobilisation and conversion. Its presidium . . . scarcely knew what
> its tasks were, other than to direct the nationalisation of industry.
> Control over nationalisation was hard to obtain, however. Although the
> SEC intended to plan branch-wide nationalisations, it was overwhelmed
> with requests to order the nationalisation of individual enterprises.
> Generally it resorted to the method, for want of a better one, of
> appointing a commissar to carry out each act of nationalisation. These
> commissars, who worked closely with the Cheka, had almost unlimited
> powers over both workers and owners, and acted largely on their own
> discretion."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 61-2]

Unsurprisingly, *"[r]esentment of the **glavki** was strongest where
local authorities had attained a high level of competence in
co-ordinating local production. They were understandably distressed when
orders from central organs disrupted local production plans."*
Particularly given that the centre *"drew up plans for developing or
reorganising the economy of a region, either in ignorance, or against
the will, of the local authorities."* *"Hypercentralisation"*,
ironically, *"multiplied the lines of command and accountability, which
ultimately reduced central control."* For example, one small condensed
milk plan, employing fewer than 15 workers, *"became the object of a
months-long competition among six organisations."* Moreover, the
**glavki** *"were filled with former owners."* Yet *"throughout 1919, as
the economic crisis grew worse and the war emergency sharper the
leadership strengthened the powers of the **glavki** in the interests of
centralisation."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 68, p. 69, p. 70 and p. 69]

A clearer example of the impact of Bolshevik ideology on the fate of the
revolution would be hard to find. While the situation was pretty chaotic
in early 1918, this does not prove that the factory committees'
socialism was not the most efficient way of running things under the
(difficult) circumstances. Unless of course, like the Bolsheviks, you
have a dogmatic belief that centralisation is always more efficient.
That favouring the factory committees, as anarchists stressed then and
now, could have been a possible solution to the economic problems being
faced is not utopian. After all rates of *"output and productivity began
to climb steadily after"* January 1918 and *"[i]n some factories,
production doubled or tripled in the early months of 1918 . . . Many of
the reports explicitly credited the factory committees for these
increases."* [Carmen Sirianni, **Workers' Control and Socialist
Democracy**, p. 109] Another expert notes that there is *"evidence that
until late 1919, some factory committees performed managerial tasks
successfully. In some regions factories were still active thanks to
their workers' initiatives in securing raw materials."* [Malle, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 101]

Moreover, given how inefficient the Bolshevik system was, it was only
the autonomous self-activity at the base which keep it going. Thus the
Commissariat of Finance was *"not only bureaucratically cumbersome, but
[it] involved mountainous accounting problems"* and *"with the various
offices of the Sovnarkhoz and commissariat structure literally swamped
with 'urgent' delegations and submerged in paperwork, even the most
committed supporters of the revolution - perhaps one should say
**especially** the most committed - felt impelled to act independently
to get what workers and factories needed, even if this circumvented
party directives."* [William G. Rosenberg, *"The Social Background to
Tsektran,"* pp. 349-373, **Party, State, and Society in the Russian
Civil War**, Diane P. Koenker, William G. Rosenberg and Ronald Grigor
Suny (eds.), p. 357] *"Requisition and confiscation of resources,"* as
Malle notes, *"largely undertaken by the **glavki**, worked against any
possible territorial network of complementary industries which might
have been more efficient in reducing delays resulting from central
financing, central ordering, central supply and delivery."* By
integrating the factory committees into a centralised state structure,
this kind of activity became harder to do and, moreover, came up against
official resistance and opposition. Significantly, due to *"the run-down
of large-scale industry and the bureaucratic methods applied to
production orders"* the Red Army turned to small-scale workplaces to
supply personal equipment. These workplaces *"largely escaped the
**glavk** administration"* and *"allowed the Bolsheviks to support a
well equipped army amidst general distress and disorganisation."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 251, p. 477 and p. 502]

Needless to say, Lenin never wavered in his support for one-man
management nor in his belief in the efficiency of centralism to solve
all problems, particularly the problems it itself created in abundance.
Nor did his explicit call to reproduce capitalist social relations in
production cause him any concern for, if the primary issue were property
and not who **manages** the means of production, then factory committees
are irrelevant in determining the socialist nature of the economy.
Equally, if (as with Engels) all forms of organisation are inherently
authoritarian then it does not fundamentally matter whether that
authority is exercised by an elected factory committee or an appointed
dictatorial manager (see [section H.4](secH4.html)). And it must be
noted that the politics of the leading members of the factory committee
movement also played its part. While the committees expressed a
spontaneous anarchism, almost instinctively moving towards libertarian
ideas, the actual influence of conscious anarchists was limited. Most of
the leaders of the movement were, or became, Bolsheviks and, as such,
shared many of the statist and centralistic assumptions of the party
leadership as well as accepting party discipline. As such, they did not
have the theoretical accruement to resist their leadership's assault on
the factory committees and, as a result, did integrate them into the
trade unions when demanded.

As well as advocating one-man management, Lenin's proposals also struck
at the heart of workers' power in other ways. For example, he argued
that *"we must raise the question of piece-work and apply it and test in
practice; we must raise the question of applying much of what is
scientific and progressive in the Taylor system"*. [**Op. Cit.**, vol.
27, p. 258] As Leninist Tony Cliff noted, *"the employers have at their
disposal a number of effective methods of disrupting th[e] unity [of
workers as a class]. One of the most important of these is the fostering
of competition between workers by means of piece-work systems."* He
added that these were used by the Nazis and the Stalinists *"for the
same purpose."* [**State Capitalism in Russia**, pp. 18-9] Obviously
piece-work is different when Lenin introduces it!

Other policies undermined working class collectivity. Banning trade
helped undermine a collective response to the problems of exchange
between city and country. For example, a delegation of workers from the
Main Workshops of the Nikolaev Railroad to Moscow reported to a
well-attended meeting that *"the government had rejected their request
[to obtain permission to buy food collectively] arguing that to permit
the free purchase of food would destroy its efforts to come to grips
with hunger by establishing a 'food dictatorship.'"* [David Mandel,
**The Petrograd Workers and the Soviet Seizure of Power**, p. 392]
Bolshevik ideology replaced collective working class action with an
abstract "collective" response via the state, which turned the workers
into isolated and atomised individuals. As such, the Bolsheviks provided
a good example to support Malatesta's argument that *"if . . . one means
government action when one talks of social action, then this is still
the resultant of individual forces, but only of those individuals who
form the government . . . it follows. . . that far from resulting in an
increase in the productive, organising and protective forces in society,
it would greatly reduce them, limiting initiative to a few, and giving
them the right to do everything without, of course, being able to
provide them with the gift of being all-knowing."* [**Anarchy**, pp.
38-9] Can it be surprising, then, that Bolshevik policies aided the
atomisation of the working class by replacing collective organisation
and action by state bureaucracy?

The negative impact of Bolshevik ideology showed up in other areas of
the economy as well. For example, the Leninist fetish that bigger was
better resulted in the *"waste of scare resources"* as the *"general
shortage of fuel and materials in the city took its greatest toll on the
largest enterprises, whose overhead expenditures for heating the plant
and firing the furnaces were proportionately greater than those for
smaller enterprises. This point . . . was recognised later. Not until
1919 were the regime's leaders prepared to acknowledge that small
enterprises, under the conditions of the time, might be more efficient
in using resources; and not until 1921 did a few Bolsheviks theorists
grasp the economic reasons for this apparent violation of their standing
assumption that larger units were inherently more productive."*
[Remington, **Op. Cit.**, p. 106] Given how disrupted transport was and
how scare supplies were, this kind of ideologically generated mistake
could not fail to have substantial impact.

Post-October Bolshevik policy is a striking confirmation of the
anarchist argument that a centralised structure would stifle the
initiative of the masses and their own organs of self-management. Not
only was it disastrous from a revolutionary perspective, it was
hopelessly inefficient. The constructive self-activity of the people was
replaced by the bureaucratic machinery of the state. The Bolshevik
onslaught on workers' control, like their attacks on soviet democracy
and workers' protest, undoubtedly engendered apathy and cynicism in the
workforce, alienating even more the positive participation required for
building socialism which the Bolshevik mania for centralisation had
already marginalised. The negative results of Bolshevik economic policy
confirmed Kropotkin's prediction that a revolution which *"establish[ed]
a strongly centralised Government"*, leaving it to *"draw up a statement
of all the produce"* in a country and *"then **command** that a
prescribed quantity"* of some good *"be sent to such a place on such a
day"* and *"stored in particular warehouses"* would *"not merely"* be
*"undesirable, but it never could by any possibility be put into
practice."* *"In any case,"* Kropotkin stressed, *"a system which
springs up spontaneously, under stress of immediate need, will be
infinitely preferable to anything invented between four-walls by
hide-bound theorists sitting on any number of committees."* [**The
Conquest of Bread**, pp. 82-3 and p. 75]

Some Bolsheviks were aware of the problems. One left-wing Communist,
Osinskii, concluded that *"his six weeks in the provinces had taught him
that the centre must rely on strong regional and provincial councils,
since they were more capable than was the centre of managing the
nationalised sector."* [Remington, **Op. Cit.**, p. 71] However, Marxist
ideology seemed to preclude even finding the words to describe a
possible solution to the problems faced by the regime: *"I stand not for
a local point of view and not for bureaucratic centralism, but for
organised centralism, - I cannot seem to find the actual word just now,
- a more balanced centralism."* [Osinskii, quoted by Remington, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 71] Any anarchist would know that the word he was struggling
to find was federalism! Little wonder Goldman concluded that
anarcho-syndicalism, not nationalisation, could solve the problems
facing Russia:

> *"Only free initiative and popular participation in the affairs of the
> revolution can prevent the terrible blunders committed in Russia. For
> instance, with fuel only a hundred versts [about sixty-six miles] from
> Petrograd there would have been no necessity for that city to suffer
> from cold had the workers' economic organisations of Petrograd been
> free to exercise their initiative for the common good. The peasants of
> the Ukraina would not have been hampered in the cultivation of their
> land had they had access to the farm implements stacked up in the
> warehouses of Kharkov and other industrial centres awaiting orders
> from Moscow for their distribution. These are characteristic examples
> of Bolshevik governmentalism and centralisation, which should serve as
> a warning to the workers of Europe and America of the destructive
> effects of Statism."* [**My Disillusionment in Russia**, p. 253]

If Bolshevik industrial policy reflected a basic ignorance of local
conditions and the nature of industry, their agricultural policies were
even worse. Part of the problem was that the Bolsheviks were simply
ignorant of peasant life (as one historian put it, *"the deeply held
views of the party on class struggle had overcome the need for
evidence."* [Christopher Read, **From Tsar to Soviet**, p. 225]). Lenin,
for example, thought that inequality in the villages was much, much
higher than it actually was, a mistaken assumption which drove the
unpopular and counter-productive "Committees of Poor Peasants" (kombedy)
policy of 1918. Rather than a countryside dominated by a few rich kulaks
(peasants who employed wage labour), Russian villages were predominantly
pre-capitalist and based on actual peasant farming (i.e., people who
worked their land themselves). While the Bolsheviks attacked kulaks,
they, at best, numbered only 5 to 7 per cent of the peasantry and even
this is high as only 1 per cent of the total of peasant households
employed more than one labourer. The revolution itself had an equalising
effect on peasant life, and during 1917 *"average size of landholding
fell, the extremes of riches and poverty diminished."* [Alec Nove, **An
economic history of the USSR: 1917-1991**, p. 103 and p. 102]

By 1919, even Lenin had to admit that the policies pursued in 1918,
against the advice and protest of the Left-SRs, were failures and had
alienated the peasantry. While admitting to errors, it remains the case
that it was Lenin himself, more than anyone, who was responsible for
them. Still, there was no fundamental change in policy for another two
years. Defenders of the Bolsheviks argue that the Bolshevik had no
alternative but to use violence to seize food from the peasants to feed
the starving cities. However, this fails to acknowledge two key facts.
Firstly, Bolshevik industrial policy made the collapse of industry worse
and so the lack of goods to trade for grain was, in part, a result of
the government. It is likely that if the factory committees had been
fully supported then the lack of goods to trade may been reduced.
Secondly, it cannot be said that the peasants did not wish to trade with
the cities. They were, but at a fair price as can be seen from the fact
that throughout Russia peasants with bags of grains on their backs went
to the city to exchange them for goods. In fact, in the Volga region
official state sources indicate *"that grain-hoarding and the black
market did not become a major problem until the beginning of 1919, and
that during the autumn the peasants, in general, were 'wildly
enthusiastic to sell as much grain as possible' to the government."*
This changed when the state reduced its fixed prices by 25% and *"it
became apparent that the new government would be unable to pay for grain
procurements in industrial goods."* [Orlando Figes, **Peasant Russia,
Civil War**, p. 253 and p. 254] Thus, in that region at least, it was
**after** the introduction of central state food requisition in January
1919 that peasants started to hoard food. Thus Bolshevik policy made the
situation worse. And as Alec Nove noted *"at certain moments even the
government itself was compelled to 'legalise' illegal trade. For
example, in September 1918 the wicked speculators and meshochniki
[bag-men] were authorised to take sacks weighing up to 1.5 poods (54
lbs.) to Petrograd and Moscow, and in this month . . . they supplied
four times more than did the official supply organisation."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 55]

Yet rather than encourage this kind of self-activity, the Bolsheviks
denounced it as speculation and did all in their power to suppress it
(this included armed pickets around the towns and cities). This, of
course, drove the prices on the black market higher due to the risk of
arrest and imprisonment this entailed and so the regime made the
situation worse: *"it was in fact quite impossible to live on the
official rations, and the majority of the supplies even of bread come
through the black market. The government was never able to prevent this
market from functioning, but did sufficiently disrupt it to make food
shortages worse."* By January 1919, only 19% of all food came through
official channels and rose to around 30% subsequently. Official sources,
however, announced an increase in grain, with total procurements
amounting to 30 million poods in the agricultural year 1917-18 to 110
million poods in 1918-19. [Nove, **Op. Cit.**, p. 55 and p. 54] Needless
to say, the average worker in the towns saw nothing of this improvement
in official statistics (and this in spite of dropping urban
populations!).

In the face of repression (up to and including torture and the
destruction of whole villages), the peasantry responded by both cutting
back on the amount of grain planted (something compounded by the state
often taking peasant reserves for next season) and rising in
insurrection. Unsurprisingly, opposition groups called for free trade in
an attempt to both feed the cities and stop the alienation of the
peasantry from the revolution. The Bolsheviks denounced the call, before
being forced to accept it in 1921 due to mass pressure from below. Three
years of bad policies had made a bad situation worse. Moreover, if the
Bolsheviks had not ignored and alienated the Left-SRs, gerrymandered the
Fifth All-Russian Congress of Soviets and pushed them into revolt then
their links with the countryside would not have been so weak and
sensible policies which reflected the reality of village life may have
been implemented.

Nor did it help that the Bolsheviks undermined Russia's extensive
network of consumer co-operatives because they were associated with the
moderate socialists. It should also be noted that the peasants (or
"kulaks") were blamed for food shortages when problems on the transport
network or general bureaucratic mismanagement was the real reason. That
there is *"is little evidence to support the Leninist view"* that kulaks
were behind the peasant resistance and revolts resulting from the
Bolshevik food requisition policies should go without saying. [Figes,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 155]

Given all this, it is not hard to conclude that alternatives existed to
Bolshevik policies - particularly as even the Bolsheviks had to admit in
1919 their decisions of the previous year were wrong! The New Economic
Policy (NEP) was introduced in 1921 (under immense popular pressure) in
conditions even worse than those in 1918, for example. Since NEP allowed
wage labour, it was a step backwards from the ideas of the peasantry
itself, peasant based parties like the SRs and Left-SRs as well as such
rebels as the Kronstadt sailors. A more socialistic policy, recognising
that peasants exchanging the product of their labour was **not**
capitalism, could have been implemented much earlier but Bolshevik
ignorance and disdain for the peasantry combined with a false belief
that centralised state control was more efficient and more socialist
ensured that this option was unlikely to be pursued, particularly given
the collapse of industrial production Bolshevik state capitalist
policies helped deepen.

The pre-revolution Bolshevik vision of a socialist system was
fundamentally centralised and, consequently, top-down. This was what was
implemented post-October, with disastrous results. At each turning
point, the Bolsheviks tended to implement policies which reflected their
prejudices in favour of centralism, nationalisation and party power.
Unsurprisingly, this also undermined the genuine socialist tendencies
which existed at the time and so the Bolshevik vision of socialism and
democracy played a key role in the failure of the revolution. Therefore,
the Leninist idea that politics of the Bolsheviks had no influence on
the outcome of the revolution, that their policies during the revolution
were a product purely of objective forces, is unconvincing. This is
enforced by the awkward fact that the Bolshevik leaders *"justified what
they were doing in theoretical terms, e.g. in whole books by Bukharin
and Trotsky."* [Pirani, **The Russian Revolution in Retreat, 1920-24**,
p. 9]

Remember, we are talking about the ideology of a ruling party and so it
is more than just ideas for after the seizure of power, they became a
part of the real social situation within Russia. Individually, party
members assumed leadership posts in all spheres of social life and
started to make decisions influenced by that ideology and its prejudices
in favour of centralisation, the privileged role of the party, the
top-down nature of decision making, the notion that socialism built upon
state capitalism, amongst others. Then there is the hierarchical
position which the party leaders found themselves. *"If it is true that
people's real social existence determines their consciousness,"* argued
Cornelius Castoriadis, *"it is from that moment illusory to expect the
Bolshevik party to act in any other fashion than according to its real
social position. The real social situation of the Party is that of a
directorial organ, and its point of view toward this society henceforth
is not necessarily the same as the one this society has toward itself."*
[**Political and Social Writings**, vol. 3, p. 97]

Ultimately, the Bolshevik's acted as if they were trying to prove
Bakunin's critique of Marxism was right (see [section
H.1.1](secH1.html#sech11)). Implementing a dictatorship of the
proletariat in a country where the majority were not proletarians failed
while, for the proletariat, it quickly became a dictatorship **over**
the proletariat by the party (and in practice, a few party leaders and
justified by the privileged access they had to socialist ideology).
Moreover, centralisation proved to be as disempowering and inefficient
as Bakunin argued.

Sadly, far too many Marxists seem keen on repeating rather than learning
from history while, at the same time, ignoring the awkward fact that
anarchism's predictions were confirmed by the Bolshevik experience. It
is not hard to conclude that another form of socialism was essential for
the Russian revolution to have any chance of success. A decentralised
socialism based on workers running their workplaces and the peasants
controlling the land was not only possible but was being implemented by
the people themselves. For the Bolsheviks, only a centralised planned
economy was true socialism and, as a result, fought this alternative
socialism and replaced it with a system reflecting that perspective. Yet
socialism needs the mass participation of all in order to be created.
Centralisation, by its very nature, limits that participation (which is
precisely **why** ruling classes have always centralised power into
states). As Russian Anarchist Voline argued, state power *"seeks more or
less to take in its hands the reins of social life. It **predisposes the
masses to passivity**, and all spirit of initiative is stifled by the
very existence of power"* and so under state socialism the *"tremendous
new creative forces which are latent in the masses thus remain unused."*
[**The Unknown Revolution**, p. 250] This cannot help have a negative
impact on the development of the revolution and, as anarchists had long
feared and predicted, it did.

H.6.3 Were the Russian workers "declassed" and "atomised"?
----------------------------------------------------------

A standard Leninist explanation for the dictatorship of the Bolshevik
party (and subsequent rise of Stalinism) is based on the *"atomisation"*
or *"declassing"* of the proletariat. Leninist John Rees summarised this
argument:

> *"The civil war had reduced industry to rubble. The working class base
> of the workers' state, mobilised time and again to defeat the Whites,
> the rock on which Bolshevik power stood, had disintegrated. The
> Bolsheviks survived three years of civil war and wars in intervention,
> but only at the cost of reducing the working class to an atomised,
> individualised mass, a fraction of its former size, and no longer able
> to exercise the collective power that it had done in 1917 . . . The
> bureaucracy of the workers' state was left suspended in mid-air, its
> class base eroded and demoralised. Such conditions could not help but
> have an effect on the machinery of the state and organisation of the
> Bolshevik Party."* [*"In Defence of October,"* pp. 3-82,
> **International Socialism**, no. 52, p. 65]

It should be noted that this perspective originated in Lenin's arguments
that the Russian proletariat had become "declassed." In 1921 it was the
case that the proletariat, *"owning to the war and to the desperate
poverty and ruin, has become declassed, i.e. dislodged from its class
groove, and had ceased to exist as proletariat . . . the proletariat has
disappeared."* [**Collected Works**, vol. 33, p. 66] However, unlike his
later-day followers, Lenin was sure that while it *"would be absurd and
ridiculous to deny that the fact that the proletariat is declassed is a
handicap"* it could still *"fulfil its task of winning and holding state
power."* [**Op. Cit.**, vol. 32, p. 412] Since Lenin, this argument has
been utilised repeatedly by Leninists to justify his regime as well as
explaining both its authoritarianism and the rise of Stalinism.

It does, of course, contain an element of truth. The numbers of
industrial workers **did** decrease dramatically between 1918 and 1921,
particularly in Petrograd and Moscow (although the drop in both cities
was exceptional, with most towns seeing much smaller reductions). As one
historian summarises, the *"social turmoil at this time undeniably
reduced the size of Russia's working class . . . . Yet a substantial
core of urban workers remained in the factories, and their attitudes
towards the Bolsheviks were indeed transformed."* [Donald J. Raleigh,
**Experiencing Russia's Civil War**, p. 348] This core was those with
the least ties with the countryside - the genuine industrial worker.

Nor can it be maintained that the Russian working class was incapable of
collective action during the civil war. Throughout that period, as well
as before and after, the Russian workers proved themselves quite capable
of taking collective action - against the Bolshevik state. Simply put,
an *"atomised, individualised mass"* does not need extensive state
repression to control it. So while the working class **was** *"a
fraction of its former size"* it **was** able *"to exercise the
collective power it had done in 1917."* Significantly, rather than
decrease over the civil war period, the mass protests **grew** in
militancy. By 1921 these protests and strikes were threatening the very
existence of the Bolshevik dictatorship, forcing it to abandon key
aspects of its economic policies.

Which shows a key flaw in the standard Leninist account - the Russian
working class, while undoubtedly reduced in size and subject to extreme
economic problems, was still able to organise, strike and protest. This
awkward fact has been systematically downplayed, when not ignored, in
Leninist accounts of this period. As in any class society, the history
of the oppressed is ignored in favour of the resolutions and decisions
of the enlightened few at the top of the social pyramid. Given the
relative lack of awareness of working class protest against the
Bolsheviks, it will be necessary to present substantial evidence of it.

This process of collective action by workers and Bolshevik repression
started before the Civil War began, continued throughout and after it.
For example, *"[t]hroughout the civil war there was an undercurrent of
labour militancy in Moscow . . . both the introduction and the phasing
out of war communism were marked by particularly active periods of
labour unrest."* In the Moscow area, while it is *"impossible to say
what proportion of workers were involved in the various disturbances,"*
following the lull after the defeat of the protest movement in mid-1918
*"each wave of unrest was more powerful than the last, culminating in
the mass movement from late 1920."* [Richard Sakwa, **Soviet Communists
in Power**, p. 94 and p. 93] This was the case across Russia, with
*"periodic swings in the workers' political temper. When Soviet rule
stood in peril . . . [this] spared the regime the defection of its
proletarian base. During lulls in the fighting, strikes and
demonstrations broke out."* [Thomas F. Remington, **Building Socialism
in Bolshevik Russia**, p. 101] Workers' resistance and protests against
the Bolsheviks shows that not only that a "workers' state" is a
contradiction in terms but also that there was a social base for
possible alternatives to Leninism.

The early months of Bolshevik rule were marked by *"worker protests,
which then precipitated violent repressions against hostile workers.
Such treatment further intensified the disenchantment of significant
segments of Petrograd labour with Bolshevik-dominated Soviet rule."*
[Alexander Rabinowitch, **Early Disenchantment with Bolshevik Rule**, p.
37] The first major act of state repression was an attack on a march in
Petrograd in support of the Constituent Assembly when it opened in
January 1918. Early May saw *"the shooting of protesting housewives and
workers in the suburb of Kolpino"*, the *"arbitrary arrest and abuse of
workers"* in Sestroretsk, the *"closure of newspapers and arrests of
individuals who protested the Kolpino and Sestroretsk events"* and *"the
resumption of labour unrest and conflict with authorities in other
Petrograd factories."* This was no isolated event, as *"violent
incidents against hungry workers and their family demanding bread
occurred with increasing regularity."* [Alexander Rabinowitch, **The
Bolsheviks in Power**, pp. 229-30] The shooting at Kolpino *"triggered a
massive wave of indignation . . . Work temporarily stopped at a number
of plants."* In Moscow, Tula, Kolomna, Nizhnii-Novoprod, Rybinsk, Orel,
Tver' and elsewhere *"workers gathered to issue new protests."* In
Petrograd, *"textile workers went on strike for increased food rations
and a wave of demonstrations spread in response to still more Bolshevik
arrests."* This movement was the *"first major wave of labour protest"*
against the regime, with *"protests against some form of Bolshevik
repression"* being common. [William Rosenberg, **Russian Labor and
Bolshevik Power**, pp. 123-4]

This general workers' opposition generated the Menshevik inspired, but
independent, Extraordinary Assembly of Delegates (EAD). *"The emergence
of the EAD"*, Rabinowitch notes, *"was also stimulated by the widespread
view that trade unions, factory committees, and soviets . . . were no
longer representative, democratically run working-class institutions;
instead they had been transformed into arbitrary, bureaucratic
government agencies. There was ample reason for this concern."* To
counter the EAD, the Bolsheviks organised non-party conferences which,
in itself, shows that the soviets had become as distant from the masses
as the opposition argued. District soviets *"were deeply concerned about
their increasing isolation . . . At the end of March . . . they resolved
to convene successive nonparty workers' conferences . . . in part to
undercut the EAD by strengthening ties between district soviets and
workers."* This was done amidst *"unmistakable signs of the widening
rift between Bolshevik-dominated political institutions and ordinary
factory workers."* The EAD, argues Rabinowitch, was an expression of the
*"growing disenchantment of Petrograd workers with economic conditions
and the evolving structure and operation of Soviet political
institutions"*. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 224, p. 232 and p. 231]

Anarchists should be not too surprised that the turning of popular
organisations into parts of a state soon resulted in their growing
isolation from the masses. The state, with its centralised structures,
is simply not designed for mass participation - and this does doubly for
the highly centralised Leninist state.

These protests and repression continued after the start of the civil
war. *"At the end of May and beginning of June, a wave of strikes to
protest the lack of bread swept Nivskii district factories"* and
*"strikes followed by bloody clashes between workers and Soviet
authorities had erupted in scattered parts of central Russia."* On June
21, a general meeting of Obukhov workers *"seized control of the plant"*
and the next day the assembled workers *"resolved to demand that the EAD
should declare political strikes . . . to protest the political
repression of workers."* Orders were issued by the authorities *"to shut
down Obukhov plant"* and *"the neighbourhood surrounding the plant was
placed under martial law."* [Rabinowitch, **Op. Cit.**, p. 231 and pp.
246-7] However *"workers were not so readily pacified. In scores of
additional factories and shops protests mounted and rapidly spread along
the railways."* [Rosenberg, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 126-7]

Faced with this mounting pressure of spontaneous strikes, the EAD
declared a general for the 2nd of July. The Bolshevik authorities acted
quickly: *"Any sign of sympathy for the strike was declared a criminal
act. More arrests were made. In Moscow, Bolsheviks raided the
Aleksandrovsk railroad shops, not without bloodshed. Dissidence
spread."* On July 1st, *"machine guns were set up at main points
throughout the Petrograd and Moscow railroad junctions, and elsewhere in
both cities as well. Controls were tightened in factories. Meetings were
forcefully dispersed."* [Rosenberg, **Op. Cit.**, p. 127] Factories were
warned *"that if they participated in the general strike they would face
immediate shutdown, and individual strikes were threatened with fines or
loss of work. Agitators and members of strike committees were subject to
immediate arrest."* Opposition printing presses *"were sealed, the
offices of hostile trade unions were raided, martial law on lines in the
Petrograd rail hub was declared, and armed patrols with authority to
prevent work stoppages were formed and put on twenty-four hour duty at
key points around the city."* Perhaps unsurprisingly, given *"the brutal
suppression of the EAD's general strike"*, it was not successful.
[Rabinowitch, **Op. Cit.**, p. 254 and p. 259]

Thus *"[b]y the early summer of 1918"* there were *"widespread
anti-Bolshevik protests. Armed clashes occurred in the factory districts
of Petrograd and other industrial centres."* [William Rosenberg, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 107] It should also be noted that at the end of September of
that year, there was a revolt by Baltic Fleet sailors demanding (as they
did again in 1921) a *"return to government by liberated, democratic
soviets - that is, 1917-type soviets."* As after the more famous 1921
revolt, the Left-SR controlled Kronstadt soviet had been disbanded and
replaced by a Bolshevik revolutionary committee in July 1918, during the
repression after the Left-SR assassination of the German ambassador.
[Rabinowitch, **Op. Cit.**, p. 352 and p. 302]

As well as state repression, the politics of the opposition played a
role in its defeat. Before October 1918, both the Mensheviks and SRs
were in favour of the Constituent Assembly and Dumas as the main organs
of power, with the soviets playing a minor role. This allowed the
Bolsheviks to portray themselves as defenders of "soviet power" (a
position which still held popular support). Understandably, many workers
were unhappy to support an opposition which aimed to replace the soviets
with typically bourgeois institutions. Many also considered the
Bolshevik government as a "soviet power" and so, to some degree, their
own regime. With the civil war starting, many working class people would
also have been uneasy in protesting against a regime which proclaimed
its soviet and socialist credentials. After October 1918, the Mensheviks
supported the idea of (a democratically elected) soviet power, joining
the Left-SRs (who were now effectively illegal after their revolt of
July - see [section H.6.1](secH6.html#sech61)). However, by then it was
far too late as Bolshevik ideology had adjusted to Bolshevik practice
and the party was now advocating party dictatorship. Thus, we find
Victor Serge in the 1930s noting that *"the degeneration of Bolshevism"*
was apparent by that time, *"since at the start of 1919 I was horrified
to read an article by Zinoviev . . . on the monopoly of the party in
power."* [**The Serge-Trotsky Papers**, p. 188] It should be noted,
though, that Serge kept his horror well hidden throughout this period -
and well into the 1930s (see [section H.1.2](secH1.html#sech12) for his
public support for this monopoly).

As noted above, this cycle of resistance and repression was not limited
to Petrograd. In July 1918, a leading Bolshevik insisted *"that server
measures were needed to deal with strikes"* in Petrograd while in other
cities *"harsher forms of repression"* were used. For example, in Tula,
in June 1918, the regime declared *"martial law and arrested the
protestors. Strikes followed and were suppressed by violence"*. In
Sormovo, 5,000 workers went on strike after a Menshevik-SR paper was
closed. Violence was *"used to break the strike."* [Remington, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 105]

Similar waves of protests and strikes as those in 1918 took place the
following year with 1919 seeing a *"new outbreak of strikes in March"*,
with the *"pattern of repression . . . repeated."* One strike saw
*"closing of the factory, the firing of a number of workers, and the
supervised re-election of its factory committee."* In Astrakhan, a mass
meeting of 10,000 workers was fired on by Red Army troops, killing 2,000
(another 2,000 were taken prisoner and subsequently executed).
[Remington, **Op. Cit.**, p. 109] Moscow, at the end of June, saw a
*"committee of defence (KOM) [being] formed to deal with the rising tide
of disturbances."* The KOM *"concentrated emergency power in its hands,
overriding the Moscow Soviet, and demanding obedience from the
population. The disturbances died down under the pressure of
repression."* [Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 94-5] In the Volga region,
delegates to a conference of railroad workers *"protested the Cheka's
arrest of union members, which the delegates insisted further disrupted
transport. It certainly curbed the number of strikes."* [Raleigh, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 371] In Tula *"after strikes in the spring of 1919"* local
Menshevik party activists had been arrested while Petrograd saw
*"violent strikes"* at around the same time. [Jonathan Aves, **Workers
Against Lenin**, p. 19 and p. 23] As Vladimir Brovkin argues in his
account of the strikes and protests of 1919:

> "Data on one strike in one city may be dismissed as incidental. When,
> however, evidence is available from various sources on simultaneous
> independent strikes in different cities an overall picture begins to
> emerge. All strikes developed along a similar timetable: February,
> brewing discontent; March and April, peak of strikes: May, slackening
> in strikes; and June and July, a new wave of strikes . . .
> "Workers' unrest took place in Russia's biggest and most important
> industrial centres . . . Strikes affected the largest industries,
> primarily those involving metal: metallurgical, locomotive, and
> armaments plants . . . In some cities . . . textile and other workers
> were active protesters as well. In at least five cities . . . the
> protests resembled general strikes." [*"Workers' Unrest and the
> Bolsheviks' Response in 1919"*, pp. 350-373, **Slavic Review**, Vol.
> 49, No. 3, p. 370]

These strikes raised both economic and political demands, such as *"free
and fair elections to the soviets."* Unsurprisingly, in all known cases
the Bolsheviks' *"initial response to strikes was to ban public meetings
and rallies"* as well as *"occup[ying] the striking plant and
dismiss[ing] the strikers en masse."* They also *"arrested strikers"*
and executed some. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 371 and p. 372]

1920 saw similar waves of strikes and protests. In fact, strike action
*"remained endemic in the first nine months of 1920."* Soviet figures
report a total of 146 strikes, involving 135,442 workers for the 26
provinces covered. In Petrograd province, there were 73 strikes with
85,642 participants. *"This is a high figure indeed, since at this time
. . . there were 109,100 workers"* in the province. Overall, *"the
geographical extent of the February-March strike wave is impressive"*
and the *"harsh discipline that went with labour militarisation led to
an increase in industrial unrest in 1920."* [Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 69,
p. 70 and p. 80]

Saratov, for example, saw a wave of factory occupations break out in
June and mill workers went out in July while in August, strikes and
walkouts occurred in its mills and other factories and these *"prompted
a spate of arrests and repression."* In September railroad workers went
out on strike, with arrests making *"the situation worse, forcing the
administration to accept the workers' demands."* [Raleigh, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 375] In January 1920, a strike followed a mass meeting at a railway
repair shop in Moscow. Attempts to spread were foiled by arrests. The
workshop was closed, depriving workers of their rations and 103 workers
of the 1,600 employed were imprisoned. *"In late March 1920 there were
strikes in some factories"* in Moscow and *"[a]t the height of the
Polish war the protests and strikes, usually provoked by economic issues
but not restricted to them, became particularly frequent . . . The
assault on non-Bolshevik trade unionism launched at this time was
probably associated with the wave of unrest since there was a clear
danger that they would provide a focus for opposition."* [Sakwa, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 95] The *"largest strike in Moscow in the summer of 1920"*
was by tram workers over the equalisation of rations. It began on August
12th, when one tram depot went on strike, quickly followed by others
while workers *"in other industries joined in to."* The tram workers
*"stayed out a further two days before being driven back by arrests and
threats of mass sackings."* In the textile manufacturing towns around
Moscow *"there were large-scale strikes"* in November 1920, with 1000
workers striking for four days in one district and a strike of 500 mill
workers saw 3,000 workers from another mill joining in. [Simon Pirani,
**The Russian Revolution in Retreat, 1920-24**, p. 32 and p. 43]

In Petrograd the Aleksandrovskii locomotive building works *"had seen
strikes in 1918 and 1919"* and in August 1920 it again stopped work. The
Bolsheviks locked the workers out and placed guards outside it. The
Cheka then arrested the SRs elected to the soviet from that workplace as
well as about 30 workers. After the arrests, the workers refused to
co-operate with elections for new soviet delegates. The *"opportunity
was taken to carry out a general round-up, and arrests were made"* at
three other works. The enormous Briansk works *"experienced two major
strikes in 1920"*, and second one saw the introduction of martial law on
both the works and the settlement it was situated in. A strike in Tula
saw the Bolsheviks declare a *"state of siege"*, although the repression
*"did not prevent further unrest and the workers put forward new
demands"* while, in Moscow, a strike in May by printers resulted in
their works *"closed and the strikers sent to concentration camps."*
[Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 41, p. 45, p. 47, pp. 48-9, pp. 53-4 and p. 59]

These expressions of mass protest and collective action continued in
1921, unsurprisingly as the civil war was effectively over in the
previous autumn. Even John Rees had to acknowledge the general strike in
Russia at the time, stating that the Kronstadt revolt was *"preceded by
a wave of serious but quickly resolved strikes."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 61]
Significantly, he failed to note that the Kronstadt sailors rebelled in
solidarity with those strikes and how it was state repression which
*"resolved"* the strikes. Moreover, he seriously downplays the scale and
importance of these strikes, perhaps unsurprisingly as *"[b]y the
beginning of 1921 a revolutionary situation with workers in the vanguard
had emerged in Soviet Russia"* with *"the simultaneous outbreak of
strikes in Petrograd and Moscow and in other industrial regions."* In
February and March 1921, *"industrial unrest broke out in a nation-wide
wave of discontent or **volynka**. General strikes, or very widespread
unrest"* hit all but one of the country's major industrial regions and
*"workers protest consisted not just of strikes but also of factory
occupations, 'Italian strikes', demonstrations, mass meetings, the
beating up of communists and so on."* Faced with this massive strike
wave, the Bolsheviks did what many ruling elites do: they called it
something else. Rather than admit it was a strike, they *"usually
employed the word **volynka**, which means only a 'go-slow'"*. [Aves,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 3, p. 109, p. 112, pp. 111-2]

Mid-February 1921 saw workers in Moscow striking and *"massive city-wide
protest spread through Petrograd . . . Strikes and demonstrations
spread. The regime responded as it had done in the past, with lock-outs,
mass arrests, heavy show of force - and concessions."* [Remington, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 111] As Paul Avrich recounts, in Petrograd these *"street
demonstrations were heralded by a rash of protest meetings"* workplaces
On the 24th of February, the day after a workplace meeting, the
Trubochny factory workforce downed tools and walked out the factory.
Additional workers from nearby factories joined in. The crowd of 2,000
was dispersed by armed military cadets. The next day, the Trubochny
workers again took to the streets and visited other workplaces, bringing
them out on strike too. In the face of a near general strike, three-man
Defence Committee was formed. Zinoviev *"proclaimed martial law"* and
*"[o]vernight Petrograd became an armed camp."* Strikers were locked out
and the *"application of military force and the widespread arrests, not
to speak of the tireless propaganda waged by the authorities"* was
*"indispensable in restoring order"* (as were economic concessions).
[**Kronstadt 1921**, pp. 37-8, p. 39, pp. 46-7 and p. 50]

In Moscow, *"industrial unrest . . . turned into open confrontation and
protest spilled on to the streets"*, starting with a *"wave of strikes
that had its centre in the heart of industrial Moscow."* Strikes were
*"also spreading outside Moscow city itself into the surrounding
provinces"* and so *"Moscow and Moscow province were put under martial
law".* [Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 130, p. 138, p. 143 and p. 144] This
strike wave started when *"[m]eetings in factories and plants gathered
and criticised government policies, beginning with supply and developing
into general political criticism."* As was typical, the *"first response
of the civil authorities to the disturbances was increased repression"*
although as *"the number of striking factories increased some
concessions were introduced."* Military units called in against striking
workers *"refused to open fire, and they were replaced by the armed
communist detachments"* which did. *"That evening mass protest meetings
were held . . . The following day several factories went on strike"* and
troops were *"disarmed and locked in as a precaution"* by the government
against possible fraternising. February 23rd saw a 10,000 strong street
demonstration and *"Moscow was placed under martial law with a 24-hour
watch on factories by the communist detachments and trustworthy army
units."* The disturbances were accompanied by factory occupations and on
the 1st of March the soviet called on workers *"not to go on strike."*
However, *"wide-scale arrests deprived the movement of its leadership."*
March 5th saw disturbances at the Bromlei works, *"resulting in the now
customary arrest of workers. A general meeting at the plant on 25 March
called for new elections to the Moscow Soviet. The management dispersed
the meeting but the workers called on other plants to support the calls
for new elections. As usual, the ringleaders were arrested."* [Sakwa,
**Op. Cit.**, pp. 242-3, p. 245 and p. 246]

The events at the Bromlei works were significant in that the march 25th
mass meeting passed an anarchist and Left-SR initiated resolution
supporting the Kronstadt rebels. The party *"responded by having them
sacked en masse"*. The workers *"demonstrated through"* their district
*"and inspired some brief solidarity strikes."* Over 3000 workers joined
the strikes and about 1000 of these joined the flying picket (managers
at one print shop locked their workers in to stop them joining the
protest). While the party was willing to negotiate economic issues, *"it
had no wish to discuss politics with workers"* and so arrested those who
initiated the resolution, sacked the rest of the workforce and
selectively re-employed them. Two more strikes were conducted *"to
defend the political activists in their midst"* and two mass meetings
demanded the release of arrested ones. Workers also struck on supply
issues in May, July and August. [Pirani, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 83-4]

While the Kronstadt revolt took place too late to help the Petrograd
strikes, it did inspire a strike wave in Ekaterinoslavl (in the Ukraine)
in May, 1921. It started in the railway workshops and became *"quickly
politicised,"* with the strike committee raising a *"series of political
ultimatums that were very similar in content to the demands of the
Kronstadt rebels"* (many of the resolutions put to the meeting almost
completely coincided with them). The strike *"spread to the other
workshops"* and on June 1st the main large Ekaterinoslavl factories
joined the strike. The strike was spread via the use of trains and
telegraph and soon an area up to fifty miles around the town was
affected. The strike was finally ended by the use of the Cheka, using
mass arrests and shootings. Unsurprisingly, the local communists called
the revolt a *"little Kronstadt."* [Aves, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 171-3]

Saratov also saw a mass revolt in March 1921, when a strike by railroad
workers over a reduction in food rations spread to the metallurgical
plants and other large factories *"as workers and non-workers sent
representatives to the railroad shops."* They forced the Communists to
allow the setting up of a commission to re-examine the activities of all
economic organs and the Cheka. During the next two days, *"the
assemblies held at factories to elect delegates to the commission
bitterly denounced the Communists."* The *"unrest spilled over into
Pokrovsk."* The commission of 270 had less than ten Communists and
*"demanded the freeing of political prisoners, new elections to the
soviets and to all labour organisations, independent unions, and freedom
of speech, the press, and assembly."* The Communists *"resolved to shut
down the commission before it could issue a public statement"* and set
up a Provincial Revolutionary Committee which *"introduced martial law
both in the city and the garrison"* as well as arresting *"the
ringleaders of the workers' movement."* The near general strike was
broken by a *"wave of repression"* but *"railroad workers and
dockworkers and some printers refused to resume work."* [Raleigh, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 388-9]

Post-**volynka**, workplaces *"that had been prominent in unrest were
particularly hit by . . . purges . . . The effect on the willingness of
workers to support opposition parties was predictable."* However, *"the
ability to organise strikes did not disappear"* and they continued to
take place throughout 1921. The spring of 1922 saw *"a new strike
wave."* [Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 182 and p. 183] For example, in early
March, *"long strikes"* hit the textile towns around Moscow. At the
Glukhovskaia mills 5000 workers struck for 5 days, 1000 at a nearby
factory for 2 days and 4000 at the Voskresenskaia mills for 6 days. In
May, 1921, workers in the city of Moscow reacted to supply problems
*"with a wave of strikes. Party officials reckoned that in a 24-day
period in May there were stoppages at 66 large enterprises."* These
included a sit-down strike at one of Moscow's largest plants, while
*"workers at engineering factories in Krasnopresnia followed suit, and
Cheka agents reported 'dissent, culminating in strikes and occupation'
in Bauman."* August 1922 saw 19,000 workers strike in textile mills in
Moscow region for several days. Tram workers also struck that year,
while teachers *"organised strikes and mass meetings"*. Workers usually
elected delegates to negotiate with their trade unions as well as their
bosses as both were Communist Party members. Strike organisers, needless
to say, were sacked. [Pirani, **Op. Cit.**, p. 82, pp. 111-2 and p. 157]

While the strike wave of early 1921 is the most famous, due to the
Kronstadt sailors rebelling in solidarity with it, the fact is that this
was just one of many strike waves during the 1918 and 1921 period. In
response to protests, *"the government had combined concessions with
severe repression to restore order"* as well as *"commonly resort[ing]
to the lock out as a means of punishing and purging the work force."*
Yet, *"as the strike waves show, the regime's sanctions were not
sufficient to prevent all anti-Bolshevik political action."* [Remington,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 111, p. 107, and p. 109] In fact, repression *"did not
prevent strikes and other forms of protest by workers becoming endemic
in 1919 and 1920"* while in early 1921 the Communist Party *"faced what
amounted to a revolutionary situation. Industrial unrest was only one
aspect of a more general crisis that encompassed the Kronstadt revolt
and the peasant rising in Tambov and Western Siberia."* This
*"industrial unrest represented a serious political threat to the Soviet
regime . . . From Ekaterinburg to Moscow, from Petrograd to
Ekaterinoslavl, workers took to the streets, often in support of
political slogans that called for the end of Communist Party rule . . .
soldiers in many of the strike areas showed themselves to be unreliable
[but] the regime was able to muster enough forces to master the
situation. Soldiers could be replaced by Chekists, officer cadets and
other special units where Party members predominated."* [Aves, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 187, p. 155 and p. 186]

Yet, an *"atomised"* and powerless working class does not need martial
law, lockouts, mass arrests and the purging of the workforce to control
it. As Russian anarchist Ida Mett succinctly put it: *"And if the
proletariat was that exhausted how come it was still capable of waging
virtually total general strikes in the largest and most heavily
industrialised cities?"* [**The Kronstadt Rebellion**, p. 81] The end of
the civil war also saw the Bolsheviks finally destroy what was left of
non-Bolshevik trade unionism. In Moscow, this took place against fierce
resistance of the union members. As one historian concludes:

> *"Reflecting on the determined struggle mounted by printers, bakers
> and chemical workers in Moscow during 1920-1, in spite of appalling
> economic conditions, being represented by organisations weakened by
> constant repression . . . to retain their independent labour
> organisations it is difficult not to feel that the social basis for a
> political alternative existed."* [Jonathan Aves, *"The Demise of
> Non-Bolshevik Trade Unionism in Moscow: 1920-21"*, pp. 101- 33,
> **Revolutionary Russia**, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 130]

Elsewhere, Aves argues that an *"examination of industrial unrest after
the Bolshevik seizure of power . . . shows that the Revolution had
brought to the surface resilient traditions of organisation in society
and had released tremendous forces in favour of greater popular
participation . . . The survival of the popular movement through the
political repression and economic devastation of the Civil War testifies
to its strength."* [**Workers Against Lenin**, p. 186] The idea that the
Russian working class was incapable of collective struggle is hard to
defend given this series of struggles (and state repression). The class
struggle in Bolshevik Russia did not stop, it continued except the
ruling class had changed. All the popular energy and organisation this
expressed, which could have been used to combat the problems facing the
revolution and create the foundations of a genuine socialist society,
were wasted in fighting the Bolshevik regime. Ultimately, though, the
*"sustained, though ultimately futile, attempts to revive an autonomous
workers' movement, especially in mid-1918 and from late 1920, failed
owing to repression."* [Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, p. 269] Another historian
notes that *"immediately after the civil war"* there was *"a revival of
working class collective action that culminated in February-March 1921
in a widespread strike movement and the revolt at the Kronstadt naval
base."* As such, the position expounded by Rees and other Leninists *"is
so one-sided as to be misleading."* [Pirani, **Op. Cit.**, p. 7 and p.
23]

Nor is this commonplace Leninist rationale for Bolshevik rule
particularly original, as it dates back to Lenin and was first
formulated *"to justify a political clamp-down."* Indeed, this argument
was developed in response to rising working class protest rather than
its lack: *"As discontent amongst workers became more and more difficult
to ignore, Lenin . . . began to argue that the consciousness of the
working class had deteriorated . . . workers had become 'declassed.'"*
However, there *"is little evidence to suggest that the demands that
workers made at the end of 1920 . . . represented a fundamental change
in aspirations since 1917."* [Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 18, p. 90 and p.
91] So while the *"working class had decreased in size and changed in
composition,. . . the protest movement from late 1920 made clear that it
was not a negligible force and that in an inchoate way it retained a
vision of socialism which was not identified entirely with Bolshevik
power . . . Lenin's arguments on the declassing of the proletariat was
more a way of avoiding this unpleasant truth than a real reflection of
what remained, in Moscow at least, a substantial physical and
ideological force."* [Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, p. 261]

Nor can it be suggested, as the Bolsheviks did at the time, that these
strikes were conducted by newly arrived workers, semi-peasants without
an awareness of proletarian socialism or traditions. Links between the
events in 1917 and those during the civil war are clear. Jonathan Aves
writes that there were *"distinct elements of continuity between the
industrial unrest in 1920 and 1917 . . . As might be anticipated, the
leaders of unrest were often to be found amongst the skilled male
workers who enjoyed positions of authority in the informal shop-floor
hierarchies."* Looking at the strike wave of early 1921 in Petrograd,
the *"strongest reason for accepting the idea that it was established
workers who were behind the **volynka** is the form and course of
protest. Traditions of protest reaching back through the spring of 1918
to 1917 and beyond were an important factor in the organisation of the
**volynka**".* In fact, *"an analysis of the industrial unrest of early
1921 shows that long-standing workers were prominent in protest."*
[Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 39, p. 126 and p. 91] As another example,
*"although the ferment touched all strata of Saratov workers, it must be
emphasised that the skilled metalworkers, railroad workers, and printers
- the most 'conscious' workers - demonstrated the most determined
resistance."* They *"contested repression and the Communists' violation
of fair play and workplace democracy."* [Raleigh, **Op. Cit.**, p. 376]
As Ida Mett argued in relation to the strikes in early 1921:

> "The population was drifting away from the capital. All who had
> relatives in the country had rejoined them. The authentic proletariat
> remained till the end, having the most slender connections with the
> countryside.
>
> "This fact must be emphasised, in order to nail the official lies
> seeking to attribute the Petrograd strikes . . . to peasant elements,
> 'insufficiently steeled in proletarian ideas.' The real situation was
> the very opposite . . . There was certainly no exodus of peasants into
> the starving towns! . . . It was the famous Petrograd proletariat, the
> proletariat which had played such a leading role in both previous
> revolutions, that was finally to resort to the classical weapon of the
> class struggle: the strike." [**The Kronstadt Uprising**, p. 36]

As one expert on this issue argues, while the number of workers did drop
*"a sizeable core of veteran urban proletarians remained in the city;
they did not all disappear."* In fact, *"it was the loss of young
activists rather than of all skilled and class-conscious urban workers
that caused the level of Bolshevik support to decline during the Civil
War. Older workers had tended to support the Menshevik Party in 1917"*.
Given this, *"it appears that the Bolshevik Party made deurbanisation
and declassing the scapegoats for its political difficulties when the
party's own policies and its unwillingness to accept changing
proletarian attitudes were also to blame."* It should also be noted that
the notion of declassing to rationalise the party's misfortunes was used
before long before the civil war: *"This was the same argument used to
explain the Bolsheviks' lack of success among workers in the early
months of 1917 - that the cadres of conscious proletarians were diluted
by nonproletarian elements."* [Diane P. Koenker, *"Urbanisation and
Deurbanisation in the Russian Revolution and Civil War"*, pp. 81-104,
**Party, State, and Society in the Russian Civil War**, Diane P.
Koenker, William G. Rosenberg and Ronald Grigor Suny (eds.), p. 96, p.
95, p. 100 and p. 84]

While there is still much research required, what facts that are
available suggest that throughout the time of Lenin's regime the Russian
workers took collective action in defence of their interests. This is
not to say that workers did not also respond to the problems they faced
in an individualistic manner, often they did. However, such responses
were, in part (as we noted in the [last section](secH6.html#sech62)),
because Bolshevik policy **itself** gave them little choice as it
limited their ability to respond collectively. Yet in the face of
difficult economic circumstances, workers turned to mass meetings and
strikes. In response, the Bolshevik's used state repression to break
resistance and protest against their regime. In such circumstances it is
easy to see how the Bolshevik party became isolated from the masses they
claimed to be leading but were, in fact, ruling. This transformation of
rebels into a ruling elite comes as no great surprise given that
Bolshevik's aimed to seize power themselves in a centralised and
hierarchical institution, a state, which has always been the method by
which ruling classes secured their position (as we argued in [section
H.3.7](secH3.html#sech37), this perspective flowed from the flawed
Marxist theory of the state). Just as they had to, first, gerrymander
and disband soviets to regime in power in the spring and summer of 1918,
so the Bolsheviks had to clamp down on any form of collective action by
the masses. As such, it is incredulous that latter day Leninists justify
Bolshevik authoritarianism on a lack of collective action by workers
when that authoritarianism was often driven precisely to break it!

So the claim by John Rees that the *"dialectical relationship between
the Bolsheviks and the working class was broken, shattered because the
working class itself was broke-backed after the civil war"* leaves a lot
to be desired. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 22] The Bolsheviks did more than their
fair share of breaking the back of the working class. This is
unsurprising for a government which grants to the working class the
greatest freedom undermines its own power by so doing. Even a limited
relaxation of its authority will allow people to organise themselves,
listen to alternative points of view and to act on them. That could not
but undermine the rule of the party and so could not be supported - nor
was it.

For example, in his 1920 diatribe against Left-wing Communism, Lenin
pointed to *"non-Party workers' and peasants' conferences"* and Soviet
Congresses as means by which the party secured its rule. Yet, **if** the
congresses of soviets were *"**democratic** institutions, the like of
which even the best democratic republics of the bourgeois have never
know"*, the Bolsheviks would have no need to *"support, develop and
extend"* non-Party conferences *"to be able to observe the temper of the
masses, come closer to them, meet their requirements, promote the best
among them to state posts".* [**The Lenin Anthology**, p. 573] How the
Bolsheviks met *"their requirements"* is extremely significant - they
disbanded them, just as they had with soviets with non-Bolshevik
majorities in 1918. This was because *"[d]uring the disturbances"* of
late 1920, *"they provided an effective platform for criticism of
Bolshevik policies."* Their frequency was decreased and they *"were
discontinued soon afterward."* [Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, p. 203]

In the soviets themselves, workers turned to non-partyism, with
non-party groups winning majorities in soviet delegates from industrial
workers' constituencies in many places. This was the case in Moscow,
where Bolshevik support among *"industrial workers collapsed"* in favour
of non-party people. Due to support among the state bureaucracy and the
usual packing of the soviet with representatives from Bolshevik
controlled organisations, the party had, in spite of this, a massive
majority. Thus the Moscow soviet elections of April-May 1921 *"provided
an opportunity to revive working-class participation. The Bolsheviks
turned it down."* [Pirani, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 97-100 and p. 23] Indeed,
one Moscow Communist leader stated that these soviet elections had seen
*"a high level of activity by the masses and a striving to be in power
themselves."* [quoted by Pirani, **Op. Cit.**, p. 101]

1921 also saw the Bolshevik disperse provincial trade unions conferences
in Vologda and Vitebsk *"because they had anti-communist majorities."*
[Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 176] At the All-Russian Congress of
Metalworkers' Union in May, the delegates voted down the party-list of
recommended candidates for union leadership. The Central Committee of
the Party *"disregarded every one of the votes and appointed a
Metalworkers' Committee of its own. So much for 'elected and revocable
delegates'. Elected by the union rank and file and revocable by the
Party leadership!"* [Brinton, **Op. Cit.**, p. 83]

Another telling example is provided in August 1920 by Moscow's striking
tram workers who, in addition to economic demands, called for a general
meeting of all depots. As one historian notes, this was *"significant:
here the workers' movement was trying to get on the first rung of the
ladder of organisation, and being knocked off by the Bolsheviks."* The
party *"responded to the strike in such a way as to undermine workers'
organisation and consciousness"* and *"throttl[ed] independent action"*
by *"repression of the strike by means reminiscent of tsarism."* The
Bolshevik's *"dismissive rejection"* of the demand for a city-wide
meeting *"spoke volumes about their hostility to the development of the
workers' movement, and landed a blow at the type of collective democracy
that might have better able to confront supply problems."* This, along
with the other strikes that took place, showed that *"the workers'
movement in Moscow was, despite its numerical weakness and the burdens
of civil war, engaged with political as well as industrial issues . . .
the working class was far from non-existent, and when, in 1921, it began
to resuscitate soviet democracy, the party's decision to make the Moscow
soviet its 'creature' was not effect but cause."* [Pirani, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 32, p. 33, p. 37 and p. 8]

When such things happen, we can conclude that Bolshevik desire to remain
in power had a significant impact on whether workers were able to
exercise collective power or not. As Pirani concludes:

> *"one of the most important choices the Bolsheviks made . . . was to
> turn their backs on forms of collective, participatory democracy that
> workers briefly attempted to revive [post civil war]. [Available
> evidence] challenges the notion . . . that political power was forced
> on the Bolsheviks because the working class was so weakened by the
> civil war that it was incapable of wielding it. In reality, non-party
> workers were willing and able to participate in political processes,
> but in the Moscow soviet and elsewhere, were pushed out of them by the
> Bolsheviks. The party's vanguardism, i.e. its conviction that it had
> the right, and the duty, to make political decisions on the workers'
> behalf, was now reinforced by its control of the state apparatus. The
> working class was politically expropriated: power was progressively
> concentrated in the party, specifically in the party elite."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 4]

It should also be stressed that fear of arrest limited participation. A
sadly typical example of this occurred in April 1920, which saw the
first conference of railway workers on the Perm-Ekaterinburg line. The
meeting of 160 delegates elected a non-Party chairman who *"demanded
that delegates be guaranteed freedom of debate and immunity from
arrest."* [Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 44] A Moscow Metalworkers' Union
conference in early February 1921 saw the first speakers calling *"for
the personal safety of the delegates to be guaranteed"* before
criticisms would be aired. [Sakwa, **Op. Cit.**, p. 244] Later that year
dissidents in the Moscow soviet demanded *"that delegates be given
immunity from arrest unless sanctioned by plenary session of the
soviet."* Immediately afterwards two of them, including an
anarcho-syndicalist, were detained. It was also proposed that delegates'
freedom of speech *"included immunity from administrative or judicial
punishment"* along with the right of any number of delegates *"to meet
and discuss their work as they chose."* [Pirani, **Op. Cit.** p. 104]
Worse, *"[b]y the end of 1920 workers not only had to deal with the
imposition of harsh forms of labour discipline, they also had to face
the Cheka in their workplace."* This could not help hinder working class
collective action, as did the use of the Cheka and other troops to
repress strikes. While it is impossible to accurately measure how many
workers were shot by the Cheka for participation in labour protest,
looking at individual cases *"suggests that shootings were employed to
inspire terror and were not simply used in the occasional extreme
case."* [Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 35] Which means, ironically, those who
had seized power in 1917 in the name of the politically conscious
proletariat were in fact ensuring their silence by fear of the Cheka or
weeding them out, by means of workplace purges and shooting.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, but definitely significantly, of the 17,000 camp
detainees on whom statistical information was available on 1 November
1920, peasants and workers constituted the largest groups, at 39% and
34% respectively. Similarly, of the 40,913 prisoners held in December
1921 (of whom 44% had been committed by the Cheka) nearly 84% were
illiterate or minimally educated, clearly, therefore, either peasants of
workers. [George Leggett, **The Cheka: Lenin's Political Police**, p.
178] Needless to say, Lenin failed to mention this aspect of his system
in **The State and Revolution** (a failure shared by later Leninists).
Ultimately, the contradictions between Bolshevik rhetoric and the
realities of working class life under their rule was closed by coercion.

Such forms of repression could not help ensure both economic chaos and
push the revolution away from socialism. As such, it is hard to think of
a more incorrect assertion than Lenin's 1921 one that *"[i]ndustry is
indispensable, democracy is not. Industrial democracy breeds some
utterly false ideas."* [**Collected Works**, vol. 32, p. 27] Yet without
industrial democracy, any development towards socialism is aborted and
the problems of a revolution cannot be solved in the interests of the
working masses.

This account of workers' protest being crushed by the so-called workers'
state raises an important theoretical question. Following Marx and
Engels, Lenin asserted that the *"state is nothing but a machine for the
suppression of one class by another"* [**Collected Works**, vol. 28, p.
259] Yet here is the working class being suppressed by "its" state. If
the state is breaking strikes, including general strikes, by what
stretch of the imagination can it be considered a "workers' state"?
Particularly as the workers, like the Kronstadt sailors, demanded free
soviet elections, **not**, as the Leninists then and now claim, "soviets
without Communists" (although one soviet historian noted with regards
the 1921 revolt that *"taking account of the mood of the workers, the
demand for free elections to the soviets meant the implementation in
practice of the infamous slogan of soviets without communists."* [quoted
by Aves, **Op. Cit.**, p. 123]). If the workers are being repressed and
denied any real say in the state, how can they be considered the ruling
class? And what class is doing the *"suppression"*? As we discussed in
[section H.3.8](secH3.html#sech38), Bolshevik ideology adjusted to this
reality by integrating the need for party dictatorship to combat the
"wavering" within the working class into its theory of the state. Yet it
is the party (i.e., the state) which determines what is and is not
wavering. This suggests that the state apparatus has to be separate from
the working class in order to repress it (as always, in its own
interests).

So anarchists argue that the actual experience of the Bolshevik state
shows that the state is no mere *"machine"* of class rule but has
interests of its own. Which confirms the anarchist theory of the state
rather than the Marxist (see [section H.3.7](secH3.html#sech37)). It
should be stressed that it was **after** the regular breaking of working
class protest and strikes that the notion of the dictatorship of the
party became Bolshevik orthodoxy. This makes sense, as protests and
strikes express "wavering" within the working class which needs to be
solved by state repression. This, however, necessitates a normal state
power, one which is isolated from the working class and which, in order
to enforce its will, **must** (like any state) atomise the working class
people and render them unable, or unwilling, to take collective action
in defence of their interests. For the defenders of Bolshevism to turn
round and blame Bolshevik authoritarianism on the atomisation required
for the party to remain in power and enforce its will is staggering.

Finally, it should be noted that Zinoviev, a leading Bolshevik, tried to
justify the hierarchical position of the Bolshevik party arguing that
*"[i]n time of strike every worker knows that there must be a Strike
Committee - a centralised organ to conduct the strike, whose orders must
be obeyed - although this Committee is elected and controlled by the
rank and file. **Soviet Russia is on strike against the whole capitalist
world. The social Revolution is a general strike against the whole
capitalist system. The dictatorship of the proletariat is the strike
committee of the social Revolution.**"* [**Proceedings and Documents of
the Second Congress 1920**, vol. 2, p. 929]

In strikes, however, the decisions which are to be obeyed are those of
the strikers. They should make the decisions and the strike committees
should carry them out. The actual decisions of the Strike Committee
should be accountable to the assembled strikers who have the real power
(and so power is **decentralised** in the hands of the strikers and not
in the hands of the committee). A far better analogy for what happened
in Russia was provided by Emma Goldman:

> "There is another objection to my criticism on the part of the
> Communists. Russia is on strike, they say, and it is unethical for a
> revolutionist to side against the workers when they are striking
> against their masters. That is pure demagoguery practised by the
> Bolsheviki to silence criticism.
> "It is not true that the Russian people are on strike. On the
> contrary, the truth of the matter is that the Russian people have been
> **locked out** and that the Bolshevik State - even as the bourgeois
> industrial master - uses the sword and the gun to keep the people out.
> In the case of the Bolsheviki this tyranny is masked by a
> world-stirring slogan: thus they have succeeded in blinding the
> masses. Just because I am a revolutionist I refuse to side with the
> master class, which in Russia is called the Communist Party." [**My
> Disillusionment in Russia**, p. xlix]

The isolation of the Bolsheviks from the working class was, in large
part, required to ensure their power and, moreover, a natural result of
utilising state structures. *"The struggle against oppression -
political, economic, and social, against the exploitation of man by
man"* argued Alexander Berkman, *"is always simultaneously a struggle
against government as such. The political State, whatever its form, and
constructive revolutionary effort are irreconcilable. They are mutually
exclusive."* Every revolution *"faces this alternative: to build freely,
independently and despite of the government, or to choose government
with all the limitation and stagnation it involves . . . Not by the
order of some central authority, but organically from life itself, must
grow up the closely knit federation of the industrial, agrarian, and
other associations; by the workers themselves must they be organised and
managed."* The *"very essence and nature"* of the socialist state
*"excludes such an evolution. Its economic and political centralisation,
its governmentalism and bureaucratisation of every sphere of activity
and effort, its inevitable militarisation and degradation of the human
spirit mechanically destroy every germ of new life and extinguish the
stimuli of creative, constructive work."* [**The Bolshevik Myth**, pp.
340-1] By creating a new state, the Bolsheviks ensured that the mass
participation required to create a genuine socialist society could not
be expressed and, moreover, came into conflict with the Bolshevik
authorities and their attempts to impose their (essentially state
capitalist) vision of "socialism".

It need not have been that way. As can be seen from our discussion of
labour protest under the Bolsheviks, even in extremely hard
circumstances the Russian people were able to organise themselves to
conduct protest meetings, demonstrations and strikes. The social base
for an alternative to Bolshevik power and policies existed. Sadly
Bolshevik politics, policies and the repression they required ensured
that it could not be used constructively during the revolution to create
a genuine socialist revolution.
