Section I - What would an anarchist society look like?
======================================================

So far this FAQ has been largely critical, focusing on hierarchy,
capitalism, the state and so on, and the problems to which they have
led, as well as refuting some bogus "solutions" that have been offered
by authoritarians of both the right and the left. It is now time to
examine the constructive side of anarchism -- the libertarian-socialist
society that anarchists envision. This is important because anarchism is
essentially a **constructive** theory, in stark contradiction to the
picture of usually painted of anarchism as chaos or mindless
destruction.

In this section of the FAQ we will give an outline of what an anarchist
society might look like. Such a society has basic features -- such as
being non-hierarchical, decentralised and, above all else, spontaneous
like life itself. To quote Glenn Albrecht, anarchists *"lay great stress
on the free unfolding of a spontaneous order without the use of external
force or authority."* [*"Ethics, Anarchy and Sustainable Development"*,
pp. 95-117, **Anarchist Studies**, vol. 2, no. 2, p. 110] This type of
development implies that anarchist society would be organised from the
simple to the complex, from the individual upwards to the community, the
bio-region and, ultimately, the planet. The resulting society, which
would be the outcome of nature freely unfolding toward greater diversity
and complexity, is ethically preferable to any other sort of order
simply because it allows for the highest degree of organic solidarity
and freedom. Kropotkin described this vision of a truly free society as
follows:

> *"We foresee millions and millions of groups freely constituting
> themselves for the satisfaction of all the varied needs of human
> beings . . . All these will be composed of human beings who will
> combine freely . . . 'Take pebbles,' said Fourier, 'put them in a box
> and shake them, and they will arrange themselves in a mosaic that you
> could never get by instructing to anyone the work of arranging them
> harmoniously.'"* [**The Place of Anarchism in Socialistic Evolution**,
> pp. 11-12]

Anarchist opposition to hierarchy is an essential part of a
"spontaneously ordered" society, for authority stops the free
development and growth of the individual. From this natural growth of
individuals, groups and society as a whole anarchists expect a society
which meets the needs of all -- for individual and social freedom,
material goods to meet physical needs and free and equal social
relationships that meet what could be termed "spiritual needs" (i.e.,
mental and emotional wellbeing, creativity, ethical development and so
on). Any attempt to force society or individuals into a pre-determined
structure which restricts their liberty will produce **dis**-order as
natural balances and development is hindered and distorted in
anti-social and destructive directions. Thus an anarchist society must
be a free society of free individuals, associating within libertarian
structures, rather than a series of competing hierarchies (be they
political or economical). Only in freedom can society and individuals
develop and create a just and fair world. In Proudhon's words, *"liberty
is the mother of order, not its daughter."*

As the individual does not exist in a social vacuum, appropriate social
conditions are required for individual freedom to develop and blossom
according to its full potential. The theory of anarchism is built around
the central assertion that individuals and their organisations
**cannot** be considered in isolation from each other. That is, social
structures shape us, *"that there is an interrelationship between the
authority structures of institutions and the psychological qualities and
attitudes of individuals"* and that *"the major function of
participation is an educative one."* [Carole Pateman, **Participation
and Democratic Theory**, p. 27] Anarchism presents this position in its
most coherent and libertarian form. In other words, freedom is only
sustained and protected by activity under conditions of freedom, namely
self-government. Freedom is the only precondition for acquiring the
maturity required for continued freedom: *"Only in freedom can man grow
to his full stature. Only in freedom will be learn to think and move,
and give the very best in him."* [Emma Goldman, **Red Emma Speaks**, p.
72]

As individual freedom can only be created, developed and defended by
self-government and free association, a system which encourages
individuality must be decentralised and participatory in order for
people to develop a psychology that allows them to accept the
responsibilities of self-management. Living under the state or any other
authoritarian system produces a servile character, as the individual is
constantly placed under hierarchical authority, which blunts their
critical and self-governing abilities by lack of use. Such a situation
cannot promote freedom, and so anarchists *"realise that power and
authority corrupt those who exercise them as much as those who are
compelled to submit to them."* [Bakunin, **The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, p. 249]

Looking at capitalism, we find that under wage labour people sell their
creative energy and control over their activity for a given period. The
boss does not just take surplus value from the time employees sell, but
the time itself -- their liberty, their ability to make their own
decisions, express themselves through work and with their fellow
workers. Wage labour equals wage slavery as you sell your time and
skills (i.e. liberty) everyday at work and you will never be able to buy
that time back for yourself. Once it is gone; it is gone for good. It
also generates, to quote Godwin, a *"sense of dependence"* and a
*"servile and truckling spirit"*, so ensuring that the *"feudal spirit
still survives that reduced the great mass of mankind to the rank of
slaves and cattle for the service of the few."* [**The Anarchist
Writings of William Godwin**, pp. 125-6] This is why anarchists see the
need to *"create the situation where each person may live by working
freely, without being forced to sell his [or her] work and his [or her]
liberty to others who accumulate wealth by the labour of their serfs."*
[Kropotkin, **Words of a Rebel**, p. 208]

Thus the aim of anarchism is to create a society in which every person
*"should have the material and moral means to develop his humanity"* and
so to *"**organise society in such a way that every individual . . .
should find . . . approximately equal means for the development of
[their] various faculties and for their utilisation in [their] work**;
to create a society which would place every individual . . . in such a
position that it would be impossible for [them] to exploit the labour of
anyone else"* and be *"enabled to participate in the enjoyment of social
wealth"* as long as they *"contributed directly toward the production of
that wealth."* [Bakunin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 409] As such, anarchists would
agree with George Orwell: *"The question is very simple. Shall people .
. . be allowed to live the decent, fully human life which is now
technically achievable, or shan't they? Shall the common man be pushed
back into the mud, or shall he not?"* [**Orwell on Spain**, p. 361]

Anarchism, in summary, is about changing society and abolishing all
forms of authoritarian social relationship, putting life before the
soul-destroying "efficiency" needed to survive under capitalism; for the
anarchist *"takes his stand on his positive right to life and all its
pleasures, both intellectual, moral and physical. He loves life, and
intends to enjoy it to the full."* [Bakunin, **Michael Bakunin: Selected
Writings**, p. 101] Thus, to quote Emma Goldman, *"all human-beings,
irrespective of race, colour, or sex, are born with the equal right to
share at the table of life; that to secure this right, there must be
established among men economic, social, and political freedom."* [**A
Documentary History of the American Years**, vol. 2, p. 450] This would
be a classless and non-hierarchical society, one without masters and
servants, one based on the free association of free individuals which
encourages and celebrates individuality and freedom:

> *"The phrase, 'a classless society', no doubt has terrors for any
> thoughtful person. It calls up immediately the image of dull
> mediocrity . . . all one uniform scale of self-sufficient individuals,
> living in model-houses, travelling in uniform Fords along endless
> uniform roads . . . But . . . the sharing of this wealth would not
> produce a uniformity of life, simply because there is no uniformity of
> desire. Uniformity is an unintelligent nightmare; there can be no
> uniformity in a free human society. Uniformity can only be created by
> the tyranny of a totalitarian regime."* [Herbert Read, **Anarchy and
> Order**, pp. 87-8]

Anarchists think that the essential social values are human values, and
that society is a complex of associations which express the wills of
their members, whose well-being is its purpose. We consider that it is
not enough that the forms of association should have the passive or
"implied" consent of their members, but that the society, and the
individuals who make it up, will be healthy only if it is in the full
sense libertarian, i.e. self-governing, self-managed, and egalitarian.
This implies not only that all the members should have a right to
influence its policy if they so desire, but that the greatest possible
opportunity should be afforded for every person to exercise this right.
Anarchism involves an active, not merely passive, citizenship on the
part of society's members and holds that this principle is not only
applied to some "special" sphere of social action called "politics" but
to any and every form of social action, including economic activity.

So, as will be seen, the key concept underlying both the
social/political and the economic structure of libertarian socialism is
*"self-management,"* a term that implies not only workers control of
their workplaces but also citizens' control of their communities (where
it becomes *"self-government"*), through direct democracy and voluntary
federation. Thus self-management is the positive implication of
anarchism's "negative" principle of opposition to hierarchical
authority. For through self-management, hierarchical authority is
dissolved as self-managing workplace and community assemblies/councils
are decentralised, "horizontal" organisations in which each participant
has an equal voice in the decisions that affect his or her life, instead
of merely following orders and being governed by others.
Self-management, therefore, is the essential condition for a world in
which individuals will be free to follow their own dreams, in their own
ways, co-operating together as equals without interference from any form
of authoritarian power (such as government or boss).

Perhaps needless to say, this section is intended as a heuristic device
**only**, as a way of helping readers envision how anarchist principles
might be embodied in practice. It is not (nor is it intended to be, nor
is it desired to be) a definitive statement of how they **must** be
embodied. The idea that a few people could determine exactly what a free
society would look like is contrary to the anarchist principles of free
growth and thought, and is far from our intention. Here we simply try to
indicate some of the structures that an anarchist society may contain,
based on the what ideals and ideas anarchists hold, informed by the few
examples of anarchy in action that have existed and our critical
evaluation of their limitations and successes. As Herbert Read once put
it, *"it is always a mistake to build **a priori** constitutions. The
main thing is to establish your principles -- the principles of equity,
of individual freedom, of workers' control. The community then aims at
the establishment of these principles from the starting-point of local
needs and local conditions."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 51]

Moreover, we must remember that, the state has changed over time and,
indeed, has not always existed. Thus it is possible to have a social
organisation which is not a state and to confuse the two would be a
*"confusion"* made by those *"who cannot visualise Society without a
concentration of the State."* Yet this *"is to overlook the fact that
Man lived in Societies for thousands of years before the State had been
heard of"* and that *"large numbers of people [have] lived in communes
and free federations."* These were not states as the state *"is only one
of the forms assumed by society in the course of history. Why then make
no distinction between what is permanent and what is accidental?"*
[Kropotkin, **The State: Its Historic Role**, pp. 9-10] Similarly, the
axioms of capitalist economics **not** withstanding, capitalism is but
latest of a series of economies. Just as serfdom replaced slavery and
capitalism replaced serfdom, so free (associated) labour can replace
hired labour. As Proudhon noted, the *"period through which we are now
passing . . . is distinguished by a special characteristic, - WAGES."*
Capitalism, this system of wage-labour, has not always existed nor need
it continue. Thus *"the radical vice of political economy"*, namely
*"affirming as a definitive state a transitory condition - namely, the
division of society into patricians and proletares."* [**System of
Economic Contradictions**, p. 198 and p. 67] Anarchists seek to make
that transitory condition shorter rather than longer.

Ultimately, a free society based on self-managed communities and
associated labour is, in many ways, a natural evolution of tendencies
**within** existing society. For example, the means of production can
only be used collectively, so suggesting that relations of equality and
freedom based on associations of workers are a sensible alternative to
ones based on hierarchy, exploitation and oppression based on masters
and servants. It is the struggle against those oppressive social
relationships which creates the very associations (workplace strike
assemblies) which could expropriate the workplaces and make that
possibility a reality.

So an anarchist society will not be created overnight nor without links
to the past, and so it will initially be based on structures created in
social struggle (i.e. created **within** but **against** capitalism and
the state) and will be marked with the ideas that inspired and developed
within that struggle. For example, the anarchist collectives in Spain
were organised in a bottom-up manner, similar to the way the C.N.T. (the
anarcho-syndicalist labour union) was organised before the revolution.
In this sense, anarchy is not some distant goal but rather an expression
of working class struggle. The creation of alternatives to the current
hierarchical, oppressive, exploitative and alienated society is a
necessary part of the struggle and the maintaining of your liberty and
humanity in the insane world of hierarchical society. As such, an
anarchist society will be the generalisation of the various types of
***"anarchy in action"*** created in the various struggles against all
forms of oppression and exploitation (see [section
I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23)).

This means that how an anarchist society would look like and work is not
independent of the specific societies it is created from nor the means
used to create it. In other words, an anarchist society will reflect the
economic conditions inherited from capitalism, the social struggles
which preceded it and the ideas which existed within that struggle as
modified by the practical needs of any given situation. Therefore the
vision of a free society indicated in this section of the FAQ is not
some sort of abstraction which will be created overnight. If anarchists
did think that then we would rightly be called utopian. No, an anarchist
society is the outcome of social struggle, self-activity which helps to
create a mass movement which contains individuals who can think for
themselves and are willing and able to take responsibility for their own
lives.

So, when reading this section please remember that this is not a
blueprint but only possible suggestions of what anarchy would look like.
It is designed to provoke thought and indicate that an anarchist society
is possible. We hope that our arguments and ideas presented in this
section will inspire more debate and discussion of how a free society
could work and, equally as important, help to inspire the struggle which
will create that society. After all, anarchists desire to build the new
world in the shell of the old. Unless we have some idea of what that new
society will be like it is difficult to pre-figure it in our activities
today! A point not lost on Kropotkin who argued that it is difficult to
build *"without extremely careful consideration beforehand, based on the
study of social life, of **what** and **how** we want to build -- we
must reject [Proudhon's] slogan [that "in demolishing we shall build"] .
. . and declare: 'in building we shall demolish.'"* [**Conquest of
Bread**, p. 173f] More recently, Noam Chomsky argued that
*"[a]lternatives to existing forms of hierarchy, domination, private
power and social control certainly exist in principle. . . But to make
them realistic will require a great deal of committed work, including
the work of articulating them clearly."* [Noam Chomsky, **Turning the
Tide**, p. 250] This section of the FAQ can be considered as a
contribution to the articulating of libertarian alternatives to existing
society, of what we want to build for the future.

We are not afraid that many will argue that much of the vision we
present in this section of the FAQ is utopian. Perhaps they are right,
but, as Oscar Wilde once said:

> *"A map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth
> glancing at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is
> always landing. And when Humanity lands there, it looks out and,
> seeing a better country, sets sail. Progress is the realisation of
> Utopias."* [**The Soul of Man Under Socialism**, p. 1184]

However, we have attempted to be as practical as we are visionary,
presenting realistic problems as well as presenting evidence for our
solutions to these problems from real life where possible, rather than
present a series of impossible assumptions which dismiss possible
problems by definition. It is better to consider the worse possible
cases for if they do not appear then nothing has been lost and if they
do at least we have a starting point for possible solutions. So, all in
all, we have tried to be practical utopians!

We must stress, however, that anarchists do not want a "perfect" society
(as is often associated with the term *"utopia"*). This would be as
impossible as the neo-classical economic vision of perfect competition.
Rather we want a free society and so one based on real human beings and
so one with its own problems and difficulties. Our use of the word
*"utopia"* should not be taken to imply that anarchists assume away all
problems and argue that an anarchist society would be ideal and perfect.
No society has ever been perfect and no society ever will be. All we
argue is that an anarchist society will have fewer problems than those
before and be better to live within. Anyone looking for perfection
should look elsewhere. Anyone looking for a better, but still human and
so imperfect, world may find in anarchism a potential end for their
quest.

So anarchists are realistic in their hopes and dreams. We do not conjure
up hopes that cannot achieved but rather base our visions in an analysis
of what is wrong with society today and a means of changing the world
for the better. And even if some people call us utopians, we shrug off
the accusation with a smile. After all, dreams are important, not only
because they often the source of change in reality but because of the
hope they express:

> *"People may . . . call us dreamers . . . They fail to see that dreams
> are also a part of the reality of life, that life without dreams would
> be unbearable. No change in our way of life would be possible without
> dreams and dreamers. The only people who are never disappointed are
> those who never hope and never try to realise their hope."* [Rudolf
> Rocker, **The London Years**, p. 95]

One last point. We must point out here that we are discussing the social
and economic structures of areas within which the inhabitants are
predominately anarchists. It is obviously the case that areas in which
the inhabitants are not anarchists will take on different forms
depending upon the ideas that dominate there. Hence, assuming the end of
the current state structure, we could see anarchist communities along
with statist ones (capitalist or socialist) and these communities taking
different forms depending on what their inhabitants want -- communist to
individualist communities in the case of anarchist ones, state socialist
to private state communities in the statist areas, ones based on
religious sects and so on. As Malatesta argued, anarchists *"must be
intransigent in our opposition to all capitalist imposition and
exploitation, and tolerant of all social concepts which prevail in
different human groupings, so long as they do not threaten the equal
rights and freedom of others."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and
Ideas**, p. 174] Thus we respect the wishes of others to experiment and
live their own lives as they see fit, while encouraging those in
capitalist and other statist communities to rise in revolution against
their masters and join the free federation of the anarchist community.
Needless to say, we do not discuss non-anarchist communities here as it
is up to non-anarchists to present their arguments in favour of their
kind of statism.

So remember that we are not arguing that everyone will live in an
anarchist way in a free society. Far from it. There will be pockets of
unfreedom around, simply because the development of ideas varies from
area to area. Anarchists, needless to say, are against forcing people to
become anarchists (how can you force someone to be free?) Our aim is to
encourage those subject to authority to free themselves and to work with
them to create an anarchist society but, obviously, how successful we
are at this will vary. We can, therefore, expect areas of freedom to
co-exist with areas dominated by, say, state socialism, religion or
capitalism just as we can expect to see different kinds of anarchism
co-existing.

However, it would be a mistake to assume that just because there are
many choices of community available that it automatically makes a
society an anarchist one. For example, the modern world boasts over 200
different states. For most of them, individuals can leave and join
another if it will let them. There is no world government as such. This
does not make this series of states an anarchy. Similarly, a system
based on different corporations is not an anarchy either, nor would be
one based on a series of company towns and neither would a (quasi-feudal
or neo-feudal?) system based on a multitude of landlords who hire their
land and workplaces to workers in return for rent. The nature of the
associations is just as important as their voluntary nature. As
Kropotkin argued, the *"communes of the next revolution will not only
break down the state and substitute free federation for parliamentary
rule; they will part with parliamentary rule within the commune itself .
. . They will be anarchist within the commune as they will be anarchist
outside it."* [**Selected Writings on Anarchism and Revolution**, p.
132] Hence an anarchist society is one that is freely joined and left,
is internally non-hierarchical and non-oppressive and non-exploitative.
Thus anarchist communities may co-exist with non-anarchist ones but this
does **not** mean the non-anarchist ones are in any way anarchistic or
libertarian.

To conclude. Anarchists, to state the blindly obvious, do not aim for
chaos, anarchy in the popular sense of the word (George Orwell once
noted how one right-wing author *"use[d] 'Anarchism' indifferently with
'anarchy', which is a hardly more correct use of words than saying that
a Conservative is one who makes jam."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 298]). Nor do
anarchists reject any discussion of what a free society would be like
(such a rejection is usually based on the somewhat spurious grounds that
you cannot prescribe what free people would do). In fact, anarchists
have quite strong opinions on the basic outlines of a free society,
always premised on the assumption that these are guidelines only. These
suggestions are based on libertarian principles, developments in the
class struggle and a keen awareness of what is wrong with class and
hierarchical systems (and so what **not** to do!).

When reading this section of the FAQ remember that an anarchist society
will be created by the autonomous actions of the mass of the population,
not by anarchists writing books about it. This means any real anarchist
society will make many mistakes and develop in ways we cannot predict.
This implies that this is only a series of suggestions on how things
**could** work in an anarchist society -- it is **not** a blueprint of
any kind. All anarchists can do is present what we believe and why we
think such a vision is both desirable **and** viable. We hope that our
arguments and ideas presented in this section of the FAQ will inspire
more debate and discussion of how a free society would work. In
addition, and equally as important, we hope it will help inspire the
struggle that will create that society.
