I.7 Won't Libertarian Socialism destroy individuality?
======================================================

No. Libertarian socialism only suppresses individuality for those who
are so shallow that they cannot separate their identity from what they
own. However, be that as it may, this is an important objection to any
form of socialism and, given the example of "socialist" Russia, needs to
be discussed more.

The basic assumption behind this question is that capitalism encourages
individuality, but this assumption can be faulted on many levels. As
Kropotkin noted, *"individual freedom [has] remained, both in theory and
in practice, more illusory than real"* and that the *"want of
development of the personality (leading to herd-psychology) and the lack
of individual creative power and initiative are certainly one of the
chief defects of our time. Economical individualism has not kept its
promise: it did not result in any striking development of
individuality."* [**Ethics**, p. 27 and p. 28] In effect, modern
capitalism has reduced individuality to a parody of what it could and
should be (see [section I.7.4](secI7.html#seci74)). Little wonder Emma
Goldman argued that:

> *"The oft repeated slogan of our time is . . . that ours is an era of
> individualism . . . Only those who do not probe beneath the surface
> might be led to entertain this view. Have not the few accumulated the
> wealth of the world? Are they not the masters, the absolute kings of
> the situation? Their success, however, is due not to individualism,
> but the inertia, the cravenness, the utter submission of the mass. The
> latter wants but to be dominated, to be led, to be coerced. As to
> individualism, at no time in human history did it have less chance of
> expression, less opportunity to assert itself in a normal, healthy
> manner."* [**Anarchism and Other Essays**, pp. 70-1]

So we see a system which is apparently based on "egotism" and
"individualism" but whose members are free be standardised individuals,
who hardly express their individuality at all. Far from increasing
individuality, capitalism standardises it and so restricts it -- that it
survives at all is more an expression of the strength of humanity than
any benefits of the capitalist system. This impoverishment of
individuality is hardly surprising in a society based on hierarchical
institutions which are designed to assure obedience and subordination.
Given this, it comes as no surprise to find libertarian communists like
Kropotkin suggesting that *"as for knowing what will be the essence of
**individual** development, I do not think it **could** be along
individualist lines. Individual -- yes, without doubt, but
individ**ualist** -- I have my doubts. That would mean: **narrow
egoism** -- regressive evolution and even that would be limited to a
certain number."* [Kropotkin, quoted by Ruth Kinna, *"Kropotkin's theory
of Mutual Aid in Historical Context"*, pp. 259-283, **International
Review of Social History**, No. 40, p. 268]

So, can we say that libertarian socialism will **increase**
individuality or is this conformity and lack of "individualism" a
constant feature of the human race? In order to make some sort of
statement on this, we have to look at non-hierarchical societies and
organisations. We will discuss tribal cultures as an example of
non-hierarchical societies in [section I.7.1](secI7.html#seci71). Here,
however, we indicate how anarchist organisations will protect and
increase an individual's sense of self.

Anarchist organisations and tactics are designed to promote
individuality. They are decentralised, participatory organisations and
so they give those involved the "social space" required to express
themselves and develop their abilities and potential in ways restricted
under capitalism. As Gaston Leval noted in his book on the anarchist
collectives during the Spanish Revolution, *"so far as collective life
is concerned, the freedom of each is the right to participate
spontaneously with one's thought, one's will, one's initiative to the
full extent of one's capacities. A negative liberty is not liberty; it
is nothingness."* [**Collectives in the Spanish Revolution**, p. 346]

By being able to take part in and manage the decision making processes
which directly affect you, your ability to think for yourself is
increased and so you are constantly developing your abilities and
personality. The spontaneous activity described by Leval has important
psychological impacts. Thus Erich Fromm: *"In all spontaneous activity,
the individual embraces the world. Not only does his [sic] individual
self remain intact; it becomes stronger and more solidified. **For the
self is as strong as it is active.**"* [**Escape from Freedom**, p. 225]

Therefore, individuality does not atrophy within an anarchist
organisation as it does under capitalism. It will become stronger as
people participate and act within the social organisation. In other
words, individuality requires community. As German philosopher and
sociologist Max Horkheimer once observed, *"individuality is impaired
when each man decides to fend for himself . . . The absolutely isolated
individual has always been an illusion. The most esteemed personal
qualities, such as independence, will to freedom, sympathy, and the
sense of justice, are social as well as individual virtues. The fully
developed individual is the consummation of a fully developed society."*
[**The Eclipse of Reason**, p. 135]

The sovereign, self-sufficient individual is as much a product of a
healthy community as it is from individual self-realisation and the
fulfilment of desire. There is a tendency for **community** to enrich
and develop **individuality**, with this tendency being seen throughout
human history. This suggests that the abstract individualism of
capitalism is more the exception than the rule in social life. In other
words, history indicates that by working together with others as equals
individuality is strengthened far more than in the so-called
"individualism" associated with capitalism. Hence the need, as Murray
Bookchin put it, to *"arrest the ravaging and simplification of the
human spirit, of human personality, of human community, of humanity's
idea of the good."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 409]

Communal support for individuality is hardly surprising as individuality
is a product of the interaction between **social** forces and individual
attributes. The more an individual cuts themselves off from social life,
the more likely their individuality will suffer. This can be seen from
the 1980's when neo-liberal governments supporting the individualism
associated with free market capitalism were elected in both Britain and
the USA. The promotion of market forces lead to social atomisation,
social disruption and a more centralised state. As this swept across
society, the resulting disruption of social life ensured that many
individuals became impoverished ethically and culturally as society
became increasingly privatised. Two decades later, David Cameron, the
leader of the Conservative party, complained of a broken society in
Britain while, of course, skilfully avoiding discussing the neo-liberal
reforms imposed by his predecessor Thatcher which made it so.

In other words, many of the characteristics which we associate with a
developed individuality (namely ability to think, to act, to hold your
own opinions and standards and so forth) are (essentially) **social**
skills and are encouraged by a well developed community. Remove that
social background and these valued aspects of individuality are
undermined by lack of use, fear of authority, atomisation and limited
social interaction. Taking the case of workplaces, for example, surely
it is an obvious truism that a hierarchical working environment will
marginalise the individual and ensure that they cannot express their
opinions, exercise their thinking capacities to the full or manage their
own activity. This will have in impact in all aspects of an individual's
life.

Hierarchy in all its forms produces oppression and a crushing of
individuality (see [section B.1](secB1.html)). In such a system, as
left-wing classical liberal John Stuart Mill argued, the *"business"*
side of group activities would be *"properly carried out"* but at the
expense of the individuals involved. Anarchists agree with Mill when he
called it *"benevolent dictatorship"* and asked *"what sort of human
beings can be formed under such a regimen? What development can either
their thinking or their active faculties attain under it? . . . Their
moral capacities are equally stunted. Wherever the sphere of action of
human beings is artificially circumscribed, their sentiments are
narrowed and dwarfed."* [**Representative Government**, pp. 203-4] Like
anarchists, he extended his critique of political organisations into all
forms of associations and stated that if *"mankind is to continue to
improve"* then in the end one form of association will predominate,
*"not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief, and workpeople
without a voice in the management, but the association of labourers
themselves on terms of equality, collectively owning the capital with
which they carry on their operations, and working under managers elected
and removable by themselves."* [**The Principles of Political Economy**,
p. 147]

Hence, anarchism will protect and develop individuality by creating the
means by which all individuals can participate in the decisions that
affect them, in all aspects of their lives. Anarchism is built upon the
central assertion that individuals and their institutions cannot be
considered in isolation from one another. Authoritarian organisations
will create a servile personality, one that feels safest conforming to
authority and what is considered normal. A libertarian organisation, one
that is based upon participation and self-management will encourage a
strong personality, one that knows its own mind, thinks for itself and
feels confident in its own powers.

Therefore, as Bakunin argued, liberty *"is not a fact springing from
isolation but from reciprocal action, a fact not of exclusion, but, on
the contrary, of social interaction -- for freedom of every individual
is simply the reflection of his humanity or his human right in the
consciousness of all free men, his brothers, his equals."* Freedom *"is
something very positive, very complex, and above all eminently social,
since it can be realised only by society and only under conditions of
strict equality and solidarity."* Hierarchical power, by necessity,
kills individual freedom as it is *"characteristic of privilege and of
every privileged position to kill the minds and hearts of men"* and
*"power and authority corrupt those who exercise them as much as those
who are compelled to submit to them."* [**The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, p. 266, p. 268, p. 269 and p. 249]

A libertarian re-organisation of society will be based upon, and
encourage, a self-empowerment and self-liberation of the individual and
by participation within self-managed organisations individuals will
educate themselves for the responsibilities and joys of freedom. As
Carole Pateman points out, *"participation develops and fosters the very
qualities necessary for it; the more individuals participate the better
able they become to do so."* [**Participation and Democratic Theory**,
pp. 42-43] This, of course, implies a mutually interactive
transformation of individuals, their social relationships and
organisations (in the words of Spanish anarchist Garcia Oliver: *"Who
hasn't been changed by the revolution? It wouldn't be worth making it
just to continue being the same."* [quoted by Abel Paz, **Durruti in the
Spanish Revolution**, p. 498]).

Such a re-organisation (as we will see in [section J.2](secJ2.html)) is
based upon the tactic of **direct action.** This tactic also encourages
individuality by encouraging the individual to fight for themselves, by
their own self-activity, that which they consider to be wrong. As
Voltairine de Cleyre put it:

> *"Every person who ever thought he had a right to assert, and went
> boldly and asserted it, himself, or jointly with others that shared
> his convictions, was a direct actionist . . .*

> *"Every person who ever had a plan to do anything, and went and did
> it, or who laid his plan before others, and won their co-operation to
> do it with him, without going to external authorities to please do the
> thing for them, was a direct actionist. All co-operative experiments
> are essentially direct action.*

> *"Every person who ever in his life had a difference with anyone to
> settle, and want straight to the other persons involved to settle it .
> . . was a direct actionist. Examples of such action are strikes and
> boycotts . . .*

> *"These actions . . . are the spontaneous retorts of those who feel
> oppressed by a situation."* [**The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader**, pp.
> 47-8]

Therefore, anarchist tactics base themselves upon self-assertion and
this can only develop individuality. Self-activity can only occur when
there is a independent, free-thinking self. As self-management is based
upon the principle of direct action (*"all co-operative experiments are
essentially direct action"*) we can suggest that individuality will have
little to fear from an anarchist society. Indeed, anarchists strongly
stress the importance of individuality within a society. To quote
communist-anarchist J. Burns-Gibson:

> *"[T]o destroy individuality is to destroy society. For society is
> only realised and alive in the individual members. Society has no
> motive that does not issue from its individual members, no end that
> does not centre in them, no mind that is not theirs. 'Spirit of the
> age,' 'public opinion,' 'commonweal or good,' and like phrases have no
> meaning if they are thought of as features of something that hovers or
> floats between man and woman. They name what resides in and proceeds
> from individuals. Individuality and community, therefore, are equally
> constitutive of our idea of human life."* [quoted by William R.
> McKercher, **Freedom and Authority**, p. 31]

Little wonder, then, that anarchism *"recognises and values
individuality which means character, conduct and the springs of conduct,
free initiative, creativeness, spontaneity, autonomy."* [J.
Burns-Gibson, quoted by McKercher, **Op. Cit.**, p. 31f] As Kropotkin
put it, anarchism *"seeks the most complete development of individuality
combined with the highest development of voluntary association in all
its aspects . . . ever changing, ever modified"*. [**Anarchism**, p.
123]

For anarchists real liberty requires social equality. For *"[i]f
individuals are to exercise the maximum amount of control over their own
lives and environment then authority structures in these areas most be
so organised that they can participate in decision making."* [Pateman,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 43] Hence individuality will be protected, encouraged
and developed in an anarchist society far more than in a class ridden,
hierarchical society like capitalism. As Kropotkin argued:

> *"[Libertarian] Communism is the best basis for individual development
> and freedom; not that individualism which drives men to the war of
> each against all . . . but that which represents the full expansion of
> man's [and woman's] faculties, the superior development of what is
> original in him [or her], the greatest fruitfulness of intelligence,
> feeling and will."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 141]

It is because wonders are so enriching to life, and none is more
wonderful than individuality, that anarchists oppose capitalism in the
name of socialism -- libertarian socialism, the free association of free
individuals.

I.7.1 Do tribal cultures indicate that communalism defends individuality?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yes. In many tribal cultures (or aboriginal cultures), we find a strong
respect for individuality. As anthropologist Paul Radin pointed out,
*"respect for the individual, irrespective of age or sex"* was one of
*"the outstanding features of aboriginal civilisation"* as well as *"the
amazing degree of social and political integration achieved by them"*
and *"a concept of personal security."* [quoted by Murray Bookchin,
**Remaking Society**, p. 48] Murray Bookchin commented on Radin's
statement:

> *"respect for the individual, which Radin lists first as an aboriginal
> attribute, deserves to be emphasised, today, in an era that rejects
> the collective as destructive of individuality on the one hand, and
> yet, in an orgy of pure egotism, has actually destroyed all the ego
> boundaries of free-floating, isolated, and atomised individuals on the
> other. A strong collectivity may be even more supportive of the
> individual as close studies of certain aboriginal societies reveal,
> than a 'free market' society with its emphasis on an egoistic, but
> impoverished, self."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 48]

This individualisation associated with tribal cultures was also noted by
historian Howard Zinn. He quotes fellow historian Gary Nash describing
Iroquois culture (which appears typical of most Native American tribes):

> *"No laws and ordinances, sheriffs and constables, judges and juries,
> or courts or jails -- the apparatus of authority in European societies
> -- were to be found in the north-east woodlands prior to European
> arrival. Yet boundaries of acceptable behaviour were firmly set.
> Though priding themselves on the autonomous individual, the Iroquois
> maintained a strict sense of right and wrong."* [quoted by Zinn, **A
> People's History of the United States**, p. 21]

This respect for individuality existed in a society based on communistic
principles. As Zinn notes, in the Iroquois *"land was owned in common
and worked in common. Hunting was done together, and the catch was
divided among the members of the village. Houses were considered common
property and were shared by several families. The concept of private
ownership of land and homes was foreign to the Iroquois."* In this
communal society women *"were important and respected"* and families
were matrilineal. Power was shared between the sexes (unlike the
European idea of male domination). Similarly, children *"while taught
the cultural heritage of their people and solidarity with the tribe,
were also taught to be independent, not to submit to overbearing
authority. They were taught equality of status and the sharing of
possessions."* As Zinn stresses, Native American tribes *"paid careful
attention to the development of personality, intensity of will,
independence and flexibility, passion and potency, to their partnership
with one another and with nature."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 20 and pp. 21-2]

Thus tribal societies indicate that community defends individuality,
with communal living actually encouraging a strong sense of
individuality. This is to be expected, as equality is the only condition
in which individuals can be free and so in a position to develop their
personality to its full. Furthermore, this communal living took place
within an anarchist environment:

> *"The foundation principle of Indian government had always been the
> rejection of government. The freedom of the individual was regarded by
> practically all Indians north of Mexico as a canon infinitely more
> precious than the individual's duty to his [or her] community or
> nation. This anarchistic attitude ruled all behaviour, beginning with
> the smallest social unity, the family. The Indian parent was
> constitutionally reluctant to discipline his [or her] children. Their
> every exhibition of self-will was accepted as a favourable indication
> of the development of maturing character. . ."* [Van Every, quoted by
> Zinn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 136]

In addition, Native American tribes also indicate that communal living
and high standards of living can and do go together. For example, during
the 1870s in the Cherokee Nation *"land was held collectively and life
was contented and prosperous"* with the US Department of the Interior
recognising that it was *"a miracle of progress, with successful
production by people living in considerable comfort, a level of
education 'equal to that furnished by an ordinary college in the
States,' flourishing industry and commerce, an effective constitutional
government, a high level of literacy, and a state of 'civilisation and
enlightenment' comparable to anything known: 'What required five hundred
years for the Britons to accomplish in this direction they have
accomplished in one hundred years,' the Department declared in wonder."*
[Noam Chomsky, **Year 501**, p. 231]

Senator Henry Dawes of Massachusetts visited in 1883 and described what
he found in glowing terms: *"There was not a pauper in that nation, and
the nation did not owe a dollar. It built its own capitol . . . and it
built its schools and its hospitals."* No family lacked a home. In spite
of this (or, perhaps, more correctly, because of this), Dawes
recommended that the society must be destroyed: *"They have got as far
as they can go, because they own their land in common . . . there is no
enterprise to make your home any better than that of your neighbours.
There is no selfishness, which is the bottom of civilisation. Till this
people will consent to give up their lands, and divide them among their
citizens so that each can own the land he cultivates, they will not make
much more progress."* [quoted by Chomsky, **Op. Cit.**, p. 231-2] The
introduction of capitalism -- as usual by state action -- resulted in
poverty and destitution, again showing the link between capitalism and
high living standards is not clear cut, regardless of claims otherwise.

Undoubtedly, having access to the means of life ensured that members of
such cultures did not have to place themselves in situations which could
produce a servile character structure. As they did not have to follow
the orders of a boss they did not have to learn to obey others and so
could develop their own abilities to govern themselves. This
self-government allowed the development of a custom in such tribes
called *"the principle of non-interference"* in anthropology. This is
the principle of defending someone's right to express the opposing view
and it is a pervasive principle in the tribal world, and it is so much
so as to be safely called a universal.

The principle of non-interference is a powerful principle that extends
from the personal to the political, and into every facet of daily life
(significantly, tribal groups *"respect the personality of their
children, much as they do that of the adults in their communities."*
[Bookchin, **The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 115]). Most people today, used
as they are to hierarchy everywhere, are aghast when they realise the
extent to which it is practised, but it has proven itself to be an
integral part of living anarchy. It means that people simply do not
limit the activities of others, period (unless that behaviour is
threatening the survival of the tribe). This in effect makes absolute
tolerance a custom (the difference between law and custom is important
to point out: Law is dead, and Custom lives -- see [section
I.7.3](secI7.html#seci73)). This is not to idealise such communities as
they are must be considered imperfect anarchist societies in many ways
(mostly obviously in that many eventually evolved into hierarchical
systems so suggesting that informal hierarchies, undoubtedly a product
of religion and other factors, existed).

As people accustomed to authority we have so much baggage that relates
to "interfering" with the lives of others that merely visualising the
situation that would eliminate this daily pastime for many is
impossible. But think about it. First of all, in a society where people
do not interfere with each other's behaviour, people tend to feel
trusted and empowered by this simple social fact. Their self-esteem is
already higher because they are trusted with the responsibility for
making learned and aware choices. This is not fiction; individual
responsibility is a key aspect of social responsibility.

Therefore, given the strength of individuality documented in tribes with
no private property, no state and little or no other hierarchical
structures within them, can we not conclude that anarchism will defend
individuality and even develop it in ways blocked by capitalism? At the
very least we can say "possibly", and that is enough to allow us to
question that dogma that capitalism is the only system based on respect
for the individual.

I.7.2 Do anarchists worship the past or the "noble savage"?
-----------------------------------------------------------

No. However, this is a common attack on socialists by supporters of
capitalism and on anarchists by Marxists. Both claim that anarchism is
"backward looking", opposed to "progress" and desire a society based on
inappropriate ideas of freedom. In particular, ideological capitalists
maintain that all forms of socialism base themselves on the ideal of the
"noble savage" (see, for example, free market capitalist guru Frederick
von Hayek's work **Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism**).

Anarchists are well aware of the limitations of the "primitive
communist" societies they have used as examples of anarchistic
tendencies within history or society. They are also aware of the
problems associated with using **any** historical period as an example
of "anarchism in action." Take for example the "free cities" of Medieval
Europe, which was used by Kropotkin as an example of the potential of
decentralised, confederated communes. He was sometimes accused of being
a *"Medievalist"* (as was William Morris) while all he was doing was
indicating that capitalism need not equal progress and that alternative
social systems have existed which have encouraged freedom in ways
capitalism restricts.

In a similar way, Marxists often accuse Proudhon of being
"petty-bourgeois" and looking backward to a pre-industrial society of
artisans and peasants. Of course, nothing could be further from the
truth. Proudhon lived in a France which was predominantly pre-industrial
and based on peasant and artisan production. He, therefore, based his
socialist ideas on the needs of working people as they required them at
the time. When Proudhon did look at large-scale production (such as
railways, factories and so on) he proposed co-operative associations to
run them. These associations would maintain the dignity of the worker by
maintaining the essential feature of artisan and peasant life, namely
the control of work and product by the labourer. Thus he used "the past"
(artisan production) to inform his analysis of current events
(industrialisation) to create a solution to the social problem which
built upon and extended a freedom crushed by capitalism (namely workers'
self-management in production). Rather than being backward looking and
worshipping a past which was disappearing, Proudhon analysed the present
**and** past, drew any positive features he could from both and applied
them to the present and the future (see also [section
I.3.8](secI3.html#seci38)). Unlike Marx, who argued that
industrialisation (i.e. proletarianisation) was the pre-conditions of
socialism, Proudhon wanted justice and freedom for working class people
during his lifetime, not some (unspecified) time in the future after
capitalism had fully developed.

Again it is hardly surprising to find that many supporters of capitalism
ignore the insights that can be gained by studying tribal cultures and
the questions they raise about capitalism and freedom. Instead, they
duck the issues raised and accuse socialists of idealising the "noble
savage." As indicated, nothing could be further from the truth. Indeed,
this claim has been directed towards Rousseau (often considered the
father of socialist and anarchist idealisation of the "noble savage")
even though he explicitly asked *"must societies be totally abolished?
Must **meum** and **tuum** be annihilated, and must we return again to
the forests to live among bears? This is a deduction in the manner of my
adversaries, which I would as soon anticipate as let them have the shame
of drawing."* Similarly, Rousseau is often thought of idealising
"natural man" but he actually wrote that *"men in a state of nature,
having no moral relations or determinate obligations one with another,
could not be either good or bad, virtuous or vicious."* [**The Social
Contract and Discourses**, p. 112 and p. 64] Rousseau failed to
understand that his adversaries, both then and now, seem to know no
shame and will happy suggest that he advocated the exact opposite of
what he actually wrote. Anarchists are also subject to this
(particularly by Marxists), particularly when we look through history,
draw libertarian currents from it and are then denounced as backward
looking utopians.

What libertarian socialists point out from this analysis of history is
that the atomised individual associated with capitalist society is not
"natural" and that capitalist social relationships help to weaken
individuality. All the many attacks on libertarian socialist analysis of
past societies are a product of capitalists attempts to deny history and
state that "Progress" reaches its final resting place in capitalism. As
David Watson argues:

> *"When we consider people living under some of the harshest, most
> commanding conditions on earth, who can nevertheless do what they like
> when the notion occurs to them, we should be able to witness the
> contemporary doubt about civilisation's superiority without growing
> indignant. Primitivism, after all, reflects not only a glimpse of life
> before the rise of the state, but also a legitimate response to real
> conditions of life under civilisation . . . Most people do not live in
> aboriginal societies, and most tribal peoples themselves now face
> wholly new contexts which will have to be confronted in new ways if
> they are to survive as peoples. But their lifeways, their histories,
> remind us that **other modes of being are possible.** Reaffirmation of
> our primal past offers insight into our history -- not the only
> possible insight, to be sure, but one important, legitimate entry
> point for a reasoned discussion about (and an impassioned reaction to)
> this world we must leave behind."* [**Beyond Bookchin**, p. 240]

This essential investigation of history and modern society to see what
other ways of living have and do exist is essential. It is too easy to
forget that what exists under modern capitalism has not always existed
(as neo-classical economics does with its atomistic and ahistoric
analysis, for example). It is also useful to remember what many people
now consider as "normal" was not always the case. As we discussed in
[section F.8.6](secF8.html#secf86), the first generation of industrial
wage slaves **hated** the system, considering it both tyranny and
unnatural. Studying history, previous cultures and the process of
hierarchical society and the resistance of the oppressed to it can
enrich our analysis and activity in the here and now and help us to
envision an anarchist society, the problems it could face and possible
solutions to them.

If the challenge for anarchists is to smash power-relations and
domination, it would make sense to get to the root of the problem.
Hierarchy, slavery, coercion, patriarchy, and so on far outdate
capitalism and it is hardly enough to just analyse the economic system
of capitalism, which is merely the current and most insidious form of
hierarchical civilisation. Similarly, without looking to cultures and
communities that functioned quite well before the rise of the state,
hierarchies and classes, anarchists do not really have much solid ground
to prove to people that anarchy is desirable or possible. For this
reason, historical analysis and the celebration of the positive aspects
of tribal and other societies is essential.

Moreover, as George Orwell pointed out, attacks that reject this
critical analysis as worshipping the "noble savage" miss the point:

> *"In the first place he [the defender of modern life] will tell you
> that it is impossible to 'go back' . . . and will then accuse you of
> being a medievalist and begin to descant upon the horrors of the
> Middle Ages . . . As a matter of fact, most attacks upon the Middle
> Ages and the past generally by apologists of modernity are beside the
> point, because their essential trick is to project a modern man, with
> his squeamishness and his high standard of comfort, into an age when
> such things were unheard of. But notice that in any case this is not
> an answer. For dislike of the mechanised future does not imply the
> smallest reverence for any period of the past . . . When one pictures
> it merely as an objective; there is no need to pretend that it has
> ever existed in space and time."* [**The Road to Wigan Pier**, p. 183]

We should also note that such attacks on anarchist investigations of
past cultures assumes that these cultures have **no** good aspects at
all and so indicates a sort of intellectual "all or nothing" approach to
modern life. The idea that past (and current) civilisations may have got
**some** things right and others wrong and should be investigated is
rejected for a totally uncritical "love it or leave" approach to modern
society. Of course, the well known "free market" capitalist love of 19th
century capitalist life and values (specifically the grim reality of
Victorian Britain or Gilded Age America) warrants no such claims of
"past worship" by the supporters of the system.

Therefore attacks on anarchists as supporters of the "noble savage"
ideal indicate more about the opponents of anarchism and their fear of
looking at the implications of the system they support than about
anarchist theory.

I.7.3 Is the law required to protect individual rights?
-------------------------------------------------------

No, far from it. It is obvious that, as Kropotkin put it, *"[n]o society
is possible without certain principles of morality generally recognised.
If everyone grew accustomed to deceiving his fellow-men; if we never
could rely on each other's promise and words; if everyone treated his
fellow as an enemy, against whom every means of warfare is justified --
no society could exist."* [**Anarchism**, p. 73] However, this does not
mean that a legal system (with its resultant bureaucracy, vested
interests and inhumanity) is the best way to protect individual rights
within a society.

What anarchists propose instead of the current legal system (or an
alternative law system based on religious or "natural" laws) is
**custom** -- namely the development of living "rules of thumb" which
express what a society considers as right at any given moment. However,
the question arises, if an agreed set of principles are used to
determine the just outcome, in what way would this differ from laws?

The difference is that the "order of custom" would prevail rather than
the "rule of law". **Custom** is a body of living institutions that
enjoys the support of the body politic, whereas **law** is a codified
(read dead) body of institutions that separates social control from
moral force. This, as anyone observing modern Western society can
testify, alienates everyone. A **just outcome** is the predictable, but
not necessarily the inevitable, outcome of interpersonal conflict
because in an anarchistic society people are trusted to do it
themselves. Anarchists think people have to grow up in a social
environment free from the confusions generated by a fundamental
discrepancy between morality, and social control, to fully appreciate
the implications. However, the essential ingredient is the investment of
trust, by the community, in people to come up with **functional
solutions** to interpersonal conflict. This stands in sharp contrast
with the present situation of people being infantilised by the state
through a constant bombardment of fixed social structures removing all
possibility of people developing their own unique solutions.

Therefore, anarchist recognise that social custom changes with society.
What was once considered "normal" or "natural" may become to be seen as
oppressive and hateful. This is because the *"conception of good or evil
varies according to the degree of intelligence or of knowledge acquired.
There is nothing unchangeable about it."* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p.
92] Only by removing the dead hand of the past can society's ethical
base develop and grow with the individuals that make it up (see [section
A.2.19](secA2.html#seca219) for a discussion of anarchist ethics).

We should also like to point out here that laws (or *"The Law"*) also
restrict the development of an individual's sense of ethics or morality.
This is because it relieves them of the responsibility of determining if
something is right or wrong. All they need to know is whether it is
legal. The morality of the action is irrelevant. This "nationalisation"
of ethics is very handy for the would be capitalist, governor or other
exploiter. In addition, capitalism also restricts the development of an
individual's ethics because it creates the environment where these
ethics can be bought. To quote Shakespeare's **Richard III**:

> *"Second Murderer: Some certain dregs of conscience are yet within
> me.*

> *First Murderer: Remember our reward, when the deed's done.*

> *Second Murderer: Zounds! He dies. I had forgot the reward.*

> *First Murderer: Where's thy conscience now?*

> *Second Murderer: O, in the Duke of Gloucester's purse."*

Therefore, as far as *"The Law"* defending individual rights, it creates
the necessary conditions (such as the de-personalisation of ethics, the
existence of concentrations wealth, and so on) for undermining
individual ethical behaviour, and so respect for other individual's
rights. As English libertarian socialist Edward Carpenter put it, *"I
think we may fairly make the following general statement, viz., that
legal ownership is essentially a negative and anti-social thing, and
that unless qualified or antidoted by human relationship, it is pretty
certain to be positively **harmful.** In fact, when a man's chief plea
is 'The law allows it,' you may be pretty sure he is up to some
mischief!"* The state forces an individual into a relationship with a
governing body. This means, as anarchist J. B. Smith put it, *"taking
away from the individual his [or her] direct interest in life and in his
surroundings . . . blunting his [or her] moral sense . . . teaching that
he [or she] must never rely on himself [or herself] . . . [but] upon a
small part of men who are elected to do everything . . . [which]
destroys to a large extent his [or her] perception of right and wrong."*
[quoted by William R. McKercher, **Freedom and Authority**, p. 48 and p.
67f]

Individual rights, for anarchists, are best protected in a social
environment based on the self-respect and sympathy. Custom, because it
is based on the outcome of numerous individual actions and thought
reflects (and so encourages the development of) individual ethical
standards and so a generalised respect for others. Thus, *"under
anarchism all rules and laws will be little more than suggestions for
the guidance of juries which will judge not only the facts but the law,
the justice of the law, its applicability to the given circumstances,
and the penalty or damage to be inflicted because if its infraction . .
. under Anarchism the law will be so flexible that it will shape itself
to every emergency and need no alteration. And it will be regarded as
**just** in proportion to its flexibility, instead of as now in
proportion to its rigidity."* [Benjamin Tucker, **The Individualist
Anarchists**, pp. 160-1] Tucker, like other individualist Anarchists,
believed that the role of juries had been very substantial in the
English common-law tradition and that they had been gradually
emasculated by the state. This system of juries, based on
common-law/custom could be the means of ensuring justice in a free
society.

Tolerance of other individuals depends far more on the attitudes of the
society in question that on its system of laws. In other words, even if
the law does respect individual rights, if others in society disapprove
of an action then they can and will act to stop it (or restrict
individual rights). All that the law can do is try to prevent this
occurring but given the power of social custom this is often limited in
scope and has to wait until people recognise the need for change.
Needless to say, governments can, and have, been far more at the
forefront of denying and ignoring individual rights and so appealing to
it for justice is, to say the least, problematic!

As such, anarchists are well aware that social custom can be oppressive
and, as discussed in [section I.5.6](secI5.html#seci56), argue for
direct action by oppressed minorities to combat any tendency towards
"dictatorship by the majority". Anarchists, as Kropotkin suggested, are
*"the last to underrate the part which the self-assertion of the
individual has played in the evolution of mankind."* However, this *"has
often been, and continually is, something quite different from, and far
larger and deeper than, the petty, unintelligent narrow-mindedness
which, with a large class of writers goes for 'individualism' and
'self-assertion.'"* There are *"two classes of revolted individuals"*,
those who rise up and aim to *"purify the old institutions [of mutual
aid], or to work out a higher form of commonwealth, based on the same
Mutual Aid principles"* and those who sought to *"break down the
protective institutions of mutual support, with no other intention but
to increase their own wealth and their own powers."* [**Mutual Aid**,
pp. 18-9] We aim to support and encourage the former.

However, while recognising the potential tyranny of custom anarchists
stress that, firstly, this is a natural part of human society and,
secondly, it palls into insignificance compared to the actual tyranny of
the state and the laws it imposes on society in the interests of the
few. Facts which, needless to say, ruling elites are at pains to hide.
As Kropotkin explained *"all our religious, historical, juridical, and
social education is imbued with the idea that human beings, if left to
themselves, would revert to savagery; that without authority men would
eat one another; for nothing, they say, can be expected from the
'multitude' but brutishness and the warring of each against all. Men
would perish if above them soared not the elect . . . These saviours
prevent, we are told, the battle of all against all."* This, he argued,
was nonsense as *"a **scientific** study of societies and institutions
brings us to quite different views. It proves that usages and customs
created by mankind for the sake of mutual aid, mutual defence, and peace
in general, were precisely elaborated by the 'nameless multitude.' And
it was these customs that enabled man to survive in his struggle for
existence in the midst of extremely hard natural conditions."* The
notion that the state was merely the instrument of the people is hardly
supported by history nor current practice, for what the state and its
laws have done is to *"fix, or rather to crystallise in a permanent
form, such customs as already were in existence"* and adding to them
*"some new rules -- rules of inequality and servile submission of the
masses in the interest of the armed rich and the warlike minorities."*
[**Evolution and Environment**, pp. 48-9] Unsurprisingly, then, the
state perverts social customs for its own, and the interests of the
economically and socially powerful:

> *"as society became more and more divided into two hostile classes,
> one seeking to establish its domination, the other struggling to
> escape, the strife began. Now the conqueror was in a hurry to secure
> the results of his actions in a permanent form, he tried to place them
> beyond question, to make them holy and venerable by every means in his
> power. Law made its appearance under the sanction of the priest, and
> the warriors club was placed at its service. Its office was to render
> immutable such customs as were to the advantage of the dominant
> minority . . . If law, however, presented nothing but a collection of
> prescriptions serviceable to rulers, it would find some difficulty in
> insuring acceptance and obedience. Well, the legislators confounded in
> one code the two currents of custom . . . , the maxims which represent
> principles of morality and social union wrought out as a result of
> life in common, and the mandates which are meant to ensure external
> existence to inequality. Customs, absolutely essential to the very
> being of society, are, in the code, cleverly intermingled with usages
> imposed by the ruling caste, and both claim equal respect from the
> crowd . . . Such was the law; and it has maintained its two-fold
> character to this day."* [Kropotkin, **Anarchism**, p. 205]

In other words, the law has *"has used Man's social feelings to get
passed not only moral precepts which were acceptable to Man, but also
orders which were useful only to the minority of exploiters against whom
he would have rebelled."* [Kropotkin quoted by Malatesta, **Anarchy**,
pp. 24-5]

Therefore anarchists argue that state institutions are not only unneeded
to create an ethical society (i.e. one based on respecting
individuality) but actively undermines such a society. That the
economically and politically powerful assert that a state is a necessary
condition for a free society and individual space is hardly surprising
for, as Malatesta put it, a ruling elite *"cannot maintain itself for
long without hiding its true nature behind a pretence of general
usefulness . . . it cannot impose acceptances of the privileges of the
few if it does not pretend to be the guardian of the rights of all."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 24] Thus laws *"exist to keep up the machinery of
government which serves to secure to capital the exploitation and
monopoly of wealth produced"* and *"to facilitate the exploitation of
the worker by the capitalist."* And people *"who long for freedom begin
the attempt to obtain it by entreating their masters to be kind enough
to protect them by modifying the laws which these masters themselves
have created!"* [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 200 and p. 210]

Therefore, its important to remember why the state exists and so
whatever actions and rights it promotes for the individual it exists to
protect the powerful against the powerless. Any human rights recognised
by the state are a product of social struggle and exist because of pass
victories in the class war and not due to the kindness of ruling elites.
In addition, capitalism itself undermines the ethical foundations of any
society by encouraging people to grow accustomed to deceiving their
fellows and treating them as a competitor, against whom every means of
action is justified. Hence capitalism undermines the basic social
context and customs within which individuals develop and need to become
fully human and free. Little wonder that a strong state has always been
required to introduce a free market -- firstly, to protect wealth from
the increasingly dispossessed and secondly, to try to hold society
together as capitalism destroys the social fabric which makes a society
worth living in.

For more on this issue, Kropotkin's classic essay *"Law and Authority"*
cannot be bettered (contained in **Anarchism** and **Words of a
Rebel**).

I.7.4 Does capitalism protect individuality?
--------------------------------------------

Given that many people claim that **any** form of socialism will destroy
liberty (and so individuality) it is worthwhile to consider whether
capitalism actually does protect individuality. The answer must be no.
Capitalism creates a standardisation which helps to distort
individuality and the fact that individuality does exist under
capitalism says more about the human spirit than capitalist social
relationships.

So, why does a system apparently based on the idea of individual profit
result in such a deadening of the individual? There are four main
reasons:

> 1) capitalism produces a hierarchical system which crushes
> self-government in many areas of life;

> 2) there is the lack of community which does not provide the necessary
> supports for the encouragement of individuality;

> 3) there is the psychological impact of "individual profit" when it
> becomes identified purely with monetary gain (as in capitalism);

> 4) the effects of competition in creating conformity and mindless
> obedience to authority.

We have discussed point one on many occasions (see, for example,
[section B.4](secB4.html)). As Emma Goldman put it, under capitalism,
the individual *"must sell his [or her] labour"* and so their
*"inclination and judgement are subordinated to the will of a master."*
This, naturally, represses individual initiative and the skills needed
to know and express ones own mind. This *"condemns millions of people to
be mere nonentities, living corpses without originality or power of
initiative . . . who pile up mountains of wealth for others and pay for
it with a grey, dull and wretched existence for themselves."* *"There
can be no freedom in the large sense of the word,"* Goldman stressed,
*"so long as mercenary and commercial considerations play an important
part in the determination of personal conduct."* [**Red Emma Speaks**,
p. 50] Hence Bookchin:

> *"With the hollowing out of community by the market system . . . we
> witness the concomitant hollowing out of personality itself. Just as
> the spiritual and institutional ties that linked human beings together
> into vibrant social relations are eroded by the mass market, so the
> sinews that make for subjectivity, character and self-definition are
> divested of form and meaning. The isolated, seemingly autonomous ego
> of 'modernity' turns out to be the mere husk of a once fairly rounded
> individual whose very completeness as an ego was possible because he
> or she was rooted in a fairly rounded and complete community."* [**The
> Ecology of Freedom**, p. 211]

As regards point one, given the social relationships it is based on,
capitalism cannot foster individuality but only harm it. As Kropotkin
argued, *"obedience towards individuals or metaphysical entities . . .
lead to depression of initiative and servility of mind."*
[**Anarchism**, p. 285] As far as point two goes, we have discussed it
above and will not repeat ourselves (see [section I.7](secI7.html)). The
last two points are worth discussing more thoroughly, and we will do so
here.

Taking the third point first, when this kind of "greed" becomes the
guiding aspect of an individual's life (and the society they live in)
they usually end up sacrificing their own ego to it. Instead of the
individual dominating their "greed," "greed" dominates them and so they
end up being possessed by one aspect of themselves. This "selfishness"
hides the poverty of the ego who practices it. As libertarian Marxist
psychiatrist Erich Fromm argued:

> *"Selfishness if not identical with self-love but with its very
> opposite. Selfishness is one kind of greediness. Like all greediness,
> it contains an insatiability, as a consequence of which there is never
> any real satisfaction. Greed is a bottomless pit which exhausts the
> person in an endless effort to satisfy the need without ever reaching
> satisfaction . . . this type of person is basically not fond of
> himself, but deeply dislikes himself.*

> *"The puzzle in this seeming contradiction is easy to solve.
> Selfishness is rooted in this very lack of fondness for oneself . . .
> He does not have the inner security which can exist only on the basis
> of genuine fondness and affirmation."* [**The Fear of Freedom**, pp.
> 99-100]

In other words, the "selfish" person allows their greed to dominate
their ego and they sacrifice their personality feeding this new God.
This was clearly seen by Max Stirner who denounced this as a
*"one-sided, unopened, narrow egoism"* which leads the ego being *"ruled
by a passion to which he brings the rest as sacrifices"* [**The Ego and
Its Own**, p. 76]. Like all *"spooks,"* capitalism results in the
self-negation of the individual and so the impoverishment of
individuality. Little wonder, then, that a system apparently based upon
"egotism" and "individualism" ends up weakening individuality.

As regards the fourth point, the effects of competition on individuality
are equally as destructive. Indeed, a *"culture dedicated to creating
standardised, specialised, predictable human components could find no
better way of grinding them out than by making every possible aspect of
life a matter of competition. 'Winning out' in this respect does not
make rugged individualists. It shapes conformist robots."* [George
Leonard, quoted by Alfie Kohn, **No Contest: The Case Against
Competition**, p. 129] Why is this?

Competition is based upon outdoing others and this can only occur if you
are doing the same thing they are. However, individuality is the most
unique thing there is and *"unique characteristics by definition cannot
be ranked and participating in the process of ranking demands essential
conformity."* The extensive research into the effects of competition
suggests that it in fact *"encourages rank conformity"* as well as
undermining the *"substantial and authentic kind of individualism"*
associated by such free thinkers as Thoreau. [Alfie Kohn, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 130 and p. 129] As well as impoverishing individuality by encouraging
conformity, competition also makes us less free thinking and rebellious:

> *"Attitude towards authorities and general conduct do count in the
> kinds of competitions that take place in the office or classroom. If I
> want to get the highest grades in class, I will not be likely to
> challenge the teacher's version of whatever topic is being covered.
> After a while, I may cease to think critically altogether . . . If
> people tend to 'go along to get along,' there is even more incentive
> to go along when the goal is to be number one. In the office or
> factory where co-workers are rivals, beating out the next person for a
> promotion means pleasing the boss. Competition acts to extinguish the
> Promethean fire of rebellion."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 130]

In [section I.4.11](secI4.html#seci411) we noted that when an artistic
task is turned into a contest, children's work reveal significantly less
spontaneity and creativity. In other words, competition reduces
creativity and so individuality because creativity is *"anti-conformist
at its core: it is nothing if not a process of idiosyncratic thinking
and risk-taking. Competition inhibits this process."* Competition,
therefore, will result in a narrowing of our lives, a failing to
experience new challenges in favour of trying to win and be
"successful." It turns *"life into a series of contests [and] turns us
into cautious, obedient people. We do not sparkle as individuals **or**
embrace collective action when we are in a race."* [Kohn, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 130 and p. 131]

So, far from defending individuality, capitalism places a lot of
barriers (both physical and mental) in the path of individuals who are
trying to express their freedom. Anarchism exists precisely because
capitalism has not created the free society it supporters claimed it
would.
