I.6 What about the *"Tragedy of the Commons"*?
==============================================

The term *"Tragedy of the Commons"* is a phrase which is used to
describe why, according to some, commonly owned resources will be
destructively overused. The term was first coined by Garret Hardin in
December 1968. [*"The Tragedy of the Commons"*, **Science**, Vol. 162,
No. 3859, pp. 1243-1248] It quickly became popular with those arguing
against any form of collective ownership or socialism and would be the
basis for many arguments for privatisation.

Unsurprisingly, given its popularity with defenders of capitalism and
neo-classical economists, Hardin's argument was a pure thought
experiment with absolutely no empirical evidence to support it. He
suggested a scenario in which commonly owned pasture was open to all
local herdsmen to feed their cattle on. Completing this assumption with
the standard ones of neo-classical economics, with Hardin arguing that
each herdsman would try to keep as many cattle as possible on the
commons to maximise their income. This would result in overgrazing and
environmental destruction as the cost of each feeding addition animals
is shouldered by all who use the commons while the benefits accrue to
the individual herdsman. However, what is individually rational becomes
collectively irrational when each herdsman, acting in isolation, does
the same thing. The net result of the individual's actions is the ending
of the livelihood of **every** herdsman as the land becomes overused.

His article was used to justify both nationalisation and privatisation
of communal resources (the former often a precursor for the latter). As
state ownership fell out of favour, the lesson of this experiment in
logic was as uniform as it was simple: only privatisation of common
resources could ensure their efficient use and stop them being overused
and destroyed. Coming as it before the rise of neo-liberalism in the
1970s, Hardin's essay was much referenced by those seeking to privatise
nationalised industries and eliminate communal institutions in tribal
societies in the Third World. That these resulted in wealth being
concentrated in a few hands should come as no surprise.

Needless to say, there are numerous problems with Hardin's analysis.
Most fundamentally, it was a pure thought experiment and, as such, was
not informed by historical or current practice. In other words, it did
not reflect the reality of the commons as a social institution. The
so-called *"Tragedy of the Commons"* was no such thing. It is actually
an imposition of the *"tragedy of the free-for-all"* to communally owned
resources (in this case, land). In reality, commons were **never**
*"free for all"* resources and while the latter may be see overuse and
destruction the former managed to survive thousands of years. So,
unfortunately for the supporters of private property who so regularly
invoke the *"Tragedy of the Commons"*, they simply show their ignorance
of what true commons are. As socialist Allan Engler points out:

> *"Supporters of capitalism cite what they call the tragedy of the
> commons to explain the wanton plundering of forests, fish and
> waterways, but common property is not the problem. When property was
> held in common by tribes, clans and villages, people took no more than
> their share and respected the rights of others. They cared for common
> property and when necessary acted together to protect it against those
> who would damage it. Under capitalism, there is no common property.
> (Public property is a form of private property, property owned by the
> government as a corporate person.) Capitalism recognises only private
> property and free-for-all property. Nobody is responsible for
> free-for-all property until someone claims it as his own. He then has
> a right to do as he pleases with it, a right that is uniquely
> capitalist. Unlike common or personal property, capitalist property is
> not valued for itself or for its utility. It is valued for the revenue
> it produces for its owner. If the capitalist owner can maximise his
> revenue by liquidating it, he has the right to do that."* [**Apostles
> of Greed**, pp. 58-59]

Therefore, as Colin Ward argues, *"[l]ocal, popular, control is the
surest way of avoiding the tragedy of the commons."* [**Reflected in
Water**, p. 20] Given that a social anarchist society is a communal,
decentralised one, it will have little to fear from irrational overuse
or abuse of communally owned and used resources.

So, the **real** problem is that a lot of economists and sociologists
conflate Hardin's scenario, in which **unmanaged** resources are free
for all, with the situation that prevailed in the use of commons which
were communally **managed** resources in village and tribal communities.
Historian E.P. Thompson, for example, noted that Hardin was
*"historically uninformed"* when he assumed that commons were pastures
open to all. The commons, in reality, **were** managed by common
agreements between those who used them. In an extensive investigation on
this subject, Thompson showed that the *"argument [is] that since
resources held in common are not owned and protected by anyone, there is
an inexorable economic logic that dooms them to over-exploitation . . .
Despite its common sense air, what it overlooks is that commoners
themselves were not without common sense. Over time and over space the
users of commons have developed a rich variety of institutions and
community sanctions which have effected restraints and stints upon use .
. . As the old . . . institutions lapsed, so they fed into a vacuum in
which political influence, market forces, and popular assertion
contested with each other without common rules."* [**Customs in
Common**, p. 108fn and p. 107] Colin Ward points to a more recent
example, that of Spain after the victory of Franco:

> *"The water history of Spain demonstrates that the tragedy of the
> commons is not the one identified by Garrett Hardin. Communal control
> developed an elaborate and sophisticated system of fair shares for
> all. The private property recommended by Hardin resulted in the
> selfish individualism that he thought was inevitable with common
> access, or in the lofty indifference of the big landowners."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 27]

So, for a while, Hardin's essay *"was taken to provide an argument for
the privatisation of the commons. It is now a well-developed point that
Hardin's argument is not a tragedy of common ownership at all . . .
Hardin's argument is a problem not of common ownership, but of open
access in a context of private ownership of particular assets."* [John
O'Neill, **Markets, Deliberation and Environment**, p. 54]
Significantly, Hardin later admitted his mistake and noted that *"it is
clear to me that the title of my original contribution should have been
**The Tragedy of the** Unmanaged **Commons** . . . I can understand how
I might have misled others."* [quoted by O'Neill, **Op. Cit.**, p. 199]
But, of course, by then the damage had been done.

There is something quite arrogant about Hardin's assertions, as he
basically assumed that peasant farmers are unable to recognise certain
disaster and change their behaviour accordingly. This, apparently, is
where enlightened elites (governmental and economic) step in. However,
in the real world, small farmers (and others) have created their own
institutions and rules for preserving resources and ensuring that their
community has the resources it needed to survive. Hardin, in other
words, ignored what actually happens in a real commons, namely communal
control and self-regulation by the communities involved who develop the
appropriate communal institutions to do so.

Surely, the very obvious fact that humans have lived in societies with
commons for centuries and did not overuse them disproves Hardin's most
fundamental assumptions. *"If we misunderstand the true nature of the
commons,"* argues scientist Susan Jane Buck Cox *"we also misunderstand
the implications of the demise of the traditional, commons system.
Perhaps what existed in fact was not a 'tragedy of the commons' but
rather a triumph: that for hundreds of years -- and perhaps thousands,
although written records do not exist to prove the longer era -- land
was managed successfully by communities."* This suggests that it is a
case of *"the myth of the tragedy of the commons"*, rooted in an
argument which is *"historically false"* as the *"commons were carefully
and painstakingly regulated."* She points to a wider issue, namely
whether *"our perceptions of the nature of humankind are awry"* for *"it
seems quite likely if 'economic man' had been managing the commons that
tragedy really would have occurred,"* so *"perhaps someone else was
running the common."* [*"No Tragedy on the Commons"*, pp. 49-61,
**Environmental Ethics**, vol. 7, p. 60, p. 53, p. 56 and p. 61]

One economist has noted that the "tragedy of the commons" only makes
sense once the assumption of neo-classical economics are taken for
granted. If we assume atomised individuals accessing unmanaged lands
then Hardin's conclusions automatically flow. However, *"if the property
were **really** common, this would imply the necessary existence of
institutional agreements . . . between the co-owners to establish the
rules for decisions governing the management of the resource. To put it
more clearly, for common property to be truly common property implies
its existence as an institution."* It is precisely these kinds of human
institutions which neo-classical economics ignores and so *"the
so-called 'tragedy of the commons' is more accurately considered 'the
tragedy of a methodological individualism'"*. As many critics note,
there are numerous *"conceptual errors"* contained in the article and
these *"have been repeated systematically by economists."* In summary,
*"the so-called tragedy of the commons has nothing to do with common
property, but with unrestricted and unregulated access."* [F.
Aguilera-Klink, *"Some Notes on the Misuse of Classic Writings in
Economics on the Subject of Common Property"*, pp. 221-8, **Ecological
Economics**, No. 9, p. 223, p. 221, p. 224 and p. 226]

Much the same can be said against those who argue that the experience of
the Stalinism in the Eastern Block and elsewhere shows that public
property leads to pollution and destruction of natural resources. Such
arguments also show a lack of awareness of what common property actually
is (it is no co-incidence that the propertarian-right use such an
argument). This is because the resources in question, as we discussed in
[section B.3.5](secB3.html#secb35), were **not** owned or managed in
common -- the fact that these countries were dictatorships excluded
popular control of resources. Thus Stalinism does not, in fact, show the
dangers of having commons or public ownership. Rather it shows the
danger of not subjecting those who manage a resource to public control
(and it is no co-incidence that the USA is far more polluted than
Western Europe -- in the USA, like in the USSR, the controllers of
resources are not subject to popular control and so pass pollution on to
the public). Stalinism shows the danger of state owned resource use
(nationalisation) rather than commonly owned resource use
(socialisation), particularly when the state in question is not under
even the limited control of its subjects implied in representative
democracy.

This confusion of public and state owned resources has, of course, been
used to justify the stealing of communal property by the rich and the
state. The continued acceptance of this "confusion" in political debate,
like the continued use of Hardin's original and flawed *"Tragedy of the
Commons"*, is due to the utility of the theory for the rich and
powerful, who have a vested interest in undermining pre-capitalist
social forms and stealing communal resources. Most examples used to
justify the *"tragedy of the commons"* are **false** examples, based on
situations in which the underlying social context is assumed to be
radically different from that involved in using true commons.

In reality, the *"tragedy of the commons"* comes about only after wealth
and private property, backed by the state, starts to eat into and
destroy communal life. This is well indicated by the fact that commons
existed for thousands of years and only disappeared after the rise of
capitalism -- and the powerful central state it requires -- had eroded
communal values and traditions. Without the influence of wealth
concentrations and the state, people get together and come to agreements
over how to use communal resources and have been doing so for millennia.
That was how the commons were successfully managed before the wealthy
sought to increase their holdings and deny the poor access to land in
order to make them fully dependent on the power and whims of the owning
class.

Thus, as Kropotkin stressed, the state *"systematically weeded out all
institutions in which the mutual-aid tendency had formerly found its
expression. The village communities were bereft of their folkmotes,
their courts and independent administration; their lands were
confiscated."* [**Mutual Aid**, p. 182] The possibilities of free
discussion and agreement were destroyed in the name of "absolute"
property rights and the power and authority which goes with them. Both
political influence and market forces were, and are, dominated by
wealth: *"There were two occasions that dictated absolute precision: a
trial at law and a process of enclosure. And both occasions favoured
those with power and purses against the little users."* Popular
assertion meant little when the state enforces property rights in the
interests of the wealthy. Ultimately, *"Parliament and law imposed
capitalist definitions to exclusive property in land."* [Thompson, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 134 and p. 163] As Cox suggested, many tenants were *"denied
[their] remedy at law for the illegal abuses of the more powerful
landowners"* and *"[s]ponsored by wealthy landowners, the land reform
was frequently no more than a sophisticated land-grab."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 58 and p. 59] Gerrard Winstanley, the Digger (and proto-anarchist),
was only expressing a widespread popular sentiment when he complained
that *"in Parishes where Commons lie the rich Norman Freeholders, or the
new (more covetous) Gentry overstock the Commons with sheep and cattle,
so that the inferior Tenants and poor labourers can hardly keep a cow
but half starve her."* [quoted by Maurice Dobb, **Studies in the
Development of Capitalism**, p. 173] The working class is only "left
alone" to starve.

As discussed in [section F.8](secF8.html), the enclosures were part of a
wider state-imposition of capitalism onto society. Of course, enclosure
was often justified by supporters of capitalism by the increased
productivity which, they claim, resulted from it (in effect, repeating
Locke's earlier, and flawed, argument -- see [section
B.3.4](secB3.html#secb34)). There are three objections to this. First,
it cannot be assumed that increased productivity could not be achieved
by keeping the commons and by the commoners applying the improved
techniques and technologies that contributed to any post-enclosure
increased productivity. Second, it ignores the key issue of liberty and
replaces it with property (increases in wealth being considered more
important than reducing the freedom of the working class). Third, and
more importantly, this paternalistic rationale for coercion and state
action does not fit well with such apologist's opposition to (certain
forms of) state intervention today (such as taxation or popular land
reform). If the "ends justify the means" (which is what their arguments
boil down to) when applied to the rural working class, then they have
little basis for opposing taxation of the wealthy elite or pro-worker
land-reform in a democracy or a popular social revolution.

To conclude. The "tragedy of the commons" argument is conceptually
flawed and empirically wrong (unsurprising, given that no actual
empirical evidence was presented to support the argument). Sadly, this
has not stopped Hardin, or those inspired by his arguments, from
suggesting policies based on a somewhat dubious understanding of history
and humanity. Perhaps this is not that surprising, given that Hardin's
assumptions (which drive his conclusions) are based not on actual people
nor historical evidence but rather by fundamental components of
capitalist economic theory. While under capitalism, and the
short-termism imposed by market forces, you could easily imagine that a
desire for profit would outweigh a person's interest in the long-term
survival of their community, such a perspective is relatively recent in
human history.

In fact, communal ownership produces a strong incentive to protect such
resources for people are aware that their offspring will need them and
so be inclined to look after them. By having more resources available,
they would be able to resist the pressures of short-termism and so
resist maximising current production without regard for the future.
Capitalist owners have the opposite incentive for, as argued in [section
E.3](secE3.html), unless they maximise short-term profits then they will
not be around in the long-term (so if wood means more profits than
centuries-old forests then the trees will be chopped down). By combining
common ownership with decentralised and federated communal
self-management, anarchism will be more than able to manage resources
effectively, avoiding the pitfalls of both privatisation and
nationalisation.

I.6.1 How can property *"owned by everyone in the world"* be used?
------------------------------------------------------------------

First, we need to point out the fallacy normally lying behind this
objection. It is assumed that because everyone owns something, then
everyone has to be consulted in what it is used for. This, however,
applies the logic of private property to non-capitalist social forms.
While it is true that everyone owns collective "property" in an
anarchist society, it does not mean that everyone **uses** it. Carlo
Cafiero, one of the founders of communist-anarchism, stated the obvious:

> *"The common wealth being scattered right across the planet, while
> belonging by right to the whole of humanity, those who happen to be
> within reach of that wealth and in a position to make use of it will
> utilise it in common. The folk from a given country will use the land,
> the machines, the workshops, the houses, etc., of that country and
> they will all make common use of them. As part of humanity, they will
> exercise here, in fact and directly, their rights over a portion of
> mankind's wealth. But should an inhabitant of Peking visit this
> country, he [or she] would enjoy the same rights as the rest: in
> common with the others, he would enjoy all the wealth of the country,
> just as he [or she] would have in Peking."* [**No Gods, No Masters**,
> vol. 1, p. 250]

Anarchists, therefore, think that those who **use** a part of society's
wealth have the most say in what happens to it (e.g., workers control
the means of production they use and the work they do when using it).
This does not mean that those using it can do what they like to it.
Users would be subject to recall by local communities if they are
abusing their position (for example, if a workplace were polluting the
environment, then the local community could act to stop or, if need be,
close down the workplace). Thus use rights (or usufruct) replace
property rights in a free society, combined with a strong dose of
*"think globally, act locally."*

It is no coincidence that societies that are stateless are also without
private property. As Murray Bookchin pointed out *"an individual
appropriation of goods, a personal claim to tools, land, and other
resources . . . is fairly common in organic [i.e. aboriginal] societies
. . . By the same token, co-operative work and the sharing of resources
on a scale that could be called communistic is also fairly common . . .
But primary to both of these seemingly contrasting relationships is the
practice of **usufruct.**"* Such stateless societies are based upon
*"the principle of **usufruct**, the freedom of individuals in a
community to appropriate resources merely by the virtue of the fact they
are using them . . . Such resources belong to the user as long as they
are being used. Function, in effect, replaces our hallowed concept of
possession."* [**The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 116] The future stateless
society anarchists hope for would also be based upon such a principle.

In effect, critics of social anarchism confuse property with possession
and think that abolishing property automatically abolishes possession
and use rights. However, as argued in [section B.3](secB3.html),
property and possession are distinctly different. In the words of
Charlotte Wilson:

> *"**Property** is the **domination** of an individual, or a coalition
> of individuals, over things; it is not the claim of any person or
> persons to the use of things -- this is, usufruct, a very different
> matter. Property means the monopoly of wealth, the right to prevent
> others using it, whether the owner needs it or not. Usufruct implies
> the claim to the use of such wealth as supplies the users needs. If
> any individual shuts of a portion of it (which he is not using, and
> does not need for his own use) from his fellows, he is defrauding the
> whole community."* [**Anarchist Essays**, p. 40]

Thus an anarchist society has a simple and effective means of deciding
how communally owned resources are used, one based on possession and
usufruct. The key thing to remember, as discussed in [section
I.3.3](secI3.html#seci33), is that socialisation means that **access**
is free: users of a resource are not subjected to hierarchical social
relationships in order to use it. Socialisation does not mean that
people can, say, wander into someone's workplace and simply take away a
machine or computer. Rather, it means that when someone joins a
workplace they are sharing in the use of a common resource and do so as
a free and equal associate rather than as an obedient wage-slave. If a
resource is not being used, then they have free access to use it. If it
is being used then it will be managed by those who use it, with access
granted in agreed ways which ensure egalitarian, and so free,
relationships and outcomes.

As for deciding what a given area of commons is used for, that falls to
the local communities who live next to them. If, for example, a local
self-managed factory wants to expand and eat into the commons, then the
local community who uses (and so controls) the local commons would
discuss it and come to an agreement concerning it. If a minority
**really** objects, they can use direct action to put their point
across. But anarchists argue that rational debate among equals will not
result in too much of that. Or suppose an individual wanted to set up an
allotment in a given area, which had not been allocated as a park. Then
he or she would notify the community assembly by appropriate means (e.g.
on a notice board or newspaper), and if no one objected at the next
assembly or in a set time-span, the allotment would go ahead, as no one
else desired to use the resource in question.

Other communities would be confederated with this one, and joint
activity would also be discussed by debate, with a community (like an
individual) being free **not** to associate if they so desire. Other
communities could and would object to ecologically and individually
destructive practices. The interrelationships of both ecosystems and
freedom is well known, and its doubtful that free individuals would sit
back and let some amongst them destroy **their** planet.

Therefore, those who use something control it. This means that "users
groups" would be created to manage resources used by more than one
person. For workplaces this would (essentially) be those who worked
there (with, possibly, the input of consumer groups and co-operatives).
Housing associations made up of tenants would manage housing and
repairs. Resources that are used by associations within society, such as
communally owned schools, workshops, computer networks, and so forth,
would be managed on a day-to-day basis by those who use them. User
groups would decide access rules (for example, time-tables and booking
rules) and how they are used, making repairs and improvements. Such
groups would be accountable to their local community. Hence, if that
community thought that any activities by a group within it was
destroying communal resources or restricting access to them, the matter
would be discussed at the relevant assembly. In this way, interested
parties manage their own activities and the resources they use (and so
would be very likely to have an interest in ensuring their proper and
effective use), but without private property and its resulting
hierarchies and restrictions on freedom.

Lastly, let us examine clashes of use rights, i.e. cases where two or
more people, communes or syndicates desire to use the same resource. In
general, such problems can be resolved by discussion and decision making
by those involved. This process would be roughly as follows: if the
contesting parties are reasonable, they would probably mutually agree to
allow their dispute to be settled by some mutual friend whose judgement
they could trust, or they would place it in the hands of a jury,
randomly selected from the community or communities in question. This
would take place only if they could not come to an agreement between
themselves to share the resource in question.

On thing is certain, however, such disputes are much better settled
without the interference of authority or the re-creation of private
property. If those involved do not take the sane course described above
and instead decide to set up an authority, disaster will be the
inevitable result. In the first place, this authority will have to be
given power to enforce its judgement in such matters. If this happens,
the new authority will undoubtedly keep for itself the best of what is
disputed (as payment for services rendered, of course!). If private
property were re-introduced, such authoritarian bodies would develop
sooner, rather than later, with two new classes of oppressors being
created -- the property owners and the enforcers of "justice."
Ultimately, it is strange to think that two parties who meet on terms of
equality and disagree could not be reasonable or just, and that a third
party with power backed up by violence will be the incarnation of
justice itself. Common sense should warn us against such an illusion
and, if common sense is lacking, then history shows that using authority
or property to solve disputes is not wise!

And, we should note, it is equally as fallacious, as Leninists suggest,
that only centralisation can ensure common access and common use.
Centralisation, by removing control from the users into a body claiming
to represent "society", replaces the dangers of abuse by a small group
of workers with the dangers of abuse by a bureaucracy invested with
power and authority over **all**. If members of a commune or syndicate
can abuse their position and restrict access for their own benefit, so
can the individuals who make up the bureaucracy gathered round a
centralised body (whether that body is, in theory, accountable by
election or not). Indeed, it is far more likely to occur as the
experience of Leninism shows beyond doubt. Thus **decentralisation** is
the key to common ownership and access, **not** centralisation.

Communal ownership needs communal structures in order to function. Use
rights, and discussion among equals, replace property rights in a free
society. Freedom cannot survive if it is caged behind laws enforced by
public or private states.

I.6.2 Doesn't communal ownership involve restricting individual liberty?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This point is expressed in many different forms. John Henry MacKay (an
individualist anarchist) put the point as follows:

> *"'Would you [the social anarchist], in the system of society which
> you call 'free Communism' prevent individuals from exchanging their
> labour among themselves by means of their own medium of exchange? And
> further: Would you prevent them from occupying land for the purpose of
> personal use?' . . . [The] question was not to be escaped. If he
> answered 'Yes!' he admitted that society had the right of control over
> the individual and threw overboard the autonomy of the individual
> which he had always zealously defended; if on the other hand he
> answered 'No!' he admitted the right of private property which he had
> just denied so emphatically."* [**Patterns of Anarchy**, p. 31]

However, anarchist theory has a simple and clear answer to this
question. To see what this answer is, it simply a case of remembering
that use rights replace property rights in an anarchist society. In
other words, individuals can exchange their labour as they see fit and
occupy land for their own use. This in no way contradicts the abolition
of private property, because occupancy and use is directly opposed to
private property (see [section B.3](secB3.html)). Socialisation is
rooted in this concept of *"occupancy and use"* and this means that in a
free communist society individuals can occupy and use whatever land and
such tools and equipment as they need -- they do not have to join the
free communist society (see [section I.5.7](secI5.html#seci57)). If they
do not, however, they cannot place claims on the benefits others receive
from co-operation and communal life.

This can be seen from Charlotte Wilson's discussions on anarchism
written a few years before MacKay published his *"inescapable"*
question. She asks the question: *"Does Anarchism . . . then . . .
acknowledge . . . no personal property?"* She answers by noting that
*"every man [or woman] is free to take what he [or she] requires"* and
so *"it is hardly conceivable that personal necessaries and conveniences
will not be appropriated"* by individual's for their personal
consumption and use. For *"[w]hen property is protected by no legal
enactments, backed by armed force, and is unable to buy personal
service, its resuscitation on such a scale as to be dangerous to society
is little to be dreaded. The amount appropriated by each individual . .
. must be left to his [or her] own conscience, and the pressure
exercised upon him [or her] by the moral sense and distinct interests of
his [or her] neighbours."* This system of *"usufruct"* would also apply
to the *"instruments of production -- land included"*, being *"free to
all workers, or groups of workers"* for *"as long as long and capital
are unappropriated, the workers are free, and that, when these have a
master, the workers also are slaves."* [**Anarchist Essays**, p. 24 and
p. 21] This is because, as with all forms of anarchism,
communist-anarchism bases itself on the distinction between property and
possession.

In other words, **possession** replaces private property in a free
society. This applies to those who decide to join a free communist
society and those who desire to remain outside. This is clear from the
works of many leading theorists of free communism (as indicated in
[section G.2.1](secG2.html#secg21)), none of whom thought the occupying
of land for personal use (or a house or the means of production)
entailed the *"right of private property."* For example, looking at land
we find both Kropotkin and Proudhon arguing along the same lines. For
the former: *"Who, then, can appropriate for himself the tiniest plot of
ground . . . without committing a flagrant injustice?"* [**Conquest of
Bread**, p. 90] For the latter: *"The land cannot be appropriated"*.
Neither denied that individuals could **use** the land or other
resources, simply that it could not be turned into private property.
Thus Proudhon: *"Every occupant is, then, necessarily a possessor or
usufructuary, -- a function that excludes proprietorship."* [**What is
Property?**, p. 103 and p. 98] Obviously John Henry MacKay, unlike
Kropotkin, had not read his Proudhon! As Wilson argued:

> *"Proudhon's famous dictum, 'Property is theft', is the key to the
> equally famous enigma . . . 'From each according to his capacities, to
> each according to his needs'. When the workers clearly understand that
> in taking possession of railways and ships, mines and fields, farm
> buildings and factories, raw material and machinery, and all else they
> need for their labour, they are claiming the right to use freely for
> the benefit of society, what social labour has created, or utilised in
> the past, and that, in return for their work, they have a just right
> to take from the finished product whatever they personally require."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 20-1]

This can be seen from libertarian communist William Morris and his
account of Proudhon. Morris classed the French anarchist as *"the most
noteworthy figure"* of a group of *"Socialist thinkers who serve as a
kind of link between the Utopians and the school of . . . scientific
Socialists."* As far as his critique of property went, Morris argued
that in **What is Property?** Proudhon's *"position is that of a
Communist pure and simple."* [**Political Writings**, p. 569 and p. 570]

Unsurprisingly, then, we find Kropotkin arguing that *"[a]ll things
belong to all, and provided that men and women contribute their share of
labour for the production of necessary objects, they are entitled to
their share of all that is produced by the community at large."* He went
on to state that *"free Communism . . . places the products reaped or
manufactured in common at the disposal of all, leaving to each the
liberty to consume them as he [or she] pleases in his [or her] own
home."* [**The Place of Anarchism in Socialistic Evolution,**, p. 6 and
p. 7] This obviously implies a situation of *"occupancy and use"* (with
those who are actually using a resource controlling it).

This support for possession does not, of course, imply any contradiction
with communism as MacKay suggested. The aim of communism is to place the
fruits of society at the disposal of society, to be used and consumed as
the members of that society desire. As such, individuals are **not**
stopped from taking and using the goods produced and, obviously, this
automatically means "excluding" others from using and consuming them.
This in no way implies the recreation of private property in any
meaningful sense. Significantly, this perspective has been pretty
commonplace in human society and numerous authors have pointed out *"how
many languages lack any verb for unilateral ownership."* [David Graeber,
**Possibilities**, p. 23]

For example, a group of friends go on a picnic and share the food stuffs
they bring. If someone takes an apple from the common bounty and eats
it, then obviously it is no longer available for others to eat. However,
this does not change the common ownership of foodstuffs the picnic is
based on. Similarly, in a communist society people would still have
their own homes and, of course, would have the right to restrict entry
to just those whom they have invited. People would not come in from the
street and take up residence in the main bedroom on the dubious
rationale that it is not being used as the inhabitant is watching TV in
the lounge, is on holiday or visiting friends.

Thus communism is based on the obvious fact that individuals will
"appropriate" (use) the products of society to satisfy their own needs
(assuming they can find someone who needs to produce it). What it does,
though, is to deprive individuals of the ability to turn possession into
private property and, as a result, subjugate others to their will by
means of wage labour or landlordism.

In other words, possession (personal "property") is not transformed into
social property. Hence the communist support for individuals **not**
joining the commune, working their land or tools and living by their own
hands. Being based on **possession**, this is utterly compatible with
communist principles and the abolition of private property. This is
because people are **using** the resources in question and for that
simple reason are exercising the same rights as the rest of communist
society. Thus the case of the non-member of free communism is clear --
they would also have access to what they possessed and used such as the
land, housing and means of production. The difference is that the
non-communists would have to barter with the rest of society for goods
rather than take what they need from the communal stores.

To re-iterate, the resources non-communists use do **not** become
private property because they are being used and they revert back into
common ownership once they are no longer occupied and used. In other
words, **possession** replaces **property.** Thus communist-anarchists
agree with Individualist Anarchist John Beverley Robinson when he wrote:

> *"There are two kinds of land ownership, proprietorship or property,
> by which the owner is absolute lord of the land to use it or hold it
> out of use, as it may please him; and possession, by which he is
> secure in the tenure of land which he uses and occupies, but has no
> claim on it at all if he ceases to use it. For the secure possession
> of his crops or buildings or other products, he needs nothing but the
> possession of the land he uses."* [**Patterns of Anarchy**, p. 273]

This system, we must note, was used in the rural collectives during the
Spanish Revolution, with people free to remain outside the collective
working only as much land and equipment as they could *"occupy and use"*
by their own labour. Similarly, the individuals within the collective
worked in common and took what they needed from the communal stores (see
[section I.8](secI8.html)).

MacKay's comments raise another interesting point. Given that
Individualist Anarchists oppose the current system of private property
in land, **their** system entails that *"society ha[s] the right of
control over the individual."* If we look at the *"occupancy and use"*
land system favoured by the likes of Tucker, we discover that it is
based on restricting property in land (and so the owners of land). As
discussed in [section G.1.2](secG1.html#secg12), the likes of Tucker
looked forward to a time when public opinion (i.e., society) would limit
the amount of land which individuals could acquire and so, from MacKay's
perspective, controlling their actions and violating their autonomy.
Which, we must say, is not surprising as individualism requires the
supremacy of the rest of society over the individual in terms of rules
relating to the ownership and use of possessions (or "property") -- as
the Individualist Anarchists themselves implicitly acknowledge.

MacKay goes on to state that *"every serious man must declare himself:
for Socialism, and thereby for force and against liberty, or for
Anarchism, and thereby for liberty and against force."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 32] Which, we must note, is a strange statement for, as indicated in
[section G.1](secG1.html), individualist anarchists like Benjamin Tucker
considered themselves socialists and opposed capitalist private property
(while, confusingly, many of them calling their system of possession
"property").

However, MacKay's statement begs the question: does private property
support liberty? He does not address or even acknowledge the fact that
private property will inevitably lead to the owners of such property
gaining control over the individuals who use, but do not own, it and so
denying them liberty (see [section B.4](secB4.html)). As Proudhon
argued:

> *"The purchaser draws boundaries, fences himself in, and says, 'This
> is mine; each one by himself, each one for himself.' Here, then, is a
> piece of land upon which, henceforth, no one has right to step, save
> the proprietor and his friends; which can benefit nobody, save the
> proprietor and his servants. Let these multiply, and soon the people .
> . . will have nowhere to rest, no place of shelter, no ground to till.
> They will die of hunger at the proprietor's door, on the edge of that
> property which was their birth-right; and the proprietor, watching
> them die, will exclaim, 'So perish idlers and vagrants.'"* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 118]

Of course, as Proudhon suggested, the non-owner can gain access to the
property by becoming a servant, by selling their liberty to the owner
and agreeing to submit to the owner's authority. Little wonder that he
argued that the *"second effect of property is despotism."* [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 259] As discussed in [section G.4.1](secG4.html#secg41), this
points to a massive contradiction in any form of individualist anarchism
which defends private property which goes beyond possession and
generates wage-labour. This is because both the state and the property
owner **both** assume sole authority over a given area and all within
it. Little wonder Emile Pouget, echoing Proudhon, argued that:

> *"Property and authority are merely differing manifestations and
> expressions of one and the same 'principle' which boils down to the
> enforcement and enshrinement of the servitude of man. Consequently,
> the only difference between them is one of vantage point: viewed from
> one angle, slavery appears as a **property crime**, whereas, viewed
> from a different angle, it constitutes an **authority crime.**"* [**No
> Gods, No Masters**, vol. 2, p. 66]

So the issue changes if someone claims more resources than they can use
as individuals or as a co-operative group. If they are attempting to
restrict access to others of resources they are not using then the
others are entitled to simply ignore the pretensions of the would-be
monopoliser. Without a state to enforce capitalist property rights,
attempts to recreate private property will flounder in the laughter of
their neighbours as these free people defend their liberty by ignoring
the would-be capitalist's attempts to subjugate the labour of others for
their own benefit by monopolising the means of life. Unsurprisingly,
MacKay does not address the fact that private property requires
extensive force (i.e. a state) to protect it against those who use it or
could use it but do not own it.

So MacKay ignores two important aspects of private property. Firstly,
that private property is based upon force, which must be used to ensure
the owner's right to exclude others (the main reason for the existence
of the state). And secondly, he ignores the anti-libertarian nature of
"property" when it creates wage labour -- the other side of "private
property" -- in which the liberty of employees is obviously restricted
by the owners whose property they are hired to use. Unlike in a free
communist society, in which members of a commune have equal rights,
power and say within a self-managed association, under "private
property" the owner of the property governs those who use it. When the
owner and the user is identical, this is not a problem (i.e. when
possession replaces property) but once possession becomes property then
despotism, as Proudhon noted, is created. As Charlotte Wilson put it:

> *"Property -- not the claim to use, but to a right to prevent others
> from using -- enables individuals who have appropriated the means of
> production, to hold in subjection all those who possess nothing . . .
> and who must work that they may live. No work is possible without
> land, materials, and tools or machinery; thus the masters of those
> things are the masters also of the destitute workers, and can live in
> idleness upon their labour. . . We look for th[e] socialisation of
> wealth, not to restraints imposed by authority upon property, but to
> the removal, by direct personal action of the people themselves, of
> the restraints which secure property against the claims of popular
> justice. For authority and property are both manifestations of the
> egoistical spirit of domination".* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 57-8]

Therefore, it seems that in the name of "liberty" John Henry MacKay and
a host of other "individualists" end up supporting authority and
(effectively) some kind of state. This is hardly surprising as private
property is the opposite of personal possession, not its base. In
summary, then, far from communal property restricting individual liberty
(or even personal use of resources) it is in fact its only defence. That
is why all anarchists would agree with Emma Goldman that *"it is our
endeavour to abolish private property, State . . . we aim to free men
from tyrants and government."* [**A Documentary History of the American
Years**, vol. 1, p. 181]
