I.2 Is this a blueprint for an anarchist society?
=================================================

No, far from it. There can be no such thing as a "blueprint" for a free
society. *"Anarchism"*, as Rocker correctly stressed, *"is no patent
solution for all human problems, no Utopia of a perfect social order, as
it has so often been called, since on principle it rejects all absolute
schemes and concepts. It does not believe in any absolute truth, or in
definite final goals for human development, but in an unlimited
perfectibility of social arrangements and human living conditions, which
are always straining after higher forms of expression, and to which for
this reason one can assign no definite terminus nor set any fixed
goal."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 15]

All we can do here is indicate those general features that we believe a
free society **must** have in order to qualify as truly libertarian. For
example, a society based on hierarchical management in the workplace
(like capitalism) would not be libertarian and would soon see private or
public states developing to protect the power of those at the top
hierarchical positions. Beyond such general considerations, however, the
specifics of how to structure a non-hierarchical society must remain
open for discussion and experimentation:

> *"Anarchism, meaning Liberty, is compatible with the most diverse
> economic [and social] conditions, on the premise that these cannot
> imply, as under capitalist monopoly, the negation of liberty."* [D. A.
> de Santillan, **After the Revolution**, p. 95]

So, our comments should not be regarded as a detailed plan but rather a
series of suggestions based on what anarchists have traditionally
advocated as an alternative to capitalism combined with what has been
tried in various social revolutions. Anarchists have always been
reticent about spelling out their vision of the future in too much
detail for it would be contrary to anarchist principles to be dogmatic
about the precise forms the new society must take. Free people will
create their own alternative institutions in response to conditions
specific to their area as well as their needs, desires and hopes and it
would be presumptuous of us to attempt to set forth universal policies
in advance. As Kropotkin argued, once expropriation of social wealth by
the masses has been achieved *"then, after a period of groping, there
will necessarily arise a new system of organising production and
exchange . . . and that system will be a lot more attuned to popular
aspirations and the requirements of co-existence and mutual relations
than any theory, however splendid, devised by the thinking and
imagination of reformers"*. This, however, did not stop him *"predicting
right now that"* in some areas influenced by anarchists *"the
foundations of the new organisation will be the free federation of
producers' groups and the free federation of Communes and groups in
independent Communes."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 232]

This is because what we think now will influence the future just as real
experience will influence and change how we think. Given the libertarian
critique of the state and capitalism, certain kinds of social
organisation are implied. Thus, our recognition that wage-labour creates
authoritarian social relationships and exploitation suggests a workplace
in a free society can only be based on associated and co-operative
labour (i.e., self-management). Similarly, given that the state is a
centralised body which delegates power upwards it is not hard to imagine
that a free society would have communal institutions which were federal
and organised from the bottom-up.

Moreover, given the ways in which our own unfree society has shaped our
ways of thinking, it is probably impossible for us to imagine what new
forms will arise once humanity's ingenuity and creativity is unleashed
by the removal of its present authoritarian fetters. Thus any attempts
to paint a detailed picture of the future will be doomed to failure.
Ultimately, anarchists think that *"the new society should be organised
with the direct participation of all concerned, from the periphery to
the centre, freely and spontaneously, at the prompting of the sentiment
of solidarity and under pressure of the natural needs of society."* [E.
Malatesta and A. Hamon, **Op. Cit.**, vol. 2, p. 20]

Nevertheless, anarchists have been willing to specify some broad
principles indicating the general framework within which they expect the
institutions of the new society to grow. It is important to emphasise
that these principles are not the arbitrary creations of intellectuals
in ivory towers. Rather, they are based on the actual political, social
and economic structures that have arisen **spontaneously** whenever
working class people have attempted to throw off their chains during
eras of heightened revolutionary activity, such as the Paris Commune,
the Russian Revolution, the Spanish Revolution, and the Hungarian
uprising of 1956, France in 1968, the Argentinean revolt against
neo-liberalism in 2001, to name just a few. It is clear, from these
examples, that federations of self-managed workers' councils and
community assemblies appear repeatedly in such popular revolts as people
attempt to manage their own destinies directly, both economically and
socially. While their names and specific organisational structures
differ, these can be considered basic libertarian socialist forms, since
they have appeared during all revolutionary periods. Ultimately, such
organisations are the only alternatives to political, social and
economic authority -- unless we make our own decisions ourselves,
someone else will.

So, when reading these sections, please remember that this is just an
attempt to sketch the outline of a possible future. It is in no way an
attempt to determine **exactly** what a free society would be like, for
such a free society will be the result of the actions of all of society,
not just anarchists. As Malatesta argued:

> *"it is a question of freedom for everybody, freedom for each
> individual so long as he [or she] respects the equal freedom of
> others."*

> *"None can judge with certainty who is right and who is wrong, who is
> nearest to the truth, or which is the best way to achieve the greatest
> good for each and everyone. Freedom, coupled by experience, is the
> only way of discovering the truth and what is best; and there is no
> freedom if there is a denial of the freedom to err."* [**Errico
> Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 49]

And, of course, real life has a habit of over-turning even the most
realistic sounding theories, ideas and ideologies. Marxism, Leninism,
Monetarism, laissez-faire capitalism (among others) have proven time and
time again that ideology applied to real life has effects not predicted
by the theory before hand (although in all four cases, their negative
effects where predicted by others; in the case of Marxism and Leninism
by anarchists). Anarchists are aware of this, which is why we reject
ideology in favour of theory and why we are hesitant to create
blue-prints for the future. History has repeatedly proven Proudhon right
when he stated that *"every society declines the moment it falls into
the hands of the ideologists."* [**System of Economical
Contradictions**, p. 115]

Only life, as Bakunin stressed, can create and so life must inform
theory -- and so if the theory is producing adverse results it is better
to revise the theory than deny reality or justify the evil effects it
creates on real people. Thus this section of the FAQ is not a blue
print, rather it is a series of suggestions (suggestions drawn, we
stress, from actual experiences of working class revolt and
organisation). These suggestions may be right or wrong and informed by
Malatesta's comments that:

> *"We do not boast that we possess absolute truth, on the contrary, we
> believe that **social truth** is not a fixed quantity, good for all
> times, universally applicable or determinable in advance, but that
> instead, once freedom has been secured, mankind will go forward
> discovering and acting gradually with the least number of upheavals
> and with a minimum of friction. Thus our solutions always leave the
> door open to different and, one hopes, better solutions."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p.21]

It is for this reason that anarchists, to quote Bakunin, think that the
*"revolution should not only be made for the people's sake; it should
also be made by the people."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 141]
Social problems will be solved in the interests of the working class
only if working class people solve them themselves. This applies to a
social revolution -- it will only liberate the working class if working
class people make it themselves, using their own organisations and
power. Indeed, it is the course of struggling for social change, to
correct social problems, by, say, strikes, occupations, demonstrations
and other forms of direct action, that people can transform their
assumptions about what is possible, necessary and desirable. The
necessity of organising their struggles and their actions ensures the
development of assemblies and other organs of popular power in order to
manage their activity. These create, potentially, an alternative means
by which society can be organised. As Kropotkin argued, *"[a]ny strike
trains the participants for a common management of affairs."* [quoted by
Caroline Cahm, **Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism**, p.
233] The ability of people to manage their own lives, and so society,
becomes increasingly apparent and the existence of hierarchical
authority, the state, the boss or a ruling class, becomes clearly
undesirable and unnecessary. Thus the framework of the free society will
be created by the very process of class struggle, as working class
people create the organisations required to fight for improvements and
change within capitalism (see [section I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23)).

Thus, the **actual** framework of an anarchist society and how it
develops and shapes itself is dependent on the needs and desires of
those who live in such a society or are trying to create one. This is
why anarchists stress the need for mass assemblies in both the community
and workplace and their federation from the bottom up to manage common
affairs. Anarchy can only be created by the active participation of the
mass of people. In the words of Malatesta, an anarchist society would be
based on *"decisions taken at popular assemblies and carried out by
groups and individuals who have volunteered or are duly delegated."* The
*"success of the revolution"* depends on *"a large number of individuals
with initiative and the ability to tackle practical tasks: by
accustoming the masses not to leave the common cause in the hands of a
few, and to delegate, when delegation is necessary, only for specific
missions and for limited duration."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 129] This
self-management would be the basis on which an anarchist society would
change and develop, with the new society created by those who live
within it. Thus Bakunin:

> *"revolution everywhere must be created by the people, and supreme
> control must always belong to people organised into a free federation
> of agricultural and industrial associations . . . organised from the
> bottom upwards by means of revolutionary delegation."* [**Michael
> Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 172]

And, we must not forget that while we may be able to roughly guess the
way an anarchist society could start initially, we cannot pretend to
predict how it will develop in the long term. A social revolution is
just the beginning of a process of social transformation. Unfortunately,
we have to start where we are now, not where we hope to end up!
Therefore our discussion will, by necessity, reflect the current society
as this is the society we will be transforming. While, for some, this
outlook may not be of a sufficient qualitative break with the world we
now inhabit, it is essential. We need to offer and discuss suggestions
for action in the **here and now**, not for some future pie in the sky
world which can only possibly exist years, even decades, **after** a
successful revolution.

For example, the ultimate goal of anarchism, we stress, is **not** the
self-management of existing workplaces or industries within the same
industrial structure produced by capitalism. However, a revolution will
undoubtedly see the occupation and placing under self-management much of
existing industry and we start our discussion assuming a similar set-up
as exists today. This does not mean that an anarchist society will
continue to be like this, we simply present the initial stages using
examples we are all familiar with. It is simply the first stage of
transforming industry into something more ecologically safe, socially
integrated and individually and collectively empowering for people.

Some people **seriously** seem to think that after a social revolution
working people will continue using the same technology, in the same old
workplaces, in the same old ways and not change a single thing (except,
perhaps, electing their managers). They simply transfer their own lack
of imagination onto the rest of humanity. For anarchists, it is
*"certain, however, that, when they [the workers] find themselves their
own masters, they will modify the old system to suit their convenience
in a variety of ways . . . as common sense is likely to suggest to free
men [and women]."* [Charlotte M. Wilson, **Anarchist Essays**, p. 23] So
we have little doubt that working people will quickly transform their
work, workplaces and society into one suitable for human beings,
rejecting the legacy of capitalism and create a society we simply cannot
predict. The occupying of workplaces is, we stress, simply the first
stage of the process of transforming them and the rest of society. These
words of the strikers just before the 1919 Seattle General Strike
expresses this perspective well:

> "Labour will not only SHUT DOWN the industries, but Labour will
> REOPEN, under the management of the appropriate trades, such
> activities as are needed to preserve public health and public peace.
> If the strike continues, Labour may feel led to avoid public suffering
> by reopening more and more activities,
>
> "UNDER ITS OWN MANAGEMENT.
>
> "And that is why we say that we are starting on a road that leads --
> NO ONE KNOWS WHERE!" [quoted by Jeremy Brecher, **Strike!**, p. 110]

People's lives in a post-revolutionary society will not centre around
fixed jobs and workplaces as they do now. Productive activity will go
on, but not in the alienated way it does today. Similarly, in their
communities people will apply their imaginations, skills and hopes to
transform them into better places to live (the beautification of the
commune, as the CNT put it). The first stage, of course, will be to take
over their existing communities and place them under community control.
Therefore, it is essential to remember that our discussion can only
provide an indication on how an anarchist society will operate in the
months and years after a successful revolution, an anarchist society
still marked by the legacy of capitalism. However, it would be a great
mistake to think that anarchists do not seek to transform all aspects of
society to eliminate that legacy and create a society fit for unique
individuals to live in. As an anarchist society develops it will, we
stress, transform society in ways we cannot guess at now, based on the
talents, hopes, dreams and imaginations of those living in it.

Lastly, it could be argued that we spend too much time discussing the
*"form"* (i.e. the types of organisation and how they make decisions)
rather than the *"content"* of an anarchist society (the nature of the
decisions reached). Moreover, the implication of this distinction also
extends to the organisations created in the class struggle that would,
in all likelihood, become the framework of a free society. However, form
is as, perhaps more, important than content. This is because *"form"*
and *"content"* are inter-related -- a libertarian, participatory
*"form"* of organisation allows the *"content"* of a decision, society
or struggle to change. Self-management has an educational effect on
those involved, as they are made aware of different ideas, think about
them and decide between them (and, of course, formulate and present
their own ones). Thus the nature of these decisions can and will evolve.
Thus form has a decisive impact on *"content"* and so we make no
apologies for discussing the form of a free society. As Murray Bookchin
argued:

> *"To assume that the forms of freedom can be treated merely as forms
> would be as absurd as to assume that legal concepts can be treated
> merely as questions of jurisprudence. The form and content of freedom,
> like law and society, are mutually determined. By the same token,
> there are forms of organisation that promote and forms that vitiate
> the goal of freedom . . . To one degree or another, these forms either
> alter the individual who uses them or inhibit his [or her] further
> development."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 89]

And the **content** of decisions are determined by the individuals
involved. Thus participatory, decentralised, self-managed organisations
are essential for the development of the content of decisions because
they develop the individuals who make them.

I.2.1 Why discuss what an anarchist society would be like at all?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Partly, in order to indicate why people should become anarchists. Most
people do not like making jumps in the dark, so an indication of what
anarchists think a desirable society could look like may help those
people who are attracted to anarchism, inspiring them to become
committed to its practical realisation. Partly, it's a case of learning
from past mistakes. There have been numerous anarchistic social
experiments on varying scales, and its useful to understand what
happened, what worked and what did not. In that way, hopefully, we will
not make the same mistakes twice.

However, the most important reason for discussing what an anarchist
society would look like is to ensure that the creation of such a society
is the action of as many people as possible. As Errico Malatesta
indicated in the middle of the Italian revolutionary *"Two Red Years"*
(see [section A.5.5](secA5.html#seca55)), *"either we all apply our
minds to thinking about social reorganisation, and right away, at the
very same moment that the old structures are being swept away, and we
shall have a more humane and more just society, open to future advances,
or we shall leave such matters to the 'leaders' and we shall have a new
government."* [**The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 69]

Hence the importance of discussing what the future will be like in the
here and now. The more people who have a fairly clear idea of what a
free society would look like the easier it will be to create that
society and ensure that no important matters are left to others to
decide for us. The example of the Spanish Revolution comes to mind. For
many years before 1936, the C.N.T. and F.A.I. put out publications
discussing what an anarchist society would look like (for example,
**After the Revolution** by Diego Abel de Santillan and **Libertarian
Communism** by Isaac Puente), the end product of libertarians organising
and educating in Spain for almost seventy years before the revolution.
When it finally occurred, the millions of people who participated
already shared a similar vision and started to build a society based on
it, thus learning firsthand where their books were wrong and which areas
of life they did not adequately cover.

So, this discussion of what an anarchist society might look like is not
a drawing up of blueprints, nor is it an attempt to force the future
into the shapes created in past revolts. It is purely and simply an
attempt to start people discussing what a free society would be like and
to learn from previous experiments. However, as anarchists recognise the
importance of building the new world in the shell of the old, our ideas
of what a free society would be like can feed into how we organise and
struggle today. And vice versa; for how we organise and struggle today
will have an impact on the future.

As Malatesta pointed out, such discussions are necessary and essential,
for it is *"absurd to believe that, once government has been destroyed
and the capitalists expropriated, 'things will look after themselves'
without the intervention of those who already have an idea on what has
to be done and who immediately set about doing it"* for *"social life,
as the life of individuals, does not permit of interruption."* He
stressed that to *"neglect all the problems of reconstruction or to
pre-arrange complete and uniform plans are both errors, excesses which,
by different routes, would led to our defeat as anarchists and to the
victory of new or old authoritarian regime. The truth lies in the
middle."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 121]

Moreover, the importance of discussing the future can help indicate
whether our activities are actually creating a better world. After all,
if Karl Marx had been more willing to discuss his vision of a socialist
society then the Stalinists would have found it much harder to claim
that their hellish system was, in fact, socialism. Given that anarchists
like Proudhon and Bakunin gave a board outline of their vision of a free
society it would have been impossible for anarchism to be twisted as
Marxism was. Most anarchists would agree with Chomsky's evaluation of
the issue:

> "A movement of the left should distinguish with clarity between its
> long-range revolutionary aims and certain more immediate effects it
> can hope to achieve . . .

> "But in the long run, a movement of the left has no chance of success,
> and deserves none, unless it develops an understanding of contemporary
> society and a vision of a future social order that is persuasive to a
> large majority of the population. Its goals and organisational forms
> must take shape through their active participation in political
> struggle [in its widest sense] and social reconstruction. A genuine
> radical culture can be created only through the spiritual
> transformation of great masses of people the essential feature of any
> social revolution that is to extend the possibilities for human
> creativity and freedom . . . The cultural and intellectual level of
> any serious radical movement will have to be far higher than in the
> past . . . It will not be able to satisfy itself with a litany of
> forms of oppression and injustice. It will need to provide compelling
> answers to the question of how these evils can be overcome by
> revolution or large-scale reform. To accomplish this aim, the left
> will have to achieve and maintain a position of honesty and commitment
> to libertarian values." [**Radical Priorities**, pp. 189-90]

We hope that this section of the FAQ, in its own small way, will
encourage as many people as possible to discuss what a libertarian
society would be like and use that discussion to bring it closer.

I.2.2 Will it be possible to go straight to an anarchist society from capitalism?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Possibly, it depends what is meant by an anarchist society.

If it is meant a fully classless society (what some people,
inaccurately, would call a "utopia") then the answer is a clear *"no,
that would be impossible."* Anarchists are well aware that *"class
difference do not vanish at the stroke of a pen whether that pen belongs
to the theoreticians or to the pen-pushers who set out laws or decrees.
Only action, that is to say direct action (not through government)
expropriation by the proletarians, directed against the privileged
class, can wipe out class difference."* [Luigi Fabbri, *"Anarchy and
'Scientific' Communism"*, pp. 13-49, **The Poverty of Statism**, pp.
13-49, Albert Meltzer (ed.), p. 30]

As we discussed in [section H.2.5](secH2.html#sech25), few anarchists
consider it likely that a perfectly functioning libertarian communist
society would be the immediate effect of a social revolution. For
anarchists a social revolution is a **process** and not an event
(although, of course, a process marked by such events as general
strikes, uprisings, insurrections and so on). As Kropotkin argued:

> *"It is a whole insurrectionary period of three, four, perhaps five
> years that we must traverse to accomplish our revolution in the
> property system and in social organisation."* [**Words of a Rebel**,
> p. 72]

His famous work **The Conquest of Bread** aimed, to use his words, at
*"prov[ing] that communism -- at least partial -- has more chance of
being established than collectivism, especially in communes taking the
lead"* and tried *"to indicate how, during a revolutionary period, a
large city -- if its inhabitants have accepted the idea -- could
organise itself on the lines of free communism."* [**Anarchism**, p.
298] The revolution, in other words, would progress towards communism
after the initial revolt:

> *"we know that an **uprising** can overthrow and change a government
> in one day, while a **revolution** needs three or four years of
> revolutionary convulsion to arrive at tangible results . . . if we
> should expect the revolution, from its **earliest** insurrections, to
> have a communist character, we would have to relinquish the
> possibility of a revolution, since in that case there would be need of
> a strong majority to agree on carrying through a change in the
> direction of communism."* [Kropotkin, quoted by Max Nettlau, **A Short
> History of Anarchism**, pp. 282-3]

In addition, different areas will develop in different speeds and in
different ways, depending on the influences dominant in the area. *"Side
by side with the revolutionised communes,"* argued Kropotkin, other
areas *"would remain in an expectant attitude, and would go on living on
the Individualist system . . . revolution would break out everywhere,
but revolution under different aspects; in one country State Socialism,
in another Federation; everywhere more or less Socialism, not conforming
to any particular rule."* Thus *"the Revolution will take a different
character in each of the different European nations; the point attained
in the socialisation of wealth will not be everywhere the same."* [**The
Conquest of Bread**, pp. 81-2 and p. 81]

Kropotkin was also aware that a revolution would face many problems,
including the disruption of economic activity, civil war and isolation.
He argued that it was *"certain that the coming Revolution . . . will
burst upon us in the middle of a great industrial crisis . . . There are
millions of unemployed workers in Europe at this moment. It will be
worse when Revolution has burst upon us . . . The number of the
out-of-works will be doubled as soon as barricades are erected in Europe
and the United States . . . we know that in time of Revolution exchange
and industry suffer most from the general upheaval . . . A Revolution in
Europe means, then, the unavoidable stoppage of at least half the
factories and workshops."* He stressed that there would be *"the
complete disorganisation"* of the capitalist economy and that during a
revolution *"[i]nternational commerce will come to a standstill"* and
*"the circulation of commodities and of provisions will be paralysed."*
This would, of course, have an impact on the development of a revolution
and so the *"circumstances will dictate the measures."* [**Op. Cit.**,
pp. 69-70, p. 191 and p. 79]

Thus we have anarcho-communism being introduced *"during a revolutionary
period"* rather than instantly and the possibility that it will be
*"partial"* in many, if not all areas, depending on the
*"circumstances"* encountered. Therefore the (Marxist inspired) claim
that anarchists think a fully communist society is possible overnight is
simply false -- we recognise that a social revolution takes time to
develop after it starts. As Malatesta put it, *"after the revolution,
that is after the defeat of the existing powers and the overwhelming
victory of the forces of insurrection"* then *"gradualism really comes
into operation. We shall have to study all the practical problems of
life: production, exchange, the means of communication, relations
between anarchist groupings and those living under some kind of
authority, between communist collectives and those living in an
individualistic way; relations between town and country . . . and so
on."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 173] In other words,
*"each community will decide for itself during the transition period the
method they deem best for the distribution of the products of associated
labour."* [James Guillaume, *"On Building the New Social Order"*, pp.
356-79, **Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 362]

However, if by "anarchist society" it is meant a society that has
abolished the state and started the process of transforming society from
below then anarchists argue that such a society is not only possible
after a successful revolution, it is essential. Thus the anarchist
social revolution would be political (abolition of the state), economic
(abolition of capitalism) and social (abolition of hierarchical social
relationships). Or, more positively, the introduction of self-management
into every aspect of life. In other words, *"political transformation"*
and *"economic transformation"* must be *"accomplished together and
simultaneously."* [Bakunin, **The Basic Bakunin**, p. 106] This
transformation would be based upon the organisations created by working
class people in their struggle against capitalism and the state (see
[next section](secI2.html#seci23)). Thus the framework of a free society
would be created by the struggle for freedom itself, by the class
struggle **within** but **against** hierarchical society. This
revolution would come ***"from below"*** and would expropriate capital
as well as smash the state (see [section H.2.4](secH2.html#sech24)).
Such a society, as Bakunin argued, will not be "perfect" by any means:

> "I do not say that the peasants [and workers], freely organised from
> the bottom up, will miraculously create an ideal organisation,
> confirming in all respects to our dreams. But I am convinced that what
> they construct will be living and vibrant, a thousands times better
> and more just than any existing organisation. Moreover, this . . .
> organisation, being on the one hand open to revolutionary propaganda .
> . . , and on the other, not petrified by the intervention of the State
> . . . will develop and perfect itself through free experimentation as
> fully as one can reasonably expect in our times.
> "With the abolition of the State, the spontaneous self-organisation of
> popular life . . . will revert to the communes. The development of
> each commune will take its point of departure the actual condition of
> its civilisation." [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 207]

How far such a new social organisation will meet the all the ideals and
hopes of communist-anarchists will vary according to objective
circumstances and the influence of libertarian theory. As people start
to liberate themselves they will under go an ethical and psychological
transformation as they act to the end specific hierarchical social
structures and relationships. It does not imply that people need to be
"perfect" nor that a perfect anarchist society will come about
"overnight. Rather, it means that while an anarchist society (i.e., one
without a state or private property) would be created by revolution, it
will be one initially marked by the society it came from and would
require a period of self-activity by which individuals reshape and
change themselves as they are reshaping and changing the world about
them. Thus Malatesta:

> *"And even after a successful insurrection, could we overnight realise
> all desires and pass from a governmental and capitalist hell to a
> libertarian-communist heaven which is the complete freedom of man
> within the wished-for community of interests with all men?*

> *"These are illusions which can take root among authoritarians who
> look upon the masses as the raw material which those who have power
> can, by decrees, supported by bullets and handcuffs, mould to their
> will. But these illusions have not taken among anarchists. We need the
> people's consensus, and therefore we must persuade by means of
> propaganda and example . . . to win over to our ideas an ever greater
> number of people."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 82-3]

So, clearly, the idea of a "one-day revolution" is one rejected as a
harmful fallacy by anarchists. We are aware that revolutions are a
**process** and not an event (or series of events). However, one thing
that anarchists do agree on is that it is essential for both the state
and capitalism to be undermined as quickly as possible. It is true that,
in the course of social revolution, we anarchists may not be able to
stop a new state being created or the old one from surviving. It all
depends on the balance of support for anarchist ideas in the population
and how willing people are to introduce them. There is no doubt, though,
that for a social revolt to be fully anarchist, the state and capitalism
must be destroyed and new forms of oppression and exploitation not put
in their place. How quickly after such a destruction we move to a fully
communist-anarchist society is a moot point, dependent on the conditions
the revolution is facing and the ideas and wants of the people making
it.

So the degree which a society which has abolished the state can progress
towards free communism depends on objective conditions and what a free
people want. Bakunin and other collectivists doubted the possibility of
introducing a communistic system instantly after a revolution. For
Kropotkin and many other anarcho-communists, communistic anarchy can,
and must, be introduced as far as possible and as soon as possible in
order to ensure a successful revolution. We should mention here that
some anarchists, like the individualists and mutualists, do not support
the idea of revolution and instead see anarchist alternatives growing
within capitalism and slowly replacing it.

In other words anarchists agree that an anarchist society cannot be
created overnight, for to assume so would be to imagine that anarchists
could enforce their ideas on a pliable population. Libertarian socialism
can only be created from below, by people who want it and understand it,
organising and liberating themselves. *"Communist organisations,"*
argued Kropotkin, *"must be the work of all, a natural growth, a product
of the constructive genius of the great mass. Communism cannot be
imposed from above; it could not live even for a few months if the
constant and daily co-operation of all did not uphold it. It must be
free."* [**Anarchism**, p. 140] The results of the Russian Revolution
should have cleared away long ago any contrary illusions about how to
create "socialist" societies. The lesson from every revolution is that
the mistakes made by people in liberating themselves and transforming
society are always minor compared to the results of creating
authorities, who eliminate such "ideological errors" by destroying the
freedom to make mistakes (and so freedom as such). Freedom is the only
real basis on which socialism can be built (*"Experience through freedom
is the only means to arrive at the truth and the best solutions; and
there is no freedom if there is not the freedom to be wrong."*
[Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 72]). Therefore, most anarchists would
agree with Malatesta:

> *"To organise a [libertarian] communist society on a large scale it
> would be necessary to transform all economic life radically, such as
> methods of production, of exchange and consumption; and all this could
> not be achieved other than gradually, as the objective circumstances
> permitted and to the extent that the masses understood what advantages
> could be gained and were able to act for themselves."* [**Op. Cit.**,
> p. 36]

This means that while the conditions necessary of a free society would
be created in a broad way by a social revolution, it would be utopian to
imagine everything will be perfect immediately. Few anarchists have
argued that such a jump would be possible -- rather they have argued
that revolutions create the conditions for the evolution towards an
anarchist society by abolishing state and capitalism. *"Besides,"*
argued Alexander Berkman, *"you must not confuse the social revolution
with anarchy. Revolution, in some of its stages, is a violent upheaval;
anarchy is a social condition of freedom and peace. The revolution is
the **means** of bringing anarchy about but it is not anarchy itself. It
is to pave the road to anarchy, to establish conditions which will make
a life of liberty possible."* However, *"to achieve its purpose the
revolution must be imbued with and directed by the anarchist spirit and
ideas. The end shapes the means . . . the social revolution must be
anarchist in method as in aim."* [**What is Anarchism?**, p. 231]

This means that while acknowledging the possibility of a transitional
**society**, anarchists reject the notion of a transitional **state** as
confused in the extreme (and, as can be seen from the experience of
Marxism, dangerous as well). An anarchist society can only be achieved
by anarchist means. Hence French Syndicalist Fernand Pelloutier's
comments:

> *"Nobody believes or expects that the coming revolution . . . will
> realise unadulterated anarchist-communism. . . it will erupt, no
> doubt, before the work of anarchist education has been completed . . .
> [and as] a result . . . , while we do preach perfect communism, it is
> not in the certainty or expectation of [libertarian] communism's being
> the social form of the future: it is in order to further men's [and
> women's] education . . . so that, by the time of the day of
> conflagration comes, they will have attained maximum emancipation. But
> must the transitional state to be endured necessarily or inevitability
> be the collectivist [i.e. state socialist/capitalist] jail? Might it
> not consist of libertarian organisation confined to the needs of
> production and consumption alone, with all political institutions
> having been done away with?"* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 2, p. 55]

One thing **is** certain: an anarchist social revolution or mass
movement will need to defend itself against attempts by statists and
capitalists to defeat it. Every popular movement, revolt, or revolution
has had to face a backlash from the supporters of the status quo. An
anarchist revolution or mass movement will face (and indeed has faced)
such counter-revolutionary movements. However, this does not mean that
the destruction of the state and capitalism need be put off until after
the forces of reaction are defeated. For anarchists, a social revolution
and free society can only be defended by anti-statist means (for more
discussion of this important subject see [section
J.7.6](secJ7.html#secj76)).

So, given an anarchist revolution which destroys the state, the type and
nature of the economic system created by it will depend on local
circumstances and the level of awareness in society. The individualists
are correct in the sense that what we do now will determine how the
future develops. Obviously, any "transition period" starts in the **here
and now,** as this helps determine the future. Thus, while social
anarchists usually reject the idea that capitalism can be reformed away,
we agree with the individualist and mutualist anarchists that it is
essential for anarchists to be active today in constructing the ideas,
ideals and new liberatory institutions of the future society within the
current one. The notion of waiting for the "glorious day" of total
revolution is not one held by anarchists -- just like the notion that we
expect a perfect communist-anarchist society to emerge the day after a
successful revolution. Neither position reflects anarchist ideas on
social change.

I.2.3 How is the framework of an anarchist society created?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Anarchists do not abstractly compare a free society with the current
one. Rather, we see an **organic** connection between what is and what
could be. In other words, anarchists see the initial framework of an
anarchist society as being created under statism and capitalism when
working class people organise themselves to resist hierarchy. As
Kropotkin argued:

> *"To make a revolution it is not . . . enough that there should be . .
> . [popular] risings . . . It is necessary that after the risings there
> should be something new in the institutions [that make up society],
> which would permit new forms of life to be elaborated and
> established."* [**The Great French Revolution**, vol. 1, p. 200]

Anarchists have seen these new institutions as being linked with the
need of working class people to resist the evils of hierarchy,
capitalism and statism, as being the product of the class struggle and
attempts by working class people to resist authority, oppression and
exploitation. Thus the struggle of working class people to protect and
enhance their liberty under hierarchical society will be the basis for a
society **without** hierarchy. This basic insight allowed anarchists
like Bakunin and Proudhon to predict future developments in the class
struggle such as workers' councils (such as those which developed during
the 1905 and 1917 Russian Revolutions). As Oskar Anweiler notes in his
definitive work on the Russian Soviets (Workers' Councils):

> "Proudhon's views are often directly associated with the Russian
> councils . . . Bakunin . . ., much more than Proudhon, linked
> anarchist principles directly to revolutionary action, thus arriving
> at remarkable insights into the revolutionary process that contribute
> to an understanding of later events in Russia . . .
>
> "In 1863 Proudhon declared . . . 'All my economic ideas as developed
> over twenty-five years can be summed up in the words:
> agricultural-industrial federation. All my political ideas boil down
> to a similar formula: political federation or decentralisation.' . . .
> Proudhon's conception of a self-governing state [sic!] founded on
> producers' corporations [i.e. federations of co-operatives], is
> certainly related to the idea of 'a democracy of producers' which
> emerged in the factory soviets. To this extent Proudhon can be
> regarded as an ideological precursor of the councils . . .
>
> "Bakunin . . . suggested the formation of revolutionary committees
> with representatives from the barricades, the streets, and the city
> districts, who would be given binding mandates, held accountable to
> the masses, and subject to recall. These revolutionary deputies were
> to form the 'federation of the barricades,' organising a revolutionary
> commune to immediately unite with other centres of rebellion . . .
>
> "Bakunin proposed the formation of revolutionary committees to elect
> communal councils, and a pyramidal organisation of society 'through
> free federation from the bottom upward, the association of workers in
> industry and agriculture -- first in the communities, then through
> federation of communities into districts, districts into nations, and
> nations into international brotherhood.' These proposals are indeed
> strikingly similar to the structure of the subsequent Russian system
> of councils . . .
>
> "Bakunin's ideas about spontaneous development of the revolution and
> the masses' capacity for elementary organisation undoubtedly were
> echoed in part by the subsequent soviet movement. . . Because Bakunin
> . . . was always very close to the reality of social struggle, he was
> able to foresee concrete aspects of the revolution. The council
> movement during the Russian Revolution, though not a result of
> Bakunin's theories, often corresponded in form and progress to his
> revolutionary concepts and predictions." [**The Soviets**, pp. 8-11]

*"As early as the 1860's and 1870's,"* Paul Avrich also noted, *"the
followers of Proudhon and Bakunin in the First International were
proposing the formation of workers' councils designed both as a weapon
of class struggle against capitalists and as the structural basis of the
future libertarian society."* [**The Russian Anarchists**, p. 73]

In this sense, anarchy is not some distant goal but rather an aspect of
the current struggles against domination, oppression and exploitation
(i.e. the class struggle, to use an all-embracing term, although we must
stress that anarchists use this term to cover all struggles against
domination). *"Anarchism,"* argued Kropotkin, *"is not a mere insight
into a remote future. Already now, whatever the sphere of action of the
individual, he [or she] can act, either in accordance with anarchist
principles or on an opposite line."* It was *"born among the people --
in the struggles of real life"* and *"owes its origin to the
constructive, creative activity of the people."* [**Anarchism**, p. 75,
p. 150 and p. 149] Thus, *"Anarchism is not . . . a theory of the future
to be realised by divine inspiration. It is a living force in the
affairs of our life, constantly creating new conditions."* It *"stands
for the spirit of revolt"* and so *"[d]irect action against the
authority in the shop, direct action against the authority of the law,
of direct action against the invasive, meddlesome authority of our moral
code, is the logical, consistent method of Anarchism."* [Emma Goldman,
**Anarchism and Other Essays**, p. 63 and p. 66]

Anarchism draws upon the autonomous self-activity and spontaneity of
working class people in struggle to inform both its political theory and
its vision of a free society. The struggle against hierarchy teaches us
not only how to be anarchists but also gives us a glimpse of what an
anarchist society would be like, what its initial framework could be and
the experience of managing our own activities which is required for such
a society to function successfully.

Therefore, as is clear, anarchists have long had a clear vision of what
an anarchist society would look like and, equally as important, where
such a society would spring from (as we proved in [section
H.1.4](secH1.html#sech14) Lenin's assertion that anarchists *"have
absolutely no clear idea of **what** the proletariat will put in its
[the states] place"* is simply false). It would, therefore, be useful to
give a quick summary of anarchist views on this subject.

Proudhon, for example, looked to the self-activity of French workers,
artisans and peasants and used that as the basis of his ideas on
anarchism. While seeing such activity as essentially reformist in
nature, like subsequent revolutionary anarchists he saw the germs of
anarchy *"generating from the bowels of the people, from the depths of
labour, a greater authority, a more potent fact, which shall envelop
capital and the State and subjugate them"* as *"it is of no use to
change the holders of power or introduce some variation into its
workings: an agricultural and industrial combination must be found by
means of which power, today the ruler of society, shall become its
slave."* [**System of Economical Contradictions**, p. 399 and p. 398]
Workers should follow the example of those already creating
co-operatives:

> *"Do not the workmen's unions at this moment serve as the cradle for
> the social revolution . . . ? Are they not always the open school,
> both theoretical and practical, where the workman learns the science
> of the production and distribution of wealth, where he studies,
> without masters and without books, by his own experience solely, the
> laws of . . . industrial organisation . . . ?"* [**General Idea of the
> Revolution**, p. 78]

Attempts to form workers associations, therefore, *"should be judged,
not by the more or less successful results which they obtain, but only
according to their silent tendency to assert and establish the social
republic."* The *"importance of their work lies, not in their petty
union interests, but in their denial of the rule of capitalists, money
lenders and governments."* They *"should take over the great departments
of industry, which are their natural inheritance."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
98-9]

This linking of the present and the future through the self-activity and
self-organisation of working class people is also found in Bakunin.
Unlike Proudhon, Bakunin stressed **revolutionary** activity and so he
saw the militant labour movement, and the revolution itself, as
providing the basic structure of a free society. As he put it, *"the
organisation of the trade sections and their representation in the
Chambers of Labour . . . bear in themselves the living seeds of the new
society which is to replace the old one. They are creating not only the
ideas, but also the facts of the future itself."* [**Bakunin on
Anarchism**, p. 255]

The needs of the class struggle would create the framework of a new
society, a federation of workers councils, as *"strikes indicate a
certain collective strength already, a certain understanding among the
workers . . . each strike becomes the point of departure for the
formation of new groups."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, pp. 149-50] This
pre-revolutionary development would be accelerated by the revolution
itself:

> *"the revolution must set out from the first to radically and totally
> destroy the State . . . The natural and necessary consequence of this
> destruction will be . . . [among others, the] dissolution of army,
> magistracy, bureaucracy, police and priesthood. . . confiscation of
> all productive capital and means of production on behalf of workers'
> associations, who are to put them to use . . . the federative Alliance
> of all working men's associations . . . [will] constitute the Commune
> . . . [the] Communal Council [will be] composed of . . . delegates . .
> . vested with plenary but accountable and removable mandates. . . all
> provinces, communes and associations . . . by first reorganising on
> revolutionary lines . . . [will] constitute the federation of
> insurgent associations, communes and provinces . . . [and] organise a
> revolutionary force capable defeating reaction . . . [and for]
> self-defence . . . [The] revolution everywhere must be created by the
> people, and supreme control must always belong to the people organised
> into a free federation of agricultural and industrial associations . .
> . organised from the bottom upwards by means of revolutionary
> delegation."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, pp. 170-2]

Like Bakunin, Kropotkin stressed that revolution transformed those
taking part in it. As he noted in his classic account of the French
Revolution, *"by degrees, the revolutionary education of the people was
being accomplished by the revolution itself."* Part of this process
involved creating new organisations which allowed the mass of people to
take part in the decision making of the revolution. He pointed to *"the
popular Commune,"* arguing that *"the Revolution began by creating the
Commune . . . and through this institution it gained . . . immense
power."* He stressed that it was *"by means of the 'districts' [of the
Communes] that . . . the masses, accustoming themselves to act without
receiving orders from the national representatives, were practising what
was to be described later as Direct Self-Government."* Such a system did
not imply isolation, for while *"the districts strove to maintain their
own independence"* they also *"sought for unity of action, not in
subjection to a Central Committee, but in a federative union."* The
Commune *"was thus made **from below upward**, by the federation of the
district organisations; it spring up in a revolutionary way, from
popular initiative."* Thus the process of class struggle, of the needs
of the fighting against the existing system, generated the framework of
an anarchist society for *"the districts of Paris laid the foundations
of a new, free, social organisation."* Little wonder he argued that
*"the principles of anarchism . . . already dated from 1789, and that
they had their origin, not in theoretical speculations, but in the
**deeds** of the Great French Revolution"* and that *"the libertarians
would no doubt do the same to-day."* [**The Great French Revolution**,
vol. 1, p. 261, p. 200, p. 203, p. 206, p. 204 and p. 206]

Similarly, as we noted in [section H.2.6](secH2.html#sech26) we discover
him arguing in **Mutual Aid** that strikes and labour unions were an
expression of mutual aid in capitalist society. Elsewhere, Kropotkin
argued that *"labour combinations"* like the *"Sections"* of French
revolution were one of the *"main popular anarchist currents"* in
history, expressing the *"same popular resistance to the growing power
of the few."* [**Anarchism**, p. 159] For Kropotkin, like Bakunin,
libertarian labour unions were *"natural organs for the direct struggle
with capitalism and for the composition of the future social order."*
[quoted by Paul Avrich, **The Russian Anarchists**, p. 81]

As can be seen, the major anarchist thinkers pointed to forms of
organisation autonomously created and managed by the working class as
the framework of an anarchist society. Both Bakunin and Kropotkin
pointed to militant, direct action based labour unions while Proudhon
pointed towards workers' experiments in co-operative production and
mutual credit. Later anarchists followed them. The anarcho-syndicalists,
like Bakunin and Kropotkin, pointed to the developing labour movement as
the framework of an anarchist society, as providing the basis for the
free federation of workers' associations which would constitute the
commune. Others, such as the Russians Maximov, Arshinov, Voline and
Makhno, saw the spontaneously created workers' councils (soviets) of
1905 and 1917 as the basis of a free society, as another example of
Bakunin's federation of workers' associations.

Thus, for all anarchists, the structural framework of an anarchist
society was created by the class struggle, by the needs of working class
people to resist oppression, exploitation and hierarchy. As Kropotkin
stressed, *"[d]uring a revolution new forms of life will always
germinate on the ruins of the old forms . . . It is impossible to
legislate for the future. All we can do is vaguely guess its essential
tendencies and clear the road for it."* [**Evolution and Environment**,
pp. 101-2] These essential tendencies were discovered, in practice, by
the needs of the class struggle. The necessity of practising mutual aid
and solidarity to survive under capitalism (as in any other hostile
environment) makes working people and other oppressed groups organise
together to fight their oppressors and exploiters. Thus the co-operation
necessary for a libertarian socialist society, like its organisational
framework, would be generated by the need to resist oppression and
exploitation under capitalism. The process of resistance produces
organisation on a wider and wider scale which, in turn, can become the
framework of a free society as the needs of the struggle promote
libertarian forms of organisation such as decision making from the
bottom up, autonomy, federalism, mandated delegates subject to instant
recall and so on.

For example, a strikers' assembly would be the basic decision-making
forum in a struggle for improved wages and working conditions. It would
create a strike committee to implement its decisions and send delegates
to spread the strike. These delegates inspire other strikes, requiring a
new organisation to co-ordinate the struggle. This results in delegates
from all the strikes meeting and forming a federation (a workers'
council). The strikers decide to occupy the workplace and the strike
assemblies take over the means of production. The strike committees
become the basis for factory committees which could administer the
workplaces, based on workers' self-management via workplace assemblies
(the former strikers' assemblies). The federation of strikers' delegates
becomes the local communal council, replacing the existing state with a
self-managed federation of workers' associations. In this way, the class
struggle creates the framework of a free society.

This, obviously, means that any suggestions of how an anarchist society
would look like are based on the fact that the ***actual*** framework of
a free society will be the product of ***actual*** struggles. This means
that the form of the free society will be shaped by the process of
social change and the organs it creates. This is an important point and
worth repeating.

So, as well as changing themselves while they change the world, a people
in struggle also create the means by which they can manage society. By
having to organise and manage their struggles, they become accustomed to
self-management and self-activity and create the possibility of a free
society and the organisations which will exist within it. Anarchy is not
a jump into the dark but rather a natural progression of the struggle
for freedom in an unfree society. The contours of a free society will be
shaped by the process of creating it and, therefore, will not be an
artificial construction imposed on society. Rather, it will be created
from below up by society itself as working class people start to break
free of hierarchy. The class struggle thus transforms those involved as
well as society **and** creates the organisational structure and people
required for a libertarian society.

This clearly suggests that the **means** anarchists support are
important as they are have a direct impact on the ends they create. In
other words, means influence ends and so our means must reflect the ends
we seek and empower those who use them. As the present state of affairs
is based on the oppression, exploitation and alienation of the working
class, any tactics used in the pursuit of a free society must be based
on resisting and destroying those evils. This is why anarchists stress
tactics and organisations which increase the power, confidence,
autonomy, initiative, participation and self-activity of oppressed
people. As we indicate in section J ([*"What Do Anarchists
Do?"*](secJcon.html)) this means supporting direct action, solidarity
and self-managed organisations built and run from the bottom-up. Only by
fighting our own battles, relying on ourselves and our own abilities and
power, in organisations we create and run ourselves, can we gain the
power and confidence and experience needed to change society for the
better and, hopefully, create a new society in place of the current one.

Needless to say, a revolutionary movement will never, at its start, be
purely anarchist:

> *"All of the workers' and peasants' movements which have taken place .
> . . have been movements within the limits of the capitalist regime,
> and have been more of less tinged with anarchism. This is perfectly
> natural and understandable. The working class do not act within a
> world of wishes, but in the real world where they are daily subjected
> to the physical and psychological blows of hostile forces . . . the
> workers continually feel the influence of all the real conditions of
> the capitalist regime and of intermediate groups . . . Consequently it
> is natural that the struggle which they undertake inevitably carries
> the stamp of various conditions and characteristics of contemporary
> society. The struggle can never be born in the finished and perfected
> anarchist form which would correspond to all the requirements of the
> ideas . . . When the popular masses engage in a struggle of large
> dimensions, they inevitably start by committing errors, they allow
> contradictions and deviations, and only through the process of this
> struggle do they direct their efforts in the direction of the ideal
> for which they are struggling."* [Peter Arshinov, **The History of the
> Makhnovist Movement**, pp. 239-40]

The role of anarchists is *"to help the masses to take the right road in
the struggle and in the construction of the new society"* and *"support
their first constructive efforts, assist them intellectually."* However,
the working class *"once it has mastered the struggle and begins its
social construction, will no longer surrender to anyone the initiative
in creative work. The working class will then direct itself by its own
thought; it will create its society according to its own plans."*
[Arshinov, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 240-1] All anarchists can do is help this
process by being part of it, arguing our case and winning people over to
anarchist ideas (see [section J.3](secJ3.html) for more details). Thus
the process of struggle and debate will, hopefully, turn a struggle
**against** capitalism and statism into one **for** anarchism. In other
words, anarchists seek to preserve and extend the anarchistic elements
that exist in every struggle and to help them become consciously
libertarian by discussion and debate as members of those struggles.

Lastly, we must stress that it is only the **initial** framework of a
free society which is created in the class struggle. As an anarchist
society develops, it will start to change and develop in ways we cannot
predict. The forms in which people express their freedom and their
control over their own lives will, by necessity, change as these
requirements and needs change. As Bakunin argued:

> "Even the most rational and profound science cannot divine the form
> social life will take in the future. It can only determine the
> **negative** conditions, which follow logically from a rigorous
> critique of existing society. Thus, by means of such a critique,
> social and economic science rejected hereditary individual property
> and, consequently, took the abstract and, so to speak, **negative**
> position of collective property as a necessary condition of the future
> social order. In the same way, it rejected the very idea of the state
> or statism, meaning government of society from above downward . . .
> Therefore, it took the opposite, or negative, position: anarchy,
> meaning the free and independent organisation of all the units and
> parts of the community and their voluntary federation from below
> upward, not by the orders of any authority, even an elected one, and
> not by the dictates of any scientific theory, but as the natural
> development of all the varied demands put forth by life itself.
> "Therefore no scholar can teach the people or even define for himself
> how they will and must live on the morrow of the social revolution.
> That will be determined first by the situation of each people, and
> secondly by the desires that manifest themselves and operate most
> strongly within them." [**Statism and Anarchy**, pp. 198-9]

So while it will be reasonable to conclude that, for example, the
federation of strike/factory assemblies and their councils/committees
will be the framework by which production will initially be organised,
this framework will mutate to take into account changing production and
social needs. The actual structures created will, by necessity, be
transformed as industry is transformed from below upwards to meet the
real needs of society and producers as both the structure and nature of
work and industry developed under capitalism bears the marks of its
economic class, hierarchies and power (*"a radical social ecology not
only raises traditional issues such as the reunion of agriculture with
industry, but also questions the very structure of industry itself."*
[Murray Bookchin, **The Ecology of Freedom**, p. 408]). Therefore, under
workers' self-management industry, work and the whole structure and
organisation of production will be transformed in ways we can only guess
at today. We can point the general direction (i.e. self-managed,
ecologically balanced, decentralised, federal, empowering, creative and
so on) but that is all. Similarly, as cities and towns are transformed
into ecologically integrated communes, the initial community assemblies
and their federations will transform along with the transformation of
our surroundings. What they will evolve into we cannot predict, but
their fundamentals of instant recall, delegation over representation,
decision making from the bottom up, and so on will remain.

So, while anarchists see *"the future in the present"* as the initial
framework of a free society, we recognise that such a society will
evolve and change. However, the fundamental principles of a free society
will not change and so it is useful to present a summary of how such a
society could work, based on these principles.
