I.3 What could the economic structure of anarchy look like?
===========================================================

Here we will examine possible frameworks of a libertarian socialist
economy. We stress that it is **frameworks** rather than framework
because it is likely that any anarchist society will see a diverse
number of economic systems co-existing in different areas, depending on
what people in those areas want. *"In each locality,"* argued Diego Abad
de Santillan, *"the degree of communism, collectivism or mutualism will
depend on the conditions prevailing. Why dictate rules? We who make
freedom our banner, cannot deny it in economy. Therefore there must be
free experimentation, free show of initiative and suggestions, as well
as the freedom of organisation."* As such, anarchism *"can be realised
in a multiformity of economic arrangements, individual and collective.
Proudhon advocated mutualism; Bakunin, collectivism; Kropotkin,
communism. Malatesta has conceived the possibility of mixed agreements,
especially during the first period."* [**After the Revolution**, p. 97
and p. 96]

Here, we will highlight and discuss the four major schools of anarchist
economic thought: Individualist anarchism, mutualism, collectivism and
communism. It is up to the reader to evaluate which school best
maximises individual liberty and the good life (as individualist
anarchist Joseph LaBadie wisely said, *"Anarchism will not dictate to
them any explicit rules as to what they must do, but that it opens to
them the opportunities of putting into practice their own ideas of
enhancing their own happiness."* [**The Individualist Anarchists**, pp.
260-1]). *"Nothing is more contrary to the real spirit of Anarchy than
uniformity and intolerance,"* argued Kropotkin. *"Freedom of development
implies difference of development, hence difference of ideas and
actions."* Experience, then, is *"the best teacher, and the necessary
experience can only be gained by entire freedom of action."* [quoted by
Ruth Kinna, *"Fields of Vision: Kropotkin and Revolutionary Change"*,
pp. 67-86, **SubStance**, Vol. 36, No. 2, p. 81] There may, of course,
be other economic practices but these may not be libertarian. In
Malatesta's words:

> *"Admitted the basic principle of anarchism -- which is that no-one
> should wish or have the opportunity to reduce others to a state of
> subjection and oblige them to work for him -- it is clear that all,
> and only, those ways of life which respect freedom, and recognise that
> each individual has an equal right to the means of production and to
> the full enjoyment of the product of his own labour, have anything in
> common with anarchism."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p.
> 33]

In addition, it should be kept in mind that in practice it is impossible
to separate the economic realm from the social and political realms, as
there are numerous interconnections between them: anarchist thinkers
like Bakunin argued that the "political" institutions of a free society
would be based upon workplace associations while Kropotkin placed the
commune at the heart of his vision of a communist-anarchist economy
**and** society. Thus the division between social and economic forms is
not clear cut in anarchist theory -- as it should be as society is not,
and cannot be, considered as separate from or inferior to the economy.
An anarchist society will try to integrate the social and economic,
embedding the latter in the former in order to stop any harmful
externalities associated economic activity being passed onto society. As
Karl Polanyi argued, capitalism *"means no less than the running of
society as an adjunct to the market. Instead of the economy being being
embedded in social relations, social relations are embedded in the
economic system."* [**The Great Transformation**, p. 57] Given the
negative effects of such an arrangement, little wonder that anarchism
seeks to reverse it.

Also, by discussing the economy first we are not implying that dealing
with economic domination or exploitation is more important than dealing
with other aspects of the total system of domination, e.g. social
hierarchies, patriarchal values, racism, etc. We follow this order of
exposition because of the need to present one thing at a time, but it
would have been equally easy to start with the social and political
structure of anarchy. However, Rudolf Rocker is correct to argue that an
economic transformation in the economy is an essential aspect of a
social revolution:

> *"[A] social development in this direction [i.e. a stateless society]
> was not possible without a fundamental revolution in existing economic
> arrangements; for tyranny and exploitation grow on the same tree and
> are inseparably bound together. The freedom of the individual is
> secure only when it rests on the economic and social well-being of all
> . . . The personality of the individual stands the higher, the more
> deeply it is rooted in the community, from which arise the richest
> sources of its moral strength. Only in freedom does there arise in man
> the consciousness of responsibility for his acts and regard for the
> rights of others; only in freedom can there unfold in its full
> strength that most precious of social instinct: man's sympathy for the
> joys and sorrows of his fellow men and the resultant impulse toward
> mutual aid and in which are rooted all social ethics, all ideas of
> social justice."* [**Nationalism and Culture**, pp. 147-8]

The aim of any anarchist society would be to maximise freedom and so
creative work:

> *"If it is correct, as I believe it is, that a fundamental element of
> human nature is the need for creative work or creative inquiry, for
> free creation without the arbitrary limiting effects of coercive
> institutions, then of course it will follow that a decent society
> should maximise the possibilities for this fundamental human
> characteristic to be realised. Now, a federated, decentralised system
> of free associations incorporating economic as well as social
> institutions would be what I refer to as anarcho-syndicalism. And it
> seems to me that it is the appropriate form of social organisation for
> an advanced technological society, in which human beings do not have
> to be forced into the position of tools, of cogs in a machine."* [Noam
> Chomsky, **Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media**, p. 31]

So, as one might expect, since the essence of anarchism is opposition to
hierarchical authority, anarchists totally oppose the way the current
economy is organised. This is because authority in the economic sphere
is embodied in centralised, hierarchical workplaces that give an elite
class (capitalists) dictatorial control over privately owned means of
production, turning the majority of the population into order takers
(i.e. wage slaves). In contrast, the libertarian-socialist economy will
be based on decentralised, egalitarian workplaces in which workers
democratically self-manage their productive activity in **socially**
owned means of production.

The key principles of libertarian socialism are decentralisation,
self-management, socialisation, voluntary association, and free
federation. These principles determine the form and function of both the
economic and political systems. In this section we will consider just
the economic system. Bakunin gives an excellent overview of such an
economy when he wrote that in a free society the *"land belongs to only
those who cultivate it with their own hands; to the agricultural
communes. The capital and all the tools of production belong to the
workers; to the workers' associations."* These associations are often
called *"co-operatives"* and *"syndicates"* (see [section
I.3.1](secI3.html#seci31)). This feeds into an essential economic
concept for libertarian socialists is ***"workers' self-management"***
This refers to those who do the work managing it, where the land and
workplaces are *"owned and operated by the workers themselves: by their
freely organised federations of industrial and agricultural workers"*
(see [section I.3.2](secI3.html#seci32)). For most anarchists,
*"socialisation"* is the necessary foundation for a free society, as
only this ensures universal self-management by allowing free access to
the means of production (see [section I.3.3](secI3.html#seci33)). Thus
an anarchist economy would be based on *"the land, tools of production
and all other capital"* being *"converted into collective property of
the whole of society and utilised only by the workers, i.e., by their
agricultural and industrial associations."* [**Bakunin on Anarchy**, p.
247, p. 400 and p. 427] As Berkman summarised:

> *"The revolution abolishes private ownership of the means of
> production, distribution, and with it goes capitalistic business.
> Personal possession remains only in the things you use. Thus, your
> watch is your own, but the watch factory belongs to the people. Land,
> machinery, and all other public utilities will be collective property,
> neither to be bought nor sold. Actual use will be considered the only
> title [in communist anarchism] -- not to ownership but to possession.
> The organisation of the coal miners, for example, will be in charge of
> the coal mines, not as owners but as the operating agency. Similarly
> will the railroad brotherhoods run the railroads, and so on.
> Collective possession, co-operatively managed in the interests of the
> community, will take the place of personal ownership privately
> conducted for profit."* [**What is Anarchism?**, p. 217]

So the solution proposed by social anarchists is **society-wide**
ownership of the means of production and distribution, with each
workplace run co-operatively by its members. However, no workplace
exists in isolation and would seek to associate with others to ensure it
gets the raw materials it needs for production and to see what it
produces goes to those who need it. These links would be based on the
anarchist principles of free agreement and voluntary federation (see
[section I.3.4](secI3.html#seci34)). For social anarchists, this would
be supplemented by confederal bodies or co-ordinating councils at two
levels: first, between all firms in a particular industry; and second,
between all industries (including agriculture) throughout the society
([section I.3.5](secI3.html#seci35)). Such federations may, depending on
the type of anarchism in question, also include people's financial
institutions.

While, for some anarcho-syndicalists, this structure is seen as enough,
most communist-anarchists consider that the economic federation should
be held accountable to society as a whole (i.e. the economy must be
communalised). This is because not everyone in society is a worker (e.g.
the young, the old and infirm) nor will everyone belong to a syndicate
(e.g. the self-employed), but as they also have to live with the results
of economic decisions, they should have a say in what happens. In other
words, in communist-anarchism, workers make the day-to-day decisions
concerning their work and workplaces, while the social criteria behind
these decisions are made by everyone. As anarchist society is based on
free access and a resource is controlled by those who use it. It is a
decentralised, participatory, self-managed, organisation whose members
can secede at any time and in which all power and initiative arises from
and flows back to the grassroots level. Such a society combines free
association, federalism and self-management with communalised ownership.
Free labour is its basis and socialisation exists to complement and
protect it. Such a society-wide economic federation of this sort is
**not** the same thing as a centralised state agency, as in the concept
of nationalised or state-owned industry.

The exact dynamics of a socialised self-managed system varies between
anarchist schools. Most obviously, as discussed in [section
I.3.6](secI3.html#seci36), while individualists view competition between
workplaces as unproblematic and mutualists see its negative aspects but
consider it necessary, collectivists and communists oppose it and argue
that a free society can do without it. Moreover, socialisation should
not be confused with forced collectivisation -- individuals and groups
will be free **not** to join a syndicate and to experiment in different
forms of economy (see [section I.3.7](secI3.html#seci37)). Lastly,
anarchists argue that such a system would be applicable to all
economies, regardless of size and development, and aim for an economy
based on appropriately sized technology (Marxist assertions **not**
withstanding -- see [section I.3.8](secI3.html#seci38)).

Regardless of the kind of anarchy desired, anarchists all agree on the
importance of decentralisation, free agreement and free association.
Kropotkin's summary of what anarchy would look like gives an excellent
feel of what sort of society anarchists desire:

> *"harmony in such a society being obtained, not by submission to law,
> or by obedience to any authority, but by free agreements concluded
> between the various groups, territorial and professional, freely
> constituted for the sake of production and consumption, as also for
> the satisfaction of the infinite variety of needs and aspirations of a
> civilised being.*

> *"In a society developed on these lines . . . voluntary associations .
> . . would represent an interwoven network, composed of an infinite
> variety of groups and federations of all sizes and degrees, local,
> regional, national and international temporary or more or less
> permanent -- for all possible purposes: production, consumption and
> exchange, communications, sanitary arrangements, education, mutual
> protection, defence of the territory, and so on; and, on the other
> side, for the satisfaction of an ever-increasing number of scientific,
> artistic, literary and sociable needs.*

> *"Moreover, such a society would represent nothing immutable. On the
> contrary -- as is seen in organic life at large - harmony would (it is
> contended) result from an ever-changing adjustment and readjustment of
> equilibrium between the multitudes of forces and influences, and this
> adjustment would be the easier to obtain as none of the forces would
> enjoy a special protection from the State."* [**Anarchism**, p. 284]

If this type of system sounds "utopian" it should be kept in mind that
it was actually implemented and worked quite well in the collectivist
economy organised during the Spanish Revolution of 1936, despite the
enormous obstacles presented by an ongoing civil war as well as the
relentless (and eventually successful) efforts of Republicans,
Stalinists and Fascists to crush it (see [section I.8](secI8.html) for
an introduction).

As well as this (and other) examples of ***"anarchy in action"*** there
have been other libertarian socialist economic systems described in
writing. All share the common features of workers' self-management,
co-operation and so on we discuss here and in [section I.4](secI4.html).
These texts include **Syndicalism** by Tom Brown, **The Program of
Anarcho-Syndicalism** by G.P. Maximoff, **Guild Socialism Restated** and
**Self-Government in Industry** by G.D.H. Cole, **After the Revolution**
by Diego Abad de Santillan, **Anarchist Economics** and **Principles of
Libertarian Economy** by Abraham Guillen, **Workers Councils and the
Economics of a Self-Managed Society** by Cornelius Castoriadis among
others. A short summary of Spanish Anarchist visions of the free society
can be found in chapter 3 of Robert Alexander's **The Anarchists in the
Spanish Civil War** (vol. 1). Some anarchists support what is called
*"Participatory Economics"* (**Parecon**, for short) and **The Political
Economy of Participatory Economics** and **Looking Forward:
Participatory Economics for the Twenty First Century** by Michael Albert
and Robin Hahnel are worth reading as they contain good introductions to
that project.

Fictional accounts include William Morris' **News from Nowhere**, the
excellent **The Dispossessed** by Ursula Le Guin, **Women on the Edge of
Time** by Marge Piercy and **The Last Capitalist** by Steve Cullen. Iain
M. Banks Culture novels are about an anarcho-communist society, but as
they are so technologically advanced they can only give an insight into
the aims of libertarian socialism and the mentality of people living in
freedom (**The State of the Art** and **The Player of Games** contrast
the Culture with hierarchical societies, the Earth in 1977 in the case
of the former).

I.3.1 What is a *"syndicate"*?
------------------------------

As we will use the term, a *"syndicate"* (also called a *"producer
co-operative"*, or *"co-operative"*, for short, sometimes a
*"collective"*, *"producers' commune"*, *"association of producers"*,
*"guild factory"* or *"guild workplace"*) is a democratically
self-managed productive enterprise whose assets are controlled by its
workers. It is a useful generic term to describe the situation aimed at
by anarchists where *"associations of men and women who . . . work on
the land, in the factories, in the mines, and so on, [are] themselves
the managers of production."* [Kropotkin, **Evolution and Environment**,
p. 78]

This means that where labour is collective, *"the ownership of
production should also be collective."* *"Each workshop, each factory,"*
correctly suggested James Guillaume, *"will organise itself into an
association of workers who will be free to administer production and
organise their work as they think best, provided that the rights of each
worker are safeguarded and the principles of equality and justice are
observed."* This applies to the land as well, for anarchism aims to
answer *"the question of how best to work the land and what form of
possession is best."* It does not matter whether peasants *"keep their
plots of land and continue to cultivate it with the help of their
families"* or whether they *"take collective possession of the vast
tracts of land and work them in common"* as *"the main purpose of the
Revolution"* has been achieved, namely that *"the land is now the
property of those who cultivate it, and the peasants no longer work for
the profit of an idle exploiter who lives by their sweat."* Any *"former
hired hands"* will become *"partners and share . . . the products which
their common labour extracts from the land"* as *"the Revolution will
have abolished agricultural wage slavery and peonage and the
agricultural proletariat will consist only of free workers living in
peace and plenty."* As with industrial workplaces, the *"internal
organisation . . . need not necessarily be identical; organisational
forms and procedures will vary greatly according to the preferences of
the associated workers."* The *"administration of the community"* could
be *"entrusted either to an individual or to a commission of many
members,"* for example, but would always be *"elected by all the
members."* [*"On Building the New Social Order"*, pp. 356-79, **Bakunin
on Anarchism**, p. 363, p. 359, p. 360 and p. 361]

It must be noted that this libertarian goal of abolishing the
hierarchical capitalist workplace and ending wage labour by associating
and democratising industry is as old as anarchism itself. Thus we find
Proudhon arguing in 1840 that the aim was a society of *"possessors
without masters"* (rather than wage-labourers and tenants *"controlled
by proprietors"*) with *"leaders, instructors, superintendents"* and so
forth being *"chosen from the labourers by the labourers themselves."*
[**What is Property?**, p. 167 and p. 137]

*"Mutuality, reciprocity exists,"* Proudhon argued, *"when all the
workers in an industry, instead of working for an **entrepreneur** who
pays them and keeps their products, work for one another and thus
collaborate in the making of a common product whose profits they share
amongst themselves. Extend the principle of reciprocity as uniting the
work of every group, to the Workers' Societies as units, and you have
created a form of civilisation which from all points of view --
political, economic and aesthetic -- is radically different from all
earlier civilisations."* In summary: *"All associated and all free"*.
[quoted by Martin Buber, **Paths in Utopia**, pp. 29-30 and p. 30]

Nor was this idea invented by Proudhon and other anarchists. Rather, it
was first raised by workers themselves and subsequently taken up by the
likes of Proudhon and Bakunin. So working class people came up with this
fundamental libertarian socialist idea by themselves. The idea that wage
labour would be replaced by associated labour was raised in many
different countries in the 19th century. In France, it was during the
wave of strikes and protests unleashed by the 1830 revolution. That year
saw Parisian printers, for example, producing a newspaper (**L'Artisan:
Journal de la classes ouvriere**) which suggested that the only way to
stop being exploited by a master was for workers to form co-operatives.
During the strikes of 1833, this was echoed by other skilled workers and
so co-operatives were seen by many workers as a method of emancipation
from wage labour. Proudhon even picked up the term **Mutualisme** from
the workers in Lyon in the early 1840s and their ideas of co-operative
credit, exchange and production influenced him as surely as he
influenced them. In America, as Chomsky notes, *"[i]f we go back to the
labour activism from the early days of the industrial revolution, to the
working class press in 1850s, and so on, it’s got a real anarchist
strain to it. They never heard of European anarchism . . . It was
spontaneous. They took for granted wage labour is little different from
slavery, that workers should own the mills"* [**Anarchism Interview**]
As we noted in [section F.8.6](secF8.html#secf86), this was a
commonplace response for working class people facing the rise of
capitalism.

In many ways a syndicate is similar to a co-operative under capitalism.
Indeed, Proudhon pointed to such experiments as examples of what he
desired, with *"co-operative associations"* being a key part of his
*"general liquidation"* of capitalist society. [**General Idea of the
Revolution**, p. 203] Bakunin, likewise, argued that anarchists are
*"convinced that the co-operative will be the preponderant form of
social organisation in the future, in every branch of labour and
science."* [**Basic Bakunin**, p. 153] Therefore, even from the limited
examples of co-operatives functioning in the capitalist market, the
essential features of a libertarian socialist economy can be seen. The
basic economic element, the workplace, will be a free association of
individuals who will organise their joint work as equals. To quote
Bakunin again, *"[o]nly associated labour, that is, labour organised
upon the principles of reciprocity and co-operation, is adequate to the
task of maintaining . . . civilised society."* [**The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 341]

***Co-operation*** in this context means that the policy decisions
related to their association will be based on the principle of "one
member, one vote," with administrative staff elected and held
accountable to the workplace as a whole. In the words of economist David
Ellerman: *"Every enterprise should be legally reconstructured as a
partnership of all who work in the enterprise. Every enterprise should
be a democratic worker-owned firm."* [**The Democratic Worker-Owned
Firm**, p. 43] Anarchists, unsurprisingly, reject the Leninist idea that
state property means the end of capitalism as simplistic and confused.
Ownership is a juridical relationship. The **real** issue is one of
management. Do the users of a resource manage it? If so, then we have a
real (i.e. libertarian) socialist society. If not, we have some form of
class society (for example, in the Soviet Union the state replaced the
capitalist class but workers still had no official control over their
labour or the product of that labour).

Workplace self-management does not mean, as some apologists of
capitalism suggest, that knowledge and skill will be ignored and **all**
decisions made by everyone. This is an obvious fallacy, since engineers,
for example, have a greater understanding of their work than
non-engineers and under workers' self-management will control it
directly:

> *"we must understand clearly wherein this Guild democracy consists,
> and especially how it bears on relations between different classes of
> workers included in a single Guild. For since a Guild includes **all**
> the workers by hand and brain engaged in a common service, it is clear
> that there will be among its members very wide divergences of
> function, of technical skill, and of administrative authority. Neither
> the Guild as a whole nor the Guild factory can determine all issues by
> the expedient of the mass vote, nor can Guild democracy mean that, on
> all questions, each member is to count as one and none more than one.
> A mass vote on a matter of technique understood only by a few experts
> would be a manifest absurdity, and, even if the element of technique
> is left out of account, a factory administered by constant mass votes
> would be neither efficient nor at all a pleasant place to work in.
> There will be in the Guilds technicians occupying special positions by
> virtue of their knowledge, and there will be administrators possessing
> special authority by virtue both of skill and ability and of personal
> qualifications."* [G.D.H. Cole, **Guild Socialism Restated**, pp.
> 50-51]

The fact that some decision-making has been delegated in this manner
sometimes leads people to ask whether a syndicate would not just be
another form of hierarchy. The answer is that it would not be
hierarchical because the workers' assemblies and their councils, open to
all workers, would decide what types of decision-making to delegate,
thus ensuring that ultimate power rests at the base. Moreover, **power**
would not be delegated. Malatesta clearly indicates the difference
between administrative decisions and policy decisions:

> *"Of course in every large collective undertaking, a division of
> labour, technical management, administration, etc. is necessary. But
> authoritarians clumsily play on words to produce a **raison d’être**
> for government out of the very real need for the organisation of work.
> Government, it is well to repeat, is the concourse of individuals who
> have had, or seized, the right and the means to make laws and to
> oblige people to obey; the administrator, the engineer, etc., instead
> are people who are appointed or assume the responsibility to carry out
> a particular job and so on. Government means the delegation of power,
> that is the abdication of initiative and sovereignty of all into the
> hands of a few; administration means the delegation of work, that is
> tasks given and received, free exchange of services based on free
> agreement . . . Let one not confuse the function of government with
> that of an administration, for they are essentially different, and if
> today the two are often confused, it is only because of economic and
> political privilege."* [**Anarchy**, pp. 41-2]

Given that power remains in the hands of the workplace assembly, it is
clear that the organisation required for every collective endeavour
cannot be equated with government. Also, never forget that
administrative staff are elected by and accountable to the rest of an
association. If, for example, it turned out that a certain type of
delegated decision-making activity was being abused, it could be revoked
by the whole workforce. Because of this grassroots control, there is
every reason to think that crucial types of decision-making activity
which could become a source of power (and so with the potential for
seriously affecting all workers' lives) would not be delegated but would
remain with the workers' assemblies. For example, powers that are now
exercised in an authoritarian manner by managers under capitalism, such
as those of hiring and firing, introducing new production methods or
technologies, changing product lines, relocating production facilities,
determining the nature, pace and rhythm of productive activity and so on
would remain in the hands of the associated producers and **not** be
delegated to anyone.

New syndicates will be created upon the initiative of individuals within
communities. These may be the initiative of workers in an existing
syndicate who desire to expand production, or members of the local
community who see that the current syndicates are not providing
adequately in a specific area of life. Either way, the syndicate will be
a voluntary association for producing useful goods or services and would
spring up and disappear as required. Therefore, an anarchist society
would see syndicates developing spontaneously as individuals freely
associate to meet their needs, with both local and confederal
initiatives taking place.

While having a common basis in co-operative workplaces, different forms
of anarchism see them work in different ways. Under mutualism, workers
organise themselves into syndicates and share in its gains and losses.
This means that in *"the labour-managed firm there is no profit, only
income to be divided among members. Without employees the labour-managed
firm does not have a wage bill, and labour costs are not counted among
the expenses to the subtracted from profit, as they are in the
capitalist firm."* The *"labour-managed firm does not hire labour. It is
a collective of workers that hires capital and necessary materials."*
[Christopher Eaton Gunn, **Workers' Self-Management in the United
States**, pp. 41-2] In this way, Proudhon and his followers argued,
exploitation would end and workers would receive the full-product of
their labour. This, it should be noted, does not mean that workers
consume all the proceeds of sales in personal consumption (i.e., no
investment). It means that labour **controls** what to do with the sales
income, i.e., how much to invest and how much to allocate to
consumption:

> *"If Labour appropriated the whole product, that would include
> appropriating the liabilities for the property used up in the
> production process in addition to appropriating the produced outputs.
> Present Labour would have to pay input suppliers (e.g., past labour)
> to satisfy those liabilities."* [Ellerman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 24]

So under mutualism, surpluses (profits) would be either equally divided
between all members of the co-operative or divided unequally on the
basis of the type of work done, with the percentages allotted to each
type being decided by democratic vote, on the principle of one worker,
one vote. Worker co-operatives of this type do have the virtue of
preventing the exploitation and oppression of labour by capital, since
workers are not hired for wages but, in effect, become partners in the
firm. This means that the workers control both the product of their
labour (so that the value-added that they produce is not appropriated by
a privileged elite) and the work process itself (and so they no longer
sell their liberty to others). However, such a limited form of
co-operation is rejected by most anarchists. Non-mutualist anarchists
argue that this, at best, is but a step in the right direction and the
ultimate aim is distribution according to need.

Production for use rather than profit/money is the key concept that
distinguishes collectivist and communist forms of anarchism from the
competitive mutualism advocated by Proudhon. This is for two reasons.
First, because of the harmful effects of markets we indicated in
[section I.1.3](secI1.html#seci13) could make co-operatives become, in
effect, "collective capitalists" and compete against each other in the
market as ferociously as actual capitalists. As Kropotkin put it, while
co-operation had *"at its origin . . . an essentially mutual aid
character"*, it *"is often described as 'joint-stock individualism'"*
and *"such as it is now, it undoubtedly tends to breed a co-operative
egotism, not only towards the community at large, but also among the
co-operators themselves."* [**Mutual Aid**, p. 214] While he was
discussing co-operatives under capitalism, his worries are equally
applicable to a mutualist system of competing syndicates. This would
also lead to a situation where market forces ensured that the workers
involved made irrational decisions (from both a social and individual
point of view) in order to survive in the market. For mutualists, this
*"irrationality of rationality"* is the price to be paid to ensure
workers receive the full product of their labour and, moreover, any
attempt to overcome this problem holds numerous dangers to freedom.
Other social anarchists disagree. They think co-operation between
workplaces can increase, not reduce, freedom. Second, as discussed in
[section I.1.4](secI1.html#seci14), distribution according to work does
not take into account the different needs of the workers (nor
non-workers like the ill, the young and the old). As such, mutualism
does not produce what most anarchists would consider a decent society,
one where people co-operate to make a decent life for all.

What about entry into a syndicate? In the words of Cole, guilds
(syndicates) are *"open associations which any man [or woman] may join"*
but *"this does not mean, of course, that any person will be able to
claim admission, as an absolute right, into the guild of his choice."*
This means that there may be training requirements (for example) and
obviously *"a man [or woman] clearly cannot get into a Guild unless it
needs fresh recruits for its work. [The worker] will have free choice,
but only of the available openings."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 75] As David
Ellerman notes, it is important to remember that *"the labour market
would not exist"* in a self-managed economy as labour would *"always be
the residual claimant."* This means that capital would not be hiring
labour as under capitalism, rather workers would be seeking out
associations to join. *"There would be a job market in the sense of
people looking for firms they could join,"* Ellerman continues, *"but it
would not be a labour market in the sense of the selling of labour in
the employment contract."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 91]

All schools of social anarchism, therefore, are based on the use rights
resting in the specific syndicate while ownership would be socialised
rather than limited to the syndicate's workers. This would ensure free
access to the means of production as new members of a syndicate would
have the same rights and power as existing members. If this were not the
case, then the new members would be the wage slaves of existing ones and
it is **precisely** to avoid this that anarchists argue for
socialisation (see [section I.3.3](secI3.html#seci33)). With
socialisation, free access is guaranteed and so all workers are in the
same position so ensuring self-management and no return to workplace
hierarchy.

Obviously, as in any society, an individual may not be able to pursue
the work they are most interested in (although given the nature of an
anarchist society they would have the free time to pursue it as a
hobby). However, we can imagine that an anarchist society would take an
interest in ensuring a fair distribution of work and so would try to
arrange work sharing if a given work placement is popular (see [section
I.4.13](secI4.html#seci413) on the question of who will do unpleasant
work, and for more on work allocation generally, in an anarchist
society).

Of course there may be the danger of a syndicate or guild trying to
restrict entry from an ulterior motive, as such the exploitation of
monopoly power vis-à-vis other groups in society. However, in an
anarchist society individuals would be free to form their own syndicates
and this would ensure that such activity is self-defeating. In addition,
in a non-individualist anarchist system, syndicates would be part of a
confederation (see [section I.3.4](secI3.html#seci34)). It is a
responsibility of the inter-syndicate congresses to assure that
membership and employment in the syndicates is not restricted in any
anti-social way. If an individual or group of individuals felt that they
had been unfairly excluded from a syndicate then an investigation into
the case would be organised at the congress. In this way any attempts to
restrict entry would be reduced (assuming they occurred to begin with).
And, of course, individuals are free to form new syndicates or leave the
confederation if they so desire.

With the question of entry into syndicates comes the question of whether
there would be enough places for those seeking to work (what could be
termed "unemployment"). Ultimately, there are always an objective number
of places available in a workplace: there is little point having people
join a syndicate if there are no machines or materials for them to work
on! Would a self-managed economy ensure that there are enough places
available for those who seek them?

Perhaps unsurprisingly, neo-classical economics says no and equally
unsurprisingly this conclusion is based not on empirical evidence of
real co-operatives but rather on an abstract model developed in 1958.
The model is based on deducing the implications of assuming that a
labour-managed (*"'Illyrian"*) firm will seek to maximise net income per
worker rather than, in a capitalist firm, maximising net profit. This
results in various perverse results compared to a capitalist firm. This
makes a co-operative-based economy extremely unstable and inefficient,
as well as leading to co-operatives firing workers when prices rise as
this maximises income per (remaining) worker. Thus a co-operative system
ends in *"producing less output and using less labour than its
capitalist counterpart."* [Benjamin Ward, *"The Firm in Illyria: Market
Syndicalism"*, pp. 566-589, **The American Economic Review**, Vol. 48,
No. 4, p. 580]

Of course, it would be churlish to note that, unlike the theory, actual
capitalism is marked by extensive unemployment (as noted in [section
C.1.5](secC1.html#secc15), this is not surprising as it is required to
secure bosses' power over their wage slaves). It would be equally
churlish to note that, to quote one Yugoslav economist, this is *"a
theory whose predictions have absolutely nothing to do with the observed
facts."* [Branko Horvat, *"The Theory of the Worker-Managed Firm
Revisited"*, pp. 9-25, **Journal of Comparative Economics**, vol. 10,
no. 1, p. 9] As David Ellerman summarises:

> *"It might be noted parenthetically that there is a whole academic
> literature on what is called the 'Illyrian firm' . . . The main
> peculiarity of this model is that it assumes the firm would expel
> members when that would increase the net income of the surviving
> members. The resulting short-run perversities have endeared the model
> to capitalist economists. Yet the Illyrian model had been an academic
> toy in the grand tradition of much of modern economics. The predicted
> short-run behaviour has not been observed in Yugoslavia or elsewhere,
> and worker-managed firms such as the Mondragon co-operatives take
> membership as a short-run fixed factor . . . Hence we will continue to
> treat the Illyrian model with its much-deserved neglect."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, p. 150]

The experience of self-managed collectives during the Spanish Revolution
also confirms this, with collectives sharing work equitably in order to
avoid laying people off during the harsh economic conditions caused by
the Civil War (for example, one collective *"adopted a three-day
workweek, dividing available work among all those who had worked at the
plant -- thereby avoiding unemployment -- and continued to pay everyone
his or her basic salary"* [Martha A. Ackelsberg, **Free Women of
Spain**, p. 101]).

We need, therefore, to *"appeal to empirical reality and common sense"*
when evaluating the claim of neo-classical economics on the issue of
co-operatives. The *"empirical evidence supports"* the argument that
this model is flawed. There *"has been no tendency for workers to lay
off co-workers when times are good, neither in Mondragon nor in
Yugoslavia. Even in bad times, layoffs are rare."* Unsurprisingly, *"in
the short run, a worker-managed firm responds in the same fashion as a
capitalist firm"* and workers are added to the collective to meet
increases in demand. [David Schweickart, **Against Capitalism**, p. 91,
p. 92 and p. 93] A conclusion shared by economist Geoffrey M. Hodgson:

> *"Much of the evidence we do have about the behaviour of real-world
> worker co-operatives is that they respond to changes in market prices
> in a similar manner to the capitalist firm . . . Accordingly, the
> basic assumptions in the model are questioned by the evidence."*
> [**Economics and Utopia**, pp. 223-4]

So, as Branko Horvat observes, in spite of the neo-classical analysis
producing specific predictions the *"mere fact that nothing of the kind
has ever been observed in real-world economies leaves them
undisturbed."* At most they would say that a *"self-managed firm may not
behave as the theory predicts, but this is because it behaves
irrationally. If something is wrong, it is not the theory but the
reality."* Interestingly, though, if you assume that capitalist firms
*"maximise the rate of profit, profit per unit invested"* rather than
total profit then neo-classical theory *"generates equally absurd
results."* That is why the distinction between short and long runs was
invented, so that in the short run the amount of capital is fixed. If
this is applied to a co-operative, so that *"in the short run, the work
force is fixed"* then the alleged problems with labour-managed
workplaces disappear. Needless to say, a real co-operative acts on the
assumption that the work force is fixed and as *"the workers are no
longer hired"* this means that the worker-managers *"do not fire their
colleagues when business is slack; they reduce work time or work for
inventories. When the demand temporarily increases, they work overtime
or contract outside work."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 11-13]

In summary, the neo-classical theory of the labour-managed firm has as
much relation to a real co-operative as neo-classical economics
generally does to capitalism. Significantly, "Austrian" economists
generally accept the neo-classical theory of co-operatives (in part,
undoubtedly, as it confirms their dislike of all forms of socialism).
Even one as sympathetic to self-management as David L. Prychitko accepts
it, simply criticising because it *"reduces the firm to a short-run
objective function"* and *"as long as market **entry** is allowed, the
labour-managed market sheds any possible instability problem."*
[**Markets, Planning and Democracy**, p. 81] While correct, this
criticism totally misses the point. Yes, in the long run other
co-operatives would be set up and this would increase supply of goods,
increase employment and so forth, yet this should not blind us to the
limitations of the assumptions which drives the neo-classical theory.

To sum up, syndicates are voluntary associations of workers who manage
their workplace and their own work. Within the syndicate, the decisions
which affect how the workplace develops and changes are in the hands of
those who work there. In addition, it means that each section of the
workforce manages its own activity and sections and that all workers
placed in administration tasks (i.e. *"management"*) are subject to
election and recall by those who are affected by their decisions. The
workers' self-management is discussed in the [next
section](secI3.html#seci32).

Finally, two things. First, as noted in [section
G.1.3](secG3.html#secg13) a few individualist anarchists, although not
all, were not opposed to (non-exploitative) wage labour and so did not
place co-operatives at the centre of their ideas. This position is very
much a minority in the anarchist tradition as it is not consistent with
libertarian principles nor likely to end the exploitation of labour (see
[section G.4.1](secG4.html#secg41)), so making most anarchists think
such individualism is inconsistent anarchism (see [section
G.4.2](secG4.html#secg42)). Secondly, it is important to note that
individuals who do not wish to join syndicates will be able to work for
themselves. There is no *"forced collectivisation"* under **any** form
of libertarian socialism, because coercing people is incompatible with
the basic principles of anarchism. Those who wish to be self-employed
will have free access to the productive assets they need, provided that
they neither attempt to monopolise more of those assets than they and
their families can use by themselves nor attempt to employ others for
wages (see [section I.3.7](secI3.html#seci37)).

I.3.2 What is workers' self-management?
---------------------------------------

Quite simply, workers' self-management (sometimes called *"workers'
control"*) means that all workers affected by a decision have an equal
voice in making it, on the principle of "one worker, one vote." Thus
*"revolution has launched us on the path of industrial democracy."*
[**Selected Writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 63] That is,
workers *"ought to be the real managers of industries."* [Peter
Kropotkin, **Fields, Factories and Workshops Tomorrow**, p. 157] This is
essential to ensure *"a society of equals, who will not be compelled to
sell their hands and their brains to those who choose to employ them . .
. but who will be able to apply their knowledge and capacities to
production, in an organism so constructed as to combine all the efforts
for procuring the greatest possible well-being for all, while full, free
scope will be left for every individual initiative."* [Kropotkin,
**Kropotkin: Selections from his Writings**, pp. 113-4] As Chomsky put
it:

> *"Compassion, solidarity, friendship are also human needs. They are
> driving needs, no less than the desire to increase one's share of
> commodities or to improve working conditions. Beyond this, I do not
> doubt that it is a fundamental human need to take an active part in
> the democratic control of social institutions. If this is so, then the
> demand for industrial democracy should become a central goal of any
> revitalised left with a working-class base."* [**Radical Priorities**,
> p. 191]

As noted earlier, however, we need to be careful when using the term
*"workers' control,"* as others use it and give it an entirely different
meaning from the one intended by anarchists. Like the terms
*"anarchist"* and *"libertarian,"* it has been co-opted by others to
describe less than libertarian schemes.

The first to do so were the Leninists, starting with Lenin, who have
used the term "workers' control" to describe a situation were workers
have a limited supervision over either the capitalists or the appointed
managers of the so-called workers' state. These do not equate to what
anarchists aim for and, moreover, such limited experiments have not
lasted long (see [section H.3.14](secH3.html#sech314)). More recently,
"workers' control" have been used by capitalists to describe schemes in
which workers' have more say in how their workplaces are run while
maintaining wage slavery (i.e. capitalist ownership, power and ultimate
control). So, in the hands of capitalists, "workers' control" is now
referred to by such terms as "participation", "co-determination",
"consensus", "empowerment", "Japanese-style management," etc. *"For
those whose function it is solve the new problems of boredom and
alienation in the workplace in advanced industrial capitalism, workers'
control is seen as a hopeful solution"*, Sam Dolgoff noted, *"a solution
in which workers are given a modicum of influence, a strictly limited
area of decision-making power, a voice at best secondary in the control
of conditions of the workplace. Workers' control, in a limited form
sanctioned by the capitalists, is held to be the answer to the growing
non-economic demands of the workers."* [**The Anarchist Collectives**,
p. 81]

The new managerial fad of "quality circles" -- meetings where workers
are encouraged to contribute their ideas on how to improve the company's
product and increase the efficiency with which it is made -- is an
example of "workers' control" as conceived by capitalists. However, when
it comes to questions such as what products to make, where to make them,
and (especially) how revenues from sales should be divided, capitalists
and managers do not ask for or listen to workers' "input." So much for
"democratisation," "empowerment," and "participation"! In reality,
capitalistic "workers control" is merely an another insidious attempt to
make workers more willing and "co-operative" partners in their own
exploitation. Needless to say, such schemes are phoney as they never
place **real** power in the hands of workers. In the end, the owners and
their managers have the final say (and so hierarchy remains) and, of
course, profits are still extracted from the workforce.

Hence anarchists prefer the term ***workers' self-management***, a
concept which refers to the exercise of workers' power through
collectivisation and federation. It means *"a transition from private to
collective ownership"* which, in turn, *"call[s] for new relationships
among the members of the working community."* [Abel Paz, **The Spanish
Civil War**, p. 55] Self-management in this sense *"is not a new form of
mediation between the workers and their capitalist bosses, but instead
refers to the very process by which the workers themselves **overthrow**
their managers and take on their own management and the management of
production in their own workplace. Self-management means the
organisation of all workers . . . into a workers' council or factory
committee (or agricultural syndicate), which makes all the decisions
formerly made by the owners and managers."* [Dolgoff, **Op. Cit.**, p.
81] Self-management means the end of hierarchy and authoritarian social
relationships in workplace and their replacement by free agreement,
collective decision-making, direct democracy, social equality and
libertarian social relationships.

As anarchists use the term, workers' self-management means collective
worker ownership, control and direction of all aspects of production,
distribution and investment. This is achieved through
participatory-democratic workers' assemblies, councils and federations,
in both agriculture and industry. These bodies would perform all the
functions formerly reserved for capitalist owners, managers, executives
and financiers where these activities actually relate to productive
activity rather than the needs to maximise minority profits and power
(in which case they would disappear along with hierarchical management).
These workplace assemblies will be complemented by people's financial
institutions or federations of syndicates which perform all functions
formerly reserved for capitalist owners, executives, and financiers in
terms of allocating investment funds or resources.

Workers' self-management is based around general meetings of the whole
workforce, held regularly in every industrial or agricultural syndicate.
These are the source of and final authority over decisions affecting
policy within the workplace as well as relations with other syndicates.
These meeting elect workplace councils whose job is to implement the
decisions of these assemblies and to make the day to day administration
decisions that will crop up. These councils are directly accountable to
the workforce and its members subject to re-election and instant recall.
It is also likely that membership of these councils will be rotated
between all members of the syndicate to ensure that no one monopolises
an administrative position. In addition, smaller councils and assemblies
would be organised for divisions, units and work teams as circumstances
dictate.

In this way, workers would manage their own collective affairs together,
as free and equal individuals. They would associate together to
co-operate without subjecting themselves to an authority over
themselves. Their collective decisions would remain under their control
and power. This means that self-management creates *"an organisation so
constituted that by affording everyone the fullest enjoyment of his [or
her] liberty, it does not permit anyone to rise above the others nor
dominate them in any way but through the natural influence of the
intellectual and moral qualities which he [or she] possesses, **without
this influence ever being imposed as a right and without leaning upon
any political institution whatever.**"* [**The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, p. 271] Only by convincing your fellow associates of the
soundness of your ideas can those ideas become the agreed plan of the
syndicate. No one is in a position to impose their ideas simply because
of the post they hold or the work they do.

Most anarchists think that it is likely that purely administrative tasks
and decisions would be delegated to elected individuals in this way,
freeing workers and assemblies to concentrate on important activities
and decisions rather than being bogged down in trivial details. As
Bakunin put it:

> *"Is not administrative work just as necessary to production as is
> manual labour -- if not more so? Of course, production would be badly
> crippled, if not altogether suspended, without efficient and
> intelligent management. But from the standpoint of elementary justice
> and even efficiency, the management of production need not be
> exclusively monopolised by one or several individuals. And managers
> are not at all entitled to more pay. The co-operative workers
> associations have demonstrated that the workers themselves, choosing
> administrators from their own ranks, receiving the same pay, can
> efficiency control and operate industry. The monopoly of
> administration, far from promoting the efficiency of production, on
> the contrary only enhances the power and privileges of the owners and
> their managers."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 424]

What is important is that what is considered as important or trivial,
policy or administration rests with the people affected by the decisions
and subject to their continual approval. Anarchists do not make a fetish
of direct democracy and recognise that there is more important things in
life than meetings and voting! While workers' assemblies play the key
role in self-management, it is not the focal point of **all** decisions.
Rather it is the place where all the important policy decisions are
made, administrative decisions are ratified or rejected and what counts
as a major decision determined. Needless to say, what is considered as
important issues will be decided upon by the workers themselves in their
assemblies.

Unsurprisingly, anarchists argue that, as well as being more free,
workers self-management is more efficient and productive than the
hierarchical capitalist firm (efficiency here means accomplishing goals
without wasting valued assets). Capitalist firms fail to tap humanity’s
vast reservoir of practical knowledge, indeed they block it as any
application of that knowledge is used to enrich the owners rather than
those who generate and use it. Thus the hierarchical firm
disenfranchises employees and reduces them to the level of order-takers
with an obvious loss of information, knowledge and insight (as discussed
in [section I.1.1](secI1.html#seci11)). With self-management, that vast
source of knowledge and creativity can be expressed. Thus,
self-management and worker ownership *"should also reap other rewards
through the greater motivation and productivity of the workers."* [David
Ellerman, **The Democratic Worker-Owned Firm**, p. 139]

This explains why some firms try to simulate workers' control (by
profit-sharing or "participation" schemes). For, as market socialist
David Schweickart notes, *"the empirical evidence is overwhelming"* and
supports those who argue for workers' participation. The *"evidence is
strong that both worker participation in management and profit sharing
tend to enhance productivity and that worker-run enterprises often are
more productive than their capitalist counterparts."* [**Against
Capitalism**, p. 100] In fact, 94% of 226 studies into this issue showed
a positive impact, with 60% being statistically significant, and so the
empirical evidence is *"generally supportive of a positive link between
profit sharing and productivity."* This applies to co-operatives as
well. [Martin L. Weitzman and Douglas L. Kruse, *"Profit Sharing and
Productivity"*, pp. 95-140, **Paying for Productivity**, Alan S. Blinder
(ed.), p. 137, p. 139 and pp. 131-2] Another study concludes that the
*"available evidence is strongly suggestive that for employee ownership
. . . to have a strong impact on performance, it needs to be accompanied
by provisions for worker participation in decision making."* In
addition, *"narrow differences in wages and status"*, as anarchists have
long argued, *"increase productivity"*. [David I. Levine and Laura
D'Andrea Tyson, *"Participation, Productivity, and the Firm's
Environment"*, pp. 183-237, **Op. Cit.**, p. 210 and p. 211]

This should be unsurprising, for as Geoffrey M. Hodgson notes, the
neo-classical model of co-operatives *"wrongly assume[s] that social
relations and technology are separable . . . Yet we have much evidence .
. . to support the contention that participation and co-operation can
increase technological efficiency. Production involves people -- their
ideas and aspirations -- and not simply machines operating under the
laws of physics. It seems that, in their search for pretty diagrams and
tractable mathematical models, mainstream economists often forget
this."* [**Economics and Utopia**, p. 223]

Therefore anarchists have strong evidence to support Herbert Read's
comment that libertarian socialism would *"provide a standard of living
far higher than that realised under any previous form of social
organisation."* [**Anarchy and Order**, p. 49] It confirms Cole's
comment that the *"key to real efficiency is self-government; and any
system that is not based upon self-government is not only servile, but
also inefficient. Just as the labour of the wage-slave is better than
the labour of the chattel-slave, so . . . will the labour of the free
man [and woman] be better than either."* [**Self-Government in
Industry**, p. 157] Yet it is important to remember, as important as
this evidence is, real social change comes not from "efficiency"
concerns but from ideals and principles. While anarchists are confident
that workers' self-management will be more efficient and productive than
capitalism, this is a welcome side-effect of the deeper goal of
increasing freedom. The evidence confirms that freedom is the best
solution for social problems but if, for example, slavery or wage-labour
proved to be more productive than free, associated, labour it does not
make them more desirable!

A self-managed workplace, like a self-managed society in general, does
not mean that specialised knowledge (where it is meaningful) will be
neglected or not taken into account. Quite the opposite. Specialists
(i.e. workers who are interested in a given area of work and gain an
extensive understanding of it) are part of the assembly of the
workplace, just like other workers. They can and have to be listened to,
like anyone else, and their expert advice included in the decision
making process. Anarchists do not reject the idea of expertise nor the
rational authority associated with it. As we indicated in [section
B.1](secB1.html), anarchists recognise the difference between being
***an*** authority (i.e. having knowledge of a given subject) and being
***in*** authority (i.e. having power over someone else). as discussed
in [section H.4](secH4.html), we reject the latter and respect the
former.

Such specialisation does not imply the end of self-management, but
rather the opposite. *"The greatest intelligence,"* Bakunin argued,
*"would not be equal to a comprehension of the whole. Thence results,
for science as well as industry, the necessity of the division and
association of labour."* [**God and the State**, p. 33] Thus specialised
knowledge is part of the associated workers and not placed above them in
positions of power. The other workers in a syndicate can compliment the
knowledge of the specialists with the knowledge of the work process they
have gained by working and so enrich the decision. Knowledge is
distributed throughout society and only a society of free individuals
associated as equals and managing their own activity can ensure that it
is applied effectively (part of the inefficiency of capitalism results
from the barriers to knowledge and information flow created by its
hierarchical workplace).

A workplace assembly is perfectly able to listen to an engineer, for
example, who suggests various ways of reaching various goals (i.e. if
you want X, you would have to do A or B. If you do A, then C, D and E is
required. If B is decided upon, then F, G, H and I are entailed). But it
is the assembly, **not** the engineer, that decides what goals and
methods to be implemented. As Cornelius Castoriadis put it: *"We are not
saying: people will have to decide **what** to do, and then technicians
will tell them **how** to do it. We say: after listening to technicians,
people will decide what to do **and** how to do it. For the **how** is
not neutral -- and the **what** is not disembodied. What and how are
neither **identical**, nor **external** to each other. A 'neutral'
technique is, of course, an illusion. A conveyor belt is linked to a
type of product **and** a type of producer -- and vice versa."*
[**Social and Political Writings**, vol. 3, p. 265]

However, we must stress that while an anarchist society would "inherit"
a diverse level of expertise and specialisation from class society, it
would not take this as unchangeable. Anarchists argue for
***"all-round"*** (or integral) education as a means of ensuring that
everyone has a basic knowledge or understanding of science, engineering
and other specialised tasks. As Bakunin argued, *"in the interests of
both labour and science . . . there should no longer be either workers
or scholars but only human beings."* Education must *"prepare every
child of each sex for the life of thought as well as for the life of
labour."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 116 and p. 119] This does not imply
the end of all specialisation (individuals will, of course, express
their individuality and know more about certain subjects than others)
but it does imply the end of the artificial specialisation developed
under capitalism which tries to deskill and disempower the wage worker
by concentrating knowledge into hands of management.

And, just to state the obvious, self-management does not imply that the
mass of workers decide on the application of specialised tasks.
Self-management implies the autonomy of those who do the work as well as
collective decision making on collective issues. For example, in a
self-managed hospital the cleaning staff would not have a say in the
doctors' treatment of patients just as the doctors would not tell the
cleaners how to do their work (of course, it is likely that an anarchist
society will **not** have people whose work is simply to clean and
nothing else, we just use this as an example people will understand).
All members of a syndicate would have a say in what happens in the
workplace as it affects them collectively, but individual workers and
groups of workers would manage their own activity within that
collective.

Needless to say, self-management abolishes the division of labour
inherent in capitalism between order takers and order givers. It
integrates (to use Kropotkin's words) brain work and manual work by
ensuring that those who do the work also manage it and that a workplace
is managed by those who use it. Such an integration of labour will,
undoubtedly, have a massive impact in terms of productivity, innovation
and efficiency. As Kropotkin argued, the capitalist firm has a negative
impact on those subject to its hierarchical and alienating structures:

> *"The worker whose task has been specialised by the permanent division
> of labour has lost the intellectual interest in his [or her] labour,
> and it is especially so in the great industries; he has lost his
> inventive powers. Formerly, he [or she] invented very much . . . But
> since the great factory has been enthroned, the worker, depressed by
> the monotony of his [or her] work, invents no more."* [**Fields,
> Factories and Workshops Tomorrow**, p. 171]

Must all the skills, experience and intelligence that very one has be
swept away or crushed by hierarchy? Or could it not become a new fertile
source of progress under a better organisation of production?
Self-management would ensure that the independence, initiative and
inventiveness of workers (which disappears under wage slavery) comes to
the fore and is applied. Combined with the principles of *"all-round"*
(or integral) education (see [section J.5.13](secJ5.html#secj513)) who
can deny that working people could transform the current economic system
to ensure *"well-being for all"*? And we must stress that by
*"well-being"* we mean well-being in terms of meaningful, productive
activity in humane surroundings and using appropriate technology, in
terms of goods of utility and beauty to help create strong, healthy
bodies and in terms of surroundings which are inspiring to live in and
ecologically integrated.

Little wonder Kropotkin argued that self-management and the *"erasing
[of] the present distinction between the brain workers and manual
worker"* would see *"social benefits"* arising from *"the concordance of
interest and harmony so much wanted in our times of social struggles"*
and *"the fullness of life which would result for each separate
individual, if he [or she] were enabled to enjoy the use of both . . .
mental and bodily powers."* This is in addition to the *"increase of
wealth which would result from having . . . educated and well-trained
producers."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 180]

Let us not forget that today workers **do** manage their own working
time to a considerable extent. The capitalist may buy a hour of a
workers' time but they have to ensure that the worker follows their
orders during that time. Workers resist this imposition and this results
in considerable shop-floor conflict. Frederick Taylor, for example,
introduced his system of *"scientific management"* in part to try and
stop workers managing their own working activity. As David Noble notes,
workers *"paced themselves for many reason: to keep time for themselves,
to avoid exhaustion, to exercise authority over their work, to avoid
killing so-called gravy piece-rate jobs by overproducing and risking a
pay cut, to stretch out available work for fear of layoffs, to exercise
their creativity, and, last but not least, to express their solidarity
and their hostility to management."* These were *"[c]oupled with
collective co-operation with their fellows on the floor"* and
*"labour-prescribed norms of behaviour"* to achieve *"shop floor control
over production."* [**Forces of Production**, p. 33] This is why
*working to rule"* is such an efficient weapon in the class struggle
(see [section H.4.4](secH4.html#sech44)) In other words, workers
naturally tend towards self-management anyway and it is this natural
movement towards liberty during work hours which is combated by bosses
(who wins, of course, depends on objective and subjective pressures
which swing the balance of power towards labour or capital).

Self-management will built upon this already existing unofficial workers
control over production and, of course, our knowledge of the working
process which actually doing it creates. The conflict over who controls
the shop floor -- either those who do the work or those who give the
orders -- not only shows that self-management is **possible** but also
show how it can come about as it brings to the fore the awkward fact
that while the bosses need us, we do not need them!

I.3.3 What does socialisation mean?
-----------------------------------

A key aspect of anarchism is the socialisation of the means of life.
This means that the land, housing, workplaces and so forth become common
property, usable by all who need them. Thus Emma Goldman's summary:

> *"That each and every individual is and ought to be free to own
> himself and to enjoy the full fruit of his labour; that man is
> absolved from all allegiance to the kings of authority and capital;
> that he has, by the very fact of his being, free access to the land
> and all means of production, and entire liberty of disposing of the
> fruits of his efforts; that each and every individual has the
> unquestionable right of free and voluntary association with other
> equally sovereign individuals for economic, political, social, and
> other purposes, and that to achieve this end man must emancipate
> himself from the sacredness of property, the respect for man-made law,
> the fear of the Church, the cowardice of public opinion, the stupid
> arrogance of national, racial, religious, and sex superiority, and
> from the narrow puritanical conception of human life."* [**A
> Documentary History of the American Years**, vol. 2, pp. 450-1]

This is required because private ownership of collectively used
"property" (such as workplaces and land) results in a situation where
the many have to sell their labour (i.e., liberty) to the few who own
it. This creates hierarchical and authoritarian social relationships as
well as economic classes. For anarchists, society cannot be divided into
*"a possessing and a non-possessing"* class system as this is *"a
condition of social injustice"* as well as making the state
*"indispensable to the possessing minority for the protection of its
privileges."* [Rudolf Rocker, **Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 11] In other
words, *"as long as land and capital are unappropriated, the workers are
free, and that, when these have a master, the workers also are slaves."*
[Charlotte M. Wilson, **Anarchist Essays**, p. 21]

While there is a tendency by state socialists and the right to equate
socialisation with nationalisation, there are key differences which the
different names signify. Nationalisation, in practice and usually in
theory, means that the means of life become state property. This means
that rather than those who need and use a specific part of the
co-operative commonwealth deciding what to do with it, the government
does. As we discussed in [section B.3.5](secB3.html#secb35) this would
just be state capitalism, with the state replacing the current
capitalist and landlords.

As Emma Goldman argued, there is a clear difference between
socialisation and nationalisation. *"The first requirement of
Communism,"* she argued, *"is the socialisation of the land and of the
machinery of production and distribution. Socialised land and machinery
belong to the people, to be settled upon and used by individuals and
groups according to their needs."* Nationalisation, on the other hand,
means that a resource *"belongs to the state; that is, the government
has control of it and may dispose of it according to its wishes and
views."* She stressed that *"when a thing is socialised, every
individual has free access to it and may use it without interference
from anyone."* When the state owned property, *"[s]uch a state of
affairs may be called state capitalism, but it would be fantastic to
consider it in any sense communistic."* [**Red Emma Speaks**, pp. 406-7]

Socialisation aims at replacing property rights by use rights. The key
to understanding socialisation is to remember that it is about **free
access**. In other words, that every one has the same rights to the
means of life as everyone else, that no one is exploited or oppressed by
those who own the means of life. In the words of Herbert Read:

> *"The essential principle of anarchism is that mankind has reached a
> stage of development at which it is possible to abolish the old
> relationship of master-man (capitalist-proletarian) and substitute a
> relationship of egalitarian co-operation. This principle is based, not
> only on ethical ground, but also on economic grounds."* [**Anarchy and
> Order**, p. 92]

This implies two things. Firstly, that the means of life are common
property, without an owning class. Secondly, there is free association
between equals within any association and so industrial democracy (or
self-management).

This has been an anarchist position as long as anarchism has been called
anarchism. Thus we find Proudhon arguing in 1840 that *"the land is
indispensable to our existence"* and *"consequently a common thing,
consequently insusceptible of appropriation"* and that *"all accumulated
capital being social property, no one can be its exclusive proprietor."*
This means *"the farmer does not appropriate the field which he sows"*
and *"all capital . . . being the result of collective labour"* is
*"collective property."* Without this there is inequality and a
restriction of freedom as *"the working-man holds his labour by the
condescension and necessities of the master and proprietor."* The
*"civilised labourer who bakes a loaf that he may eat a slice of bread .
. . is not free. His employer . . . is his enemy."* In fact, *"neither a
commercial, nor an industrial, nor an agricultural association can be
conceived of in the absence of equality."* The aim was a society of
*"possessors without masters"* rather than wage-labourers and tenants
*"controlled by proprietors."* Within any economic association there
would be democracy, with *"leaders, instructors, superintendents"* and
so forth being *"chosen from the labourers by the labourers themselves,
and must fulfil the conditions of eligibility. It is the same with all
public functions, whether of administration or instruction."* [**What is
Property?**, p. 107, p. 130, p. 153, p. 128, p. 142, p. 227, p. 167 and
p. 137]

This meant *"democratically organised workers associations"* and
*"[u]nder the law of association, transmission of wealth does not apply
to the instruments of labour, so cannot become a cause of inequality."*
[Proudhon, **No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1., p. 62] Thus workplaces
*"are the common and undivided property of all those who take part
therein"* rather than *"companies of stockholders who plunder the bodies
and souls of the wage workers."* This meant free access, with *"every
individual employed in the association"* having *"an undivided share in
the property of the company"* and has *"a right to fill any position"*
as *"all positions are elective, and the by-laws subject to the approval
of the members."* Each member *"shall participate in the gains and in
the losses of the company, in proportion to his [or her] services."*
[Proudhon, **General Idea of the Revolution**, p. 219 and p. 222]
Proudhon's idea of free credit from a People's Bank, it should be noted,
is another example of free access, of socialisation. Needless to say,
anarchists like Bakunin and Kropotkin based their arguments for
socialisation on this vision of self-managed workplaces and free access
to the means of life. For Bakunin, for example, *"the land, the
instruments of work and all other capital may become the collective
property of the whole of society and be utilised only by the workers, on
other words, by the agricultural and industrial associations."*
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 174]

So the means of production are socialised in the mutualism, collectivism
and communism and all rest on the same principle of equal access. So
when someone joins an existing workers association they become full
members of the co-operative, with the same rights and duties as existing
members. In other words, they participate in the decisions on a basis of
one person, one vote. How the products of that association are
distributed vary in different types of anarchism, but the associations
that create them are rooted in the free association of equals. In
contrast, a capitalist society places the owner in the dominant position
and new members of the workforce are employees and so subordinate
members of an organisation which they have no say in (see [section
B.1](secB1.html)).

Socialisation would mean that workplaces would become *"little republics
of workingmen."* [Proudhon, quoted by Dorothy W. Douglas, *"Proudhon: A
Prophet of 1848: Part II"*, pp. 35-59, **The American Journal of
Sociology**, Vol. 35, No. 1, p. 45] As economist David Ellerman
explains, the democratic workplace *"is a social community, a community
of work rather than a community residence. It is a republic, or **res
publica** of the workplace. The ultimate governance rights are assigned
as personal rights . . . to the people who work in the firm . . . This
analysis shows how a firm can be socialised and yet remain 'private' in
the sense of not being government-owned."* As noted in [section
I.3.1](secI3.html#seci31), this means the end of the labour market as
there would be free access to workplaces and so workers would not be
wage-labourers employed by bosses. Instead, there would be a people
seeking associations to join and associations seeking new associates to
work with. *"Instead of abolishing the employment relation,"* Ellerman
argues, *"state socialism nationalised it . . . Only the democratic firm
-- where the workers are jointly self-employed -- is a genuine
alternatives to private or public employment."* [**The Democratic
Worker-Owned Firm**, p. 76 and p. 209]

So libertarian socialism is based on decentralised decision making
within the framework of socially-owned but independently-run and
worker-self-managed syndicates. The importance of socialisation should
not be downplayed. This is because the self-management of work is not
sufficient in and of itself to ensure an anarchist society. Under
feudalism, the peasants managed their own labour but such a regime was
hardly libertarian for, at a minimum, the peasants paid the landlord
rent. An industrial equivalent can be imagined, where workers hire
workplaces and land from capitalists and landlords. As left-wing
economist Geoffrey M. Hodgson suggests:

> *"Assume that the workers are self-employed but do not own all the
> means of production. In this case there still may be powerful owners
> of factories, offices and machines . . . the owners of the means of
> production would still receive an income, emanating from that
> ownership. In bargaining with these owners, the workers would be
> required to concede the claim of these owners to an income, as they
> would be unable to produce without making use of the means of
> production owned by others. Hence the workers would still be deprived
> of . . . 'surplus value'. Profits would still derive from ownership of
> the means of production."* [**Economics and Utopia**, p. 168]

This would not be (libertarian) socialism (as workers would still be
exploited) nor would it be capitalism (as there is no wage labour as
such, although there would be a proletariat). Thus genuine anarchism
requires socialisation of the means of life, which ensures free access
(no usury). In other words, self-management (while an essential part of
anarchism) is not sufficient to make a society anarchistic. Without
socialism (free access to the means of life) it would be yet another
class system and rooted in exploitation. To eliminate all exploitation,
social anarchists propose that productive assets such as workplaces and
land be owned by society as a whole and run by syndicates and
self-employed individuals. Thus Kropotkin: *"Free workers, on free land,
with free machinery, and freely using all the powers given to man by
science."* [**Act for Yourselves**, p. 102]

This vision of socialisation, of free access, also applies to housing.
Proudhon, for example, suggested that payments of rent in housing under
capitalism would be *"carried over to the account of the purchase of the
property"* and once paid for the house *"shall pass under the control of
the town administration . . . in the name of all the tenants, and shall
guarantee them all a domicile, in perpetuity, at the cost of the
building."* Rented farm land would be the same and would, once paid for,
*"revert immediately to the town, which shall take the place of the
former proprietor."* Provision *"shall be made for the supervision of
the towns, for the installation of cultivators, and for the fixing of
the boundaries of possessions."* [**General Idea of the Revolution**, p.
194 and p. 199] Kropotkin had a similar end in mind, namely *"the
abolition of rent"*, but by different means, namely by *"the
expropriation of houses"* during a social revolution. This would be
*"the communalising of houses and the right of each family to a decent
dwelling."* [**The Conquest of Bread**, p. 91 and p. 95]

It is important to note here that while anarchists tend to stress
communes (see [section I.5](secI5.html)) this does **not** imply
communal living in the sense of one-big family. As Kropotkin, for
example, was at pains to stress such continual communal living is
*"repugnant to millions of human beings. The most reserved man [and
woman] certainly feels the necessity of meeting his [or her] fellows for
the pursue of common work . . . But it is not so for the hours of
leisure, reserved for rest and intimacy."* Communal living in the sense
of a human bee-hive *"can please some, and even all at a certain period
of their life, but the great mass prefers family life (family life of
the future, be it understood). They prefer isolated apartments."* A
community living together under one roof *"would be hateful, were it the
general rule. Isolation, alternating with time spent in society, is the
normal desire of human nature."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 123-4] Thus the aim
is *"Communism, but not the monastic or barrack-room Communism formerly
advocated [by state socialists], but the free Communism which places the
products reaped or manufactured at the disposal of all, leaving to each
the liberty to consume them as he pleases in his [or her] own home."*
[**The Place of Anarchism in the Evolution of Socialist Thought**, p. 7]
Needless to say, each household, like each workplace, would be under the
control of its users and socialisation exists to ensure that remains the
case (i.e., that people cannot become tenants/subjects of landlords).

See [section I.6](secI6.html) for a discussion of how socialisation and
free access could work.

Beyond this basic vision of self-management and socialisation, the
schools of anarchism vary. Mutualism eliminates wage labour and unites
workers with the means of production they use. Such a system is
socialist as it is based on self-management and workers'
control/ownership of the means of production. However, other social
anarchists argue that such a system is little more than "petit-bourgeois
co-operativism" in which the worker-owners of the co-operatives compete
in the marketplace with other co-operatives for customers, profits, raw
materials, etc. -- a situation that could result in many of the same
problems that arise under capitalism or even a return to capitalism (see
[section I.1.3](secI1.html#seci13)). Some Mutualists recognise this
danger. Proudhon, as discussed in [section I.3.5](secI3.html#seci35),
advocated an agro-industrial federation to combat the effects of market
forces in generating inequality and wage labour. In addition, supporters
of mutualism can point to the fact that existing co-operatives rarely
fire their members and are far more egalitarian in nature than
corresponding capitalist firms. This they argue will ensure that
mutualism will remain socialist, with easy credit available to those who
are made unemployed to start their own co-operatives again.

In contrast, within anarcho-collectivism and anarcho-communism society
as a whole owns the means of life, which allows for the elimination of
both competition for survival and the tendency for workers to develop a
proprietary interest the enterprises in which they work. As Kropotkin
argued, *"[t]here is no reason why the factory . . . should not belong
to the community . . . It is evident that now, under the capitalist
system, the factory is the curse of the village, as it comes to overwork
children and to make paupers of its male inhabitants; and it is quite
natural that it should be opposed by all means by the workers . . . But
under a more rational social organisation, the factory would find no
such obstacles; it would be a boon to the village."* Needless to say,
such a workplace would be based on workers' self-management, as *"the
workers . . . ought to be the real managers of industries."* [**Fields,
Factories and Workshops Tomorrow**, p. 152 and p. 157] This *"socially
organised industrial production"* (to use Kropotkin's term) would ensure
a decent standard of living without the problems associated with a
market, even a non-capitalist one.

In other words, the economy is communalised, with land and the means of
production being turned into common "property". The community determines
the social and ecological framework for production while the workforce
makes the day-to-day decisions about what to produce and how to do it.
This is because a system based purely on workplace assemblies
effectively disenfranchises those individuals who do not work but live
with the effects of production (e.g., ecological disruption). In Murray
Bookchin's words, the aim would be to advance *"a holistic approach to
an ecologically oriented economy"* with key policy decisions *"made by
citizens in face-to-face assemblies -- as **citizens**, not simply as
workers, farmers, or professionals . . . As citizens, they would
function in such assemblies by their highest level -- their **human**
level -- rather than as socially ghettoised beings. They would express
their general human interests, not their particular status interests."*
These communalised economies would join with others *"into a regional
confederal system. Land, factories, and workshops would be controlled by
the popular assemblies of free communities, not by a nation-state or by
worker-producers who might very well develop a proprietary interest in
them."* [**Remaking Society**, p. 194]

An important difference between workplace and community assemblies is
that the former can be narrow in focus while the latter can give a
hearing to solutions that bring out the common ground of people as
people rather than as workers in a specific workplace or industry. This
would be in the context of communal participation, through face-to-face
voting of the whole community in local neighbourhood and confederal
assemblies, which will be linked together through voluntary federations.
It does **not** mean that the state owns the means of production, as
under Marxism-Leninism or social democracy, because there is no state
under libertarian socialism (for more on community assemblies, see
[section I.5](secI5.html)).

This means that when a workplace is communalised workers'
self-management is placed within the broader context of the community,
becoming an aspect of community control. This does not mean that
workers' do not control what they do or how they do it. Rather, it means
that the framework within which they make their decisions is determined
by the community. For example, the local community may decide that
production should maximise recycling and minimise pollution, and workers
informed of this decision make investment and production decisions
accordingly. In addition, consumer groups and co-operatives may be given
a voice in the confederal congresses of syndicates or even in the
individual workplaces (although it would be up to local communities to
decide whether this would be practical or not). In these ways, consumers
could have a say in the administration of production and the type and
quality of the product, adding their voice and interests in the creation
as well as the consumption of a product.

Given the general principle of social ownership and the absence of a
state, there is considerable leeway regarding the specific forms that
collectivisation might take -- for example, in regard to methods of
distribution, the use or non-use of money, etc. -- as can be seen by the
different systems worked out in various areas of Spain during the
Revolution of 1936-39. Nevertheless, freedom is undermined when some
communities are poor while others are wealthy. Therefore the method of
surplus distribution must insure that all communities have an adequate
share of pooled revenues and resources held at higher levels of
confederation as well as guaranteed minimum levels of public services
and provisions to meet basic human needs. That is why anarchists have
supported the need for syndicates and communities to federate (see [next
section](secI3.html#seci34))

Finally, one key area of disagreement between anarchist schools is how
far socialisation should go. Mutualists think that it should only
include the means of production while communist-anarchists argue that
socialisation, to be consistent, must embrace what is produced as well
as what produced it. Collectivist-anarchists tend to agree with
mutualists on this, although many think that, over time, the economy
would evolve into communism as the legacies of capitalism and scarcity
are overcome. Proudhon spoke for the mutualists:

> *"This, then, is the first point settled: property in product, if we
> grant so much, does not carry with it property in the means of
> production; that seems to me to need no further demonstration . . .
> all . . . are proprietors of their products -- not one is proprietor
> of the means of production. The right to product is exclusive -- **jus
> in re**; the right to means is common -- **jus ad rem**."* [**What is
> Property?**, pp. 120-1]

For libertarian communists, socialisation should be extended to the
products of labour as well. This means that as well as having free
access to the means of production, people would also have free access to
the goods and services produced by them. Again, this does not imply
people having to share the possessions they use. Rather it means that
instead of having to buy the goods in question they are distributed
freely, according to need. To maintain socialisation of the means of
product but not in goods means basing society *"on two absolutely
opposed principles, two principles that contradict one another
continually."* [Kropotkin, **The Conquest of Bread**, p. 163] The need
is to go beyond the abolition of wage labour into the abolition of money
(the wages system). This is because any attempt at measuring a person's
contribution to society will be flawed and, more importantly, people
*"differ from one another by the amount of their **needs**. There is the
young unmarried woman and the mother of a family of five or six
children. For the employer of our days there is no consideration of the
needs of"* each and *"the labour cheque . . . acts in the same way."*
[Kropotkin, **Act For Yourselves**, pp. 108-9]

Regardless of precisely which mode of distribution specific individuals,
workplaces, communes or areas picks, socialisation would be underlying
all. Free access to the means of production will ensure free
individuals, including the freedom to experiment with different
anarchistic economic systems.

I.3.4 What relations would exist between individual syndicates?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Just as individuals associate together to work on and overcome common
problems, so would syndicates. Few, if any, workplaces are totally
independent of others. They require raw materials as inputs and
consumers for their products. Therefore there will be links between
different syndicates. These links are twofold: firstly, free agreements
between individual syndicates; secondly, confederations of syndicates
(within branches of industry and regionally).

Combined with this desire for free co-operation is a desire to end
centralised systems. The opposition to centralisation is often framed in
a distinctly false manner. This can be seen when Alex Nove, a leading
market socialist, argued that *"there are horizontal links (market),
there are vertical links (hierarchy). What other dimension is there?"*
[**The Economics of Feasible Socialism**, p. 226] In other words, to
oppose central planning means to embrace the market. This is not true:
horizontal links need not be market based any more than vertical links
need be hierarchical. An anarchist society must be based essentially on
horizontal links between individuals and associations, freely
co-operating together as they (not a central body) sees fit. This
co-operation will be source of many links in an anarchist economy. When
a group of individuals or associations meet together and discuss common
interests and make common decisions they will be bound by their own
decisions. This is radically different from a central body giving out
orders because those affected will determine the content of these
decisions. In other words, instead of decisions being handed down from
the top, they will be created from the bottom up.

Let us consider free agreement. Anarchists recognise the importance of
letting people organise their own lives. This means that they reject
central planning and instead urge direct links between workers'
associations. In the words of Kropotkin, *"[f]ree workers would require
a free organisation, and this cannot have any other basis than free
agreement and free co-operation, without sacrificing the autonomy of the
individual."* Those directly involved in production (and in consumption)
know their needs far better than any bureaucrat. Thus voluntary
agreement is the basis of a free economy, such agreements being
*"entered by free consent, as a free choice between different courses
equally open to each of the agreeing parties."* [**Anarchism**, p. 52
and p. 69] Without the concentration of wealth and power associated with
capitalism, free agreement will become real and no longer a mask for
hierarchy.

The anarchist economy *"starts from below, not from above. Like an
organism, this free society grows into being from the simple unit up to
the complex structure. The need for . . . the individual struggle for
life"* is *"sufficient to set the whole complex social machinery in
motion. Society is the result of the individual struggle for existence;
it is not, as many suppose, opposed to it."* So anarchists think that
*"[i]n the same way that each free individual has associated with his
brothers [and sisters!] to produce . . . all that was necessary for
life, driven by no other force than his [or her] desire for the full
enjoyment of life, so each institution is free and self-contained, and
co-operates and enters into agreements with others because by so doing
it extends its own possibilities."* This suggests a decentralised
economy -- even more decentralised than capitalism (which is
decentralised only in capitalist mythology, as shown by big business and
transnational corporations, for example) -- one *"growing ever more
closely bound together and interwoven by free and mutual agreements."*
[George Barrett, **The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 18]

An anarchist economy would be based on spontaneous order as workers
practised mutual aid and free association. For communist anarchists,
this would take the form of *"free exchange without the medium of money
and without profit, on the basis of requirement and the supply at
hand."* [Alexander Berkman, **What is Anarchism?**, p. 217]
*"Anarchists"*, summarised Rocker, *"desire a federation of free
communities which shall be bound to one another by their common economic
and social interest and shall arrange their affairs by mutual agreement
and free contract."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 1] An example of one
such agreement would be orders for products and services:

> *"This factory of ours is, then, to the fullest extent consistent with
> the character of its service, a self-governing unit, managing its own
> productive operations, and free to experiment to the heart's content
> in new methods, to develop new styles and products. . . This autonomy
> of the factory is the safeguard. . . against the dead level of
> mediocrity, the more than adequate substitute for the variety which
> the competitive motive was once supposed to stimulate, the guarantee
> of liveliness, and of individual work and workmanship."* [G.D.H. Cole,
> **Guild Socialism Restated**, p. 59]

This means that free agreement will ensure that customers would be able
to choose their own suppliers, meaning that production units would know
whether they were producing what their customers wanted, when they
wanted it (i.e., whether they were meeting individual and social needs).
If they were not, customers would go elsewhere, to other production
units within the same branch of production. We should stress that in
addition to this negative check (i.e. "exit" by consumers) it is likely,
via consumer groups and co-operatives as well as communes, that
workplaces will be subject to positive checks on what they produced.
Consumer groups, by formulating and communicating needs to producer
groups, will have a key role in ensuring the quality of production and
goods and that it satisfies their needs (see [section
I.4.7](secI4.html#seci47) for more details of this).

These direct horizontal links between syndicates are essential to ensure
that goods are produced which meet the needs of those who requested
them. Without specific syndicates requesting specific goods at specific
times to meet specific requirements, an economy will not meet people's
needs. A central plan, for example, which states that 1 million tonnes
of steel or 25 million shirts need to be produced in a year says nothing
about what specifically needs to be produced and when, which depends on
how it will be used and the needs of those using it. As Malatesta
argued, *"it would be an absurd waste of energy to produce blindly for
all possible needs, rather than calculating the actual needs and
organising to satisfy them with as little effort as possible . . . the
solution lies in accord between people and in the agreements . . . that
will come about"* between them. [**At the Café**, pp. 62-3] Hence the
pressing need for the classic anarchist ideas on free association, free
agreement and mutual aid! These direct links between producer and
consumer can communicate the information required to produce the right
thing at the right time! As Kropotkin argued (based on his firsthand
experience of state capitalism in Russia under Lenin):

> *"production and exchange represent an undertaking so complicated that
> the plans of the state socialists . . . would prove to be absolutely
> ineffective as soon as they were applied to life. No government would
> be able to organise production if the workers themselves through their
> unions did not do it in each branch of industry; for in all production
> there arise daily thousands of difficulties which no government can
> solve or foresee. It is certainly impossible to foresee everything.
> Only the efforts of thousands of intelligences working on the problems
> can co-operate in the development of a new social system and find the
> best solutions for the thousands of local needs."* [**Anarchism**, pp.
> 76-77]

This brings us to the second form of relationships between syndicates,
namely confederations of syndicates in the same industry or geographical
area. It should be noted that inter-workplace federations are not
limited to collectivist, syndicalist and communist anarchists. The idea
of federations of syndicates goes back to Proudhon's agro-industrial
federation, first raised during the 1848 revolution and named as such in
his 1863 book, **The Principle of Federation**. The French mutualist
suggested an *"agro-industrial federation"* as the structural support
organisation for his system of self-managed co-operatives. These
confederations of syndicates, are necessary to aid communication between
workplaces. No syndicate exists in isolation, and so there is a real
need for a means by which syndicates can meet together to discuss common
interests and act on them. Thus confederations are complementary to free
agreement and also reflect anarchist ideas of free association and
decentralised organisation as well as concern for practical needs:

> *"Anarchists are strenuously opposed to the authoritarian, centralist
> spirit . . . So they picture a future social life in the basis of
> federalism, from the individual to the municipality, to the commune,
> to the region, to the nation, to the international, on the basis of
> solidarity and free agreement. And it is natural that this ideal
> should be reflected also in the organisation of production, giving
> preference as far as possible, to a decentralised sort of
> organisation; but this does not take the form of an absolute rule to
> be applied in every instance. A libertarian order would be in itself .
> . . rule out the possibility of imposing such a unilateral solution."*
> [Luigi Fabbri, *"Anarchy and 'Scientific Communism"*, pp. 13-49, **The
> Poverty of Statism**, Albert Meltzer (ed.), p. 23]

A confederation of syndicates (called a *"guild"* by some libertarian
socialists, or *"industrial union"* by others) works on two levels:
within an industry and across industries. The basic operating principle
of these confederations is the same as that of the syndicate itself --
voluntary co-operation between equals in order to meet common needs. In
other words, each syndicate in the confederation is linked by horizontal
agreements with the others, and none owe any obligations to a separate
entity above the group (see [section A.2.11](secA2.html#seca211) for
more on the nature of anarchist confederation). As Herbert Read
summarised:

> *"The general principle is clear: each industry forms itself into a
> federation of self-governing collectives; the control of each industry
> is wholly in the hands of the workers in that industry, and these
> collectives administer the whole economic life of the country."*
> [**Anarchy and Order**, p. 49]

Kropotkin's comments on federalism between communes indicate this (a
syndicate can be considered as a producers' commune). *"The Commune of
tomorrow,"* he argued *"will know that it cannot admit any higher
authority; above it there can only be the interests of the Federation,
freely accepted by itself as well as other communes."* So federalism
need not conflict with autonomy, as each member would have extensive
freedom of action within its boundaries and so each *"Commune will be
absolutely free to adopt all the institutions it wishes and to make all
the reforms and revolutions it finds necessary."* [**Words of a Rebel**,
p. 83] Moreover, these federations would be diverse and functional.
Economic federation would a produce a complex inter-networking between
associations and federations:

> *"Our needs are in fact so various, and they emerge with such
> rapidity, that soon a single federation will not be sufficient to
> satisfy them all. The Commune will then feel the need to contract
> other alliances, to enter into other federations. Belonging to one
> group for the acquisition of food supplies, it will have to join a
> second group to obtain other goods, such as metals, and then a third
> and a fourth group for textiles and works of art."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
> 87]

Therefore, a confederation of syndicates would be adaptive to its
members needs. As Tom Brown argued, the *"syndicalist mode of
organisation is extremely elastic, therein is its chief strength, and
the regional confederations can be formed, modified, added to or
reformed according to local conditions and changing circumstances."*
[**Syndicalism**, p. 58]

As would be imagined, these confederations are voluntary associations
and *"[j]ust as factory autonomy is vital in order to keep the Guild
system alive and vigorous, the existence of varying democratic types of
factories in independence of the National Guilds may also be a means of
valuable experiment and fruitful initiative of individual minds. In
insistently refusing to carry their theory to its last 'logical'
conclusion, the Guildsmen [and anarchists] are true to their love of
freedom and varied social enterprise."* [G.D.H. Cole, **Op. Cit.**, p.
65] This, it must be stressed does not mean centralised control from the
top:

> *"But when we say that ownership of the tools of production, including
> the factory itself, should revert to the corporation [i.e.
> confederation] we do not mean that the workers in the individual
> workshops will be ruled by any kind of industrial government having
> power to do what it pleases with the tools of production. No, the
> workers in the various factories have not the slightest intention of
> handing over their hard-won control . . . to a superior power . . .
> What they will do is . . . to guarantee reciprocal use of their tools
> of production and accord their fellow workers in other factories the
> right to share their facilities, receiving in exchange the same right
> to share the facilities of the fellow workers with whom they have
> contracted the pact of solidarity."* [James Guillaume, *"On Building
> the New Social Order"*, pp. 356-79, **Bakunin on Anarchism**, pp.
> 363-364]

So collectivist and communist anarchism, like mutualism, is rooted in
self-management in the workplace. This implies the ability of workers to
pick the kinds of productive tasks they want to do. It would not be the
case of workplaces simply being allocated tasks by some central body and
expected to fulfil them (a task which, ignoring the real issues of
bureaucracy and freedom, would be difficult to implement in any large
and complex economy). Rather, workplaces would have the power to select
tasks submitted to them by other associations (economic and communal)
and control how the work required to achieve them was done. In this type
of economic system, workers' assemblies and councils would be the focal
point, formulating policies for their individual workplaces and
deliberating on industry-wide or economy-wide issues through general
meetings of the whole workforce in which everyone would participate in
decision making. Voting in the councils would be direct, whereas in
larger confederal bodies, voting would be carried out by temporary,
unpaid, mandated, and instantly recallable delegates, who would resume
their status as ordinary workers as soon as their mandate had been
carried out.

**Mandated** here means that the delegates from workers' assemblies and
councils to meetings of higher confederal bodies would be instructed, at
every level of confederation, by the workers who elected them on how to
deal with any issue. They would be delegates, not representatives, and
so would attend any confederal meeting with specific instructions on how
to vote on a particular issue. **Recallable** means that if they do not
vote according to that mandate they will be replaced and the results of
the vote nullified. The delegates, in other words, would be given
imperative mandates (binding instructions) that committed them to a
framework of policies within which they would have to act, and they
could be recalled and their decisions revoked at any time for failing to
carry out the mandates they were given (this support for mandated
delegates has existed in anarchist theory since at least 1848, when
Proudhon argued that it was *"a consequence of universal suffrage"* to
ensure that *"the people . . . do not . . . abjure their sovereignty."*
[**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 63]). Because of this right of
mandating and recalling their delegates, the workers' assemblies at the
base would be the source of, and final "authority" (so to speak) over,
policy for all higher levels of confederal co-ordination of the economy.
Delegates will be ordinary workers rather than paid full-time
representatives or union leaders, and they will return to their usual
jobs as soon as the mandate for which they have been elected has been
carried out. In this way, decision-making power remains with the
workers' councils and does not become concentrated at the top of a
bureaucratic hierarchy in an elite class of professional administrators
or union leaders. What these confederations could do is discussed in the
[next section](secI3.html#seci35).

In summary, a free society *"is freely organised, from the bottom to
top, staring from individuals that unite in associations which slowly
grow bit by bit into ever more complex federations of associations"*.
[Malatesta, **At the Cafe**, p. 65]

I.3.5 What would confederations of syndicates do?
-------------------------------------------------

Voluntary confederation among syndicates is considered necessary by
social anarchists for numerous reasons but mostly in order to decide on
the policies governing relations between syndicates and to co-ordinate
their activities. This could vary from agreeing technical standards, to
producing guidelines and policies on specific issues, to agreeing major
investment decisions or prioritising certain large-scale economic
projects or areas of research. In addition, they would be the means by
which disputes could be solved and any tendencies back towards
capitalism or some other class society identified and acted upon.

This can be seen from Proudhon, who was the first to suggest the need
for such federations. *"All my economic ideas developed over the last
twenty-five years,"* he stated, *"can be defined in three words:
**Agro-industrial federation**"* This was required because *"[h]owever
impeccable in its basic logic the federal principle may be . . . it will
not survive if economic factors tend persistently to dissolve it. In
other words, political right requires to be buttressed by economic
right"*. A free society could not survive if *"capital and commerce"*
existed, as it would be *"divided into two classes -- one of landlords,
capitalists, and entrepreneurs, the other of wage-earning proletarians,
one rich, the other poor."* Thus *"in an economic context, confederation
may be intended to provide reciprocal security in commerce and industry
. . . The purpose of such specific federal arrangements is to protect
the citizens . . . from capitalist and financial exploitation, both from
within and from the outside; in their aggregate they form . . . an
**agro-industrial federation**"* [**The Principle of Federation**, p.
74, p. 67 and p. 70]

While capitalism results in *"interest on capital"* and *"wage-labour or
economic servitude, in short inequality of condition"*, the
*"agro-industrial federation . . . will tend to foster increasing
equality . . . through mutualism in credit and insurance . . .
guaranteeing the right to work and to education, and an organisation of
work which allows each labourer to become a skilled worker and an
artist, each wage-earner to become his own master."* The *"industrial
federation"* will apply *"on the largest scale"* the *"principles of
mutualism"* and *"economic solidarity"*. As *"industries are sisters"*,
they *"are parts of the same body"* and *"one cannot suffer without the
others sharing in its suffering. They should therefore federate . . . in
order to guarantee the conditions of common prosperity, upon which no
one has an exclusive claim."* Thus mutualism sees *"all industries
guaranteeing one another mutually"* as well as *"organising all public
services in an economical fashion and in hands other than the state's."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 70, p. 71, p. 72 and p. 70]

Later anarchists took up, built upon and clarified these ideas of
economic federation. There are two basic kinds of confederation: an
industrial one (i.e., a federation of all workplaces of a certain type)
and a regional one (i.e. a federation of all syndicates within a given
economic area). Thus there would be a federation for each industry and a
federation of all syndicates in a geographical area. Both would operate
at different levels, meaning there would be confederations for both
industrial and inter-industrial associations at the local and regional
levels and beyond. The basic aim of this inter-industry and
cross-industry networking is to ensure that the relevant information is
spread across the various parts of the economy so that each can
effectively co-ordinate its plans with the others in a way which
minimises ecological and social harm. Thus there would be a railway
workers confederation to manage the rail network but the local, regional
and national depots and stations would send a delegate to meet regularly
with the other syndicates in the same geographical area to discuss
general economic issues.

However, it is essential to remember that each syndicate within the
confederation is autonomous. The confederations seek to co-ordinate
activities of joint interest (in particular investment decisions for new
plant and the rationalisation of existing plant in light of reduced
demand). They do not determine what work a syndicate does or how they do
it:

> *"With the factory thus largely conducting its own concerns, the
> duties of the larger Guild organisations [i.e. confederations] would
> be mainly those of co-ordination, or regulation, and of representing
> the Guild in its external relations. They would, where it was
> necessary, co-ordinate the production of various factories, so as to
> make supply coincide with demand. . . they would organise research . .
> . This large Guild organisation. . . must be based directly on the
> various factories included in the Guild."* [Cole, **Guild Socialism
> Restated**, pp. 59-60]

So it is important to note that the lowest units of confederation -- the
workers' assemblies -- will control the higher levels, through their
power to elect mandated and recallable delegates to meetings of higher
confederal units. It would be fair to make the assumption that the
"higher" up the federation a decision is made, the more general it will
be. Due to the complexity of life it would be difficult for federations
which cover wide areas to plan large-scale projects in any detail and so
would be, in practice, more forums for agreeing guidelines and
priorities than planning actual specific projects or economies. As
Russian anarcho-syndicalist G.P. Maximov put it, the aim *"was to
co-ordinate all activity, all local interest, to create a centre but not
a centre of decrees and ordinances but a centre of regulation, of
guidance -- and only through such a centre to organise the industrial
life of the country."* [quoted by M. Brinton, **For Workers' Power**, p.
330]

So this is a decentralised system, as the workers' assemblies and
councils at the base having the final say on **all** policy decisions,
being able to revoke policies made by those with delegated
decision-making power and to recall those who made them:

> *"When it comes to the material and technical method of production,
> anarchists have no preconceived solutions or absolute prescriptions,
> and bow to what experience and conditions in a free society recommend
> and prescribe. What matters is that, whatever the type of production
> adopted, it should be the free choice of the producers themselves, and
> cannot possibly be imposed, any more than any form is possible of
> exploitations of another's labour. . . Anarchists do not **a priori**
> exclude any practical solution and likewise concede that there may be
> a number of different solutions at different times."* [Luigi Fabbri,
> *"Anarchy and 'Scientific' Communism"*, pp. 13-49, **The Poverty of
> Statism**, Albert Meltzer (ed.), p. 22]

Confederations would exist for specific reasons. Mutualists, as can be
seen from Proudhon, are aware of the dangers associated with even a
self-managed, socialistic market and create support structures to defend
workers' self-management. Moreover, it is likely that industrial
syndicates would be linked to mutual banks (a credit syndicate). Such
syndicates would exist to provide interest-free credit for
self-management, new syndicate expansion and so on. And if the
experience of capitalism is anything to go by, mutual banks will also
reduce the business cycle as *"[c]ountries like Japan and Germany that
are usually classifies as bank-centred -- because banks provide more
outside finance than markets, and because more firms have long-term
relationships with their banks -- show greater growth in and stability
of investment over time than the market-centred ones, like the US and
Britain . . . Further, studies comparing German and Japanese firms with
tight bank ties to those without them also show that firms with bank
ties exhibit greater stability in investment over the business cycle."*
[Doug Henwood, **Wall Street**, pp. 174-5]

One argument against co-operatives is that they do not allow the
diversification of risk (all the worker's eggs are on one basket).
Ignoring the obvious point that most workers today do not have shares
and are dependent on their job to survive, this objection can be
addressed by means of *"the **horizontal association** or grouping of
enterprises to pool their business risk. The Mondragon co-operatives are
associated together in a number of regional groups that pool their
profits in varying degrees. Instead of a worker diversifying his or her
capital in six companies, six companies partially pool their profits in
a group or federation and accomplish the same risk-reduction purpose
without transferable equity capital."* Thus *"risk-pooling in
federations of co-operatives"* ensure that *"transferable equity capital
is not necessary to obtain risk diversification in the flow of annual
worker income."* [David Ellerman, **The Democratic Worker-Owned Firm**,
p. 104] Moreover, as the example of many isolated co-operatives under
capitalism have shown, support networks are essential for co-operatives
to survive. It is no co-incidence that the Mondragon co-operative
complex in the Basque region of Spain has a credit union and mutual
support networks between its co-operatives and is by far the most
successful co-operative system in the world. The *"agro-industrial
federation"* exists precisely for these reasons.

Under collectivist and communist anarchism, the federations would have
addition tasks. There are two key roles. Firstly, the sharing and
co-ordination of information produced by the syndicates and, secondly,
determining the response to the changes in production and consumption
indicated by this information.

Confederations (negotiated-co-ordination bodies) would be responsible
for clearly defined branches of production, and in general, production
units would operate in only one branch of production. These
confederations would have direct links to other confederations and the
relevant communal confederations, which supply the syndicates with
guidelines for decision making (see [section I.4.4](secI4.html#seci44))
and ensure that common problems can be highlighted and discussed. These
confederations exist to ensure that information is spread between
workplaces and to ensure that the industry responds to changes in social
demand. In other words, these confederations exist to co-ordinate major
new investment decisions (i.e. if demand exceeds supply) and to
determine how to respond if there is excess capacity (i.e. if supply
exceeds demand).

It should be pointed out that these confederated investment decisions
will exist along with the investments associated with the creation of
new syndicates, plus internal syndicate investment decisions. We are not
suggesting that **every** investment decision is to be made by the
confederations. (This would be particularly impossible for **new**
industries, for which a confederation would not exist!) Therefore, in
addition to co-ordinated production units, an anarchist society would
see numerous small-scale, local activities which would ensure
creativity, diversity, and flexibility. Only after these activities had
spread across society would confederal co-ordination become necessary.
So while production will be based on autonomous networking, the
investment response to consumer actions would, to some degree, be
co-ordinated by a confederation of syndicates in that branch of
production. By such means, the confederation can ensure that resources
are not wasted by individual syndicates over-producing goods or
over-investing in response to changes in production. By communicating
across workplaces, people can overcome the barriers to co-ordinating
their plans which one finds in market systems (see [section
C.7.2](secC7.html#secc72)) and so avoid the economic and social
disruptions associated with them.

Thus, major investment decisions would be made at congresses and plenums
of the industry's syndicates, by a process of horizontal, negotiated
co-ordination. Major investment decisions are co-ordinated at an
appropriate level, with each unit in the confederation being autonomous,
deciding what to do with its own productive capacity in order to meet
social demand. Thus we have self-governing production units co-ordinated
by confederations (horizontal negotiation), which ensures local
initiative (a vital source of flexibility, creativity, and diversity)
and a rational response to changes in social demand. As links between
syndicates are non-hierarchical, each syndicate remains self-governing.
This ensures decentralisation of power and direct control, initiative,
and experimentation by those involved in doing the work.

It should be noted that during the Spanish Revolution successfully
federated in different ways. Gaston Leval noted that these forms of
confederation did not harm the libertarian nature of self-management:

> *"Everything was controlled by the syndicates. But it must not
> therefore be assumed that everything was decided by a few higher
> bureaucratic committees without consulting the rank and file members
> of the union. Here libertarian democracy was practised. As in the
> C.N.T. there was a reciprocal double structure; from the grass roots
> at the base . . . upwards, and in the other direction a reciprocal
> influence from the federation of these same local units at all levels
> downwards, from the source back to the source."* [**The Anarchist
> Collectives**, p. 105]

The exact nature of any confederal responsibilities will vary, although
we *"prefer decentralised management; but ultimately, in practical and
technical problems, we defer to free experience."* [Luigi Fabbri, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 24] The specific form of organisation will obviously vary as
required from industry to industry, area to area, but the underlying
ideas of self-management and free association will be the same.
Moreover, the *"essential thing . . . is that its [the confederation or
guild] function should be kept down to the minimum possible for each
industry."* [Cole, **Op. Cit.**, p. 61]

Another important role for inter-syndicate federations is to even-out
inequalities. After all, each area will not be identical in terms of
natural resources, quality of land, situation, accessibility, and so on.
Simply put, social anarchists *"believe that because of natural
differences in fertility, health and location of the soil it would be
impossible to ensure that every individual enjoyed equal working
conditions."* Under such circumstances, it would be *"impossible to
achieve a state of equality from the beginning"* and so *"justice and
equity are, for natural reasons, impossible to achieve . . . and that
freedom would thus also be unachievable."* [Malatesta, **The Anarchist
Revolution**, p. 16 and p. 21]

This was recognised by Proudhon, who saw the need for economic
federation due to differences in raw materials, quality of land and so
on, and as such argued that a portion of income from agricultural
produce be paid into a central fund which would be used to make
equalisation payments to compensate farmers with less favourably
situated or less fertile land. As he put it, economic rent *"in
agriculture has no other cause than the inequality in the quality of
land . . . if anyone has a claim on account of this inequality . . . [it
is] the other land workers who hold inferior land. That is why in our
scheme for liquidation [of capitalism] we stipulated that every variety
of cultivation should pay a proportional contribution, destined to
accomplish a balancing of returns among farm workers and an assurance of
products."* In addition, *"all the towns of the Republic shall come to
an understanding for equalising among them the quality of tracts of
land, as well as accidents of culture."* [**General Idea of the
Revolution**, p. 209 and p. 200]

By federating together, workers can ensure that *"the earth will . . .
be an economic domain available to everyone, the riches of which will be
enjoyed by all human beings."* [Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta: His Life
and Ideas**, p. 93] Local deficiencies of raw materials, in the quality
of land, and, therefore, supplies would be compensated from outside, by
the socialisation of production and consumption. This would allow all of
humanity to share and benefit from economic activity, so ensuring that
well-being for all is possible.

Federation would eliminate the possibility of rich and poor collectives
and syndicates co-existing side by side. As Kropotkin argued, *"[c]ommon
possession of the necessities for production implies the common
enjoyment of the fruits of common production . . . when everybody,
contributing for the common well-being to the full extent of his [or
her] capacities, shall enjoy also from the common stock of society to
the fullest possible extent of his [or her] needs."* [**Anarchism**, p.
59] Hence we find the CNT arguing in its 1936 resolution on libertarian
communism that *"[a]s far as the interchange of produce between communes
is concerned, the communal councils are to liase with the regional
federations of communes and with the confederal council of production
and distribution, applying for whatever they may need and [giving] any
available surplus stocks."* [quoted by Jose Peirats, **The CNT in the
Spanish Revolution**, vol. 1, p. 107] This clearly followed Kropotkin's
comments that the *"socialising of production, consumption, and
exchange"* would be based on workplaces *"belong[ing] to federated
Communes."* [**The Conquest of Bread**, p. 136]

The legacy of capitalism, with its rich and poor areas, its rich and
poor workplaces, will be a problem any revolution will face. The
inequalities produced by centuries of class society will take time to
change. This is one of the tasks of the confederation, to ensure the
socialisation of both production and consumption so that people are not
penalised for the accidents of history and that each commune can develop
itself to an adequate level. In the words of the CNT during the Spanish
Revolution:

> *"Many arguments are used against the idea of socialisation; one of
> these -- the most delightful -- says that by socialising an industry
> we simply take it over and run it with the consequence that we have
> flourishing industries where the workers are privileged, and
> unfortunate industries where the workers get less benefits but have to
> work harder than workers elsewhere . . . There are differences between
> the workers in prosperous industries and those which barely survive. .
> . Such anomalies, which we don't deny exist, are attributed to the
> attempts at socialisation. We firmly assert that the opposite is true;
> such anomalies are the logical result of the absence of
> socialisation.*

> *"The socialisation which we propose will resolve these problems which
> are used to attack it. Were Catalan industry socialised, everything
> would be organically linked -- industry, agriculture, and the trade
> union organisations, in accordance with the council for the economy.
> They would become normalised, the working day would become more equal
> or what comes to the same thing, the differences between workers of
> different activities would end . . .*

> *"Socialisation is -- and let its detractors hear it -- the genuine
> authentic organisation of the economy. Undoubtedly the economy has to
> be organised; but not according to the old methods, which are
> precisely those which we are destroying, but in accordance with new
> norms which will make our people become an example to the world
> proletariat."* [**Solidaridad Obrera**, 30 April 1937, p. l2]

Workers' self-management does not automatically mean that all forms of
economic domination and exploitation would be eliminated. After all, in
a market economy firms can accrue super-profits simply because of their
size or control over a specific technology or resource. Hence Proudhon's
suggestion that *"advocates of mutualism"* would *"regulate the market"*
to ensure *"an honest breakdown of cost prices"*, fix *"after amicable
discussion of a **maximum** and **minimum** profit margin"* and *"the
organising of regulating societies."* [**Selected Writings of
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 70] It seems likely that the
agro-industrial federation would be the body which ensures that.
Similarly, the federation would be the means by which to air, and deal
with, suggestions that syndicates are monopolising their resources,
i.e., treating them as private property rather than socialised
possessions. Thus the federation would unite workers *"to guarantee the
mutual use of the tools of production"* which are, *"by a reciprocal
contract"*, the *"collective property of the whole."* [James Guillaume,
*"On Building the New Social Order"*, pp. 356-79, **Bakunin on
Anarchism**, p. 376]

The inter-industry confederations help ensure that when the members of a
syndicate change work to another syndicate in another (or the same)
branch of industry, they have the same rights as the members of their
new syndicate. In other words, by being part of the confederation, a
worker ensures that s/he has the same rights and an equal say in
whatever workplace is joined. This is essential to ensure that a
co-operative society remains co-operative, as the system is based on the
principle of *"one person, one vote"* by all those involved the work
process. If specific syndicates **are** restricting access and so
producing wage-labour, monopolising resources and so charging monopoly
prices, the federation would be forum to publicly shame such syndicates
and organise boycotts of them. Such anti-social activity is unlikely to
be tolerated by a free people seeking to protect that freedom.

However, it could again be argued that these confederations are still
centralised and that workers would still be following orders coming from
above. This is incorrect, for any decisions concerning an industry or
plant are under the direct control of those involved. For example, the
steel industry confederation may decide to rationalise itself at one of
its congresses. Murray Bookchin sketches the response to this situation
as follows:

> *"[L]et us suppose that a board of highly qualified technicians is
> established [by this congress] to propose changes in the steel
> industry. This board . . . advances proposals to rationalise the
> industry by closing down some plants and expanding the operation of
> others . . . Is this a 'centralised' body or not? The answer is both
> yes and no. Yes, only in the sense that the board is dealing with
> problems that concern the country as a whole; no, because it can make
> no decision that **must** be executed for the country as a whole. The
> board's plan must be examined by all the workers in the plants [that
> are affected] . . . The board itself has no power to enforce
> 'decisions'; it merely makes recommendations. Additionally, its
> personnel are controlled by the plant in which they work and the
> locality in which they live . . . they would have no decision-making
> powers. The adoption, modification or rejection of their plans would
> rest entirely with . . . [those] involved."* [**Post Scarcity
> Anarchism**, p. 180]

Therefore, confederations would not be in positions of power over the
individual syndicates. No attempt is made to determine which plants
produce which steel for which customers in which manner. Thus, the
confederations of syndicates ensure a decentralised, spontaneous
economic order without the negative side-effects of capitalism (namely
power concentrations within firms and in the market, periodic crises,
etc.).

As one can imagine, an essential feature of these confederations will be
the collection and processing of information in order to determine how
an industry is developing. This does not imply bureaucracy or
centralised control at the top. Taking the issue of centralisation
first, the confederation is run by delegate assemblies, meaning that any
officers elected at a congress only implement the decisions made by the
delegates of the relevant syndicates. It is in the congresses and
plenums of the confederation that new investment decisions, for example,
are made. The key point to remember is that the confederation exists
purely to co-ordinate joint activity and share information, it does not
take an interest in how a workplace is run or what orders from consumers
it fills. (Of course, if a given workplace introduces policies which
other syndicates disapprove of, it can be expelled). As the delegates to
these congresses and plenums are mandated and their decisions subject to
rejection and modification by each productive unit, the confederation is
not centralised.

As far as bureaucracy goes, the collecting and processing of information
does necessitate an administrative staff to do the work. However, this
problem affects capitalist firms as well; and since syndicates are based
on bottom-up decision making, its clear that, unlike a centralised
capitalist corporation, administration would be smaller. In fact, it is
likely that a fixed administration staff for the confederation would not
exist in the first place! At the regular congresses, a particular
syndicate may be selected to do the confederation's information
processing, with this job being rotated regularly around different
syndicates. In this way, a specific administrative body and equipment
can be avoided and the task of collating information placed directly in
the hands of ordinary workers. Further, it prevents the development of a
bureaucratic elite by ensuring that **all** participants are versed in
information-processing procedures.

Lastly, what information would be collected? That depends on the
context. Individual syndicates would record inputs and outputs,
producing summary sheets of information. For example, total energy
input, in kilowatts and by type, raw material inputs, labour hours
spent, orders received, orders accepted, output, and so forth. This
information can be processed into energy use and labour time per product
(for example), in order to give an idea of how efficient production is
and how it is changing over time. For confederations, the output of
individual syndicates can be aggregated and local and other averages can
be calculated. In addition, changes in demand can be identified by this
aggregation process and used to identify when investment will be needed
or plants closed down. In this way the chronic slumps and booms of
capitalism can be avoided without creating a system which is even more
centralised than capitalism.

I.3.6 What about competition between syndicates?
------------------------------------------------

This is a common question, particularly from defenders of capitalism.
They argue that syndicates will not co-operate together unless forced to
do so, and will compete against each other for raw materials, skilled
workers, and so on. The result of this process, it is claimed, will be
rich and poor syndicates, inequality within society and within the
workplace, and (possibly) a class of unemployed workers from
unsuccessful syndicates who are hired by successful ones. In other
words, they argue that libertarian socialism will need to become
authoritarian to prevent competition, and that if it does not do so it
will become capitalist very quickly.

For individualist anarchists and mutualists, competition is not viewed
as a problem. They think that competition, based around co-operatives
and mutual banks, would minimise economic inequality, as the new
economic structure based around free credit and co-operation would
eliminate non-labour (i.e. unearned) income such as profit, interest and
rent and give workers enough bargaining power to eliminate exploitation.
For these anarchists it is a case of capitalism perverting competition
and so are not against competition itself. Other anarchists think that
whatever gains might accrue from competition (assuming there are, in
fact, any) would be more than offset by its negative effects, which are
outlined in [section I.1.3](secI1.html#seci13). It is to these
anarchists that the question is usually asked.

Before continuing, we would like to point out that individuals trying to
improve their lot in life is not against anarchist principles. How could
it be? *"Selfish is not a crime,"* John Most and Emma Goldman noted,
*"it only becomes a crime when conditions are such as to give an
individual the opportunity to satisfy his selfishness to the detriment
of others. In an anarchistic society everyone will seek to satisfy his
ego"* but in order to do so he *"will extend his aid to those who will
aid him, and then selfishness will no more be a curse but a blessing."*
[*"Talking about Anarchy"*, **Black Flag**, no. 228, p. 28] Thus
anarchists see co-operation and mutual aid as an expression of
"self-interest", in that working with people as equals is in our joint
benefit. In the words of John O'Neill:

> *"[F]or it is the institutions themselves that define what counts as
> one's interests. In particular, the market encourages egoism, not
> primarily because it encourages an individual to be 'self-interested'
> -- it would be unrealistic not to expect individuals to act for the
> greater part in a 'self-interested' manner -- but rather because it
> defines an individual's interests in a particularly narrow fashion,
> most notably in terms of possession of certain material goods. In
> consequence, where market mechanism enter a particular sphere of life,
> the pursuit of goods outside this narrow range of market goods is
> institutionally defined as an act of altruism."* [**The Market**, p.
> 158]

As such, anarchists would suggest that we should not confuse competition
with self-interest and that a co-operative society would tend to promote
institutions and customs which would ensure that people recognised that
co-operation between equals maximises individual freedom and
self-interest far more than individualistic pursuit to material wealth
at the expense of all other goals. Ultimately, what use would it be to
gain the world and loose what makes life worth living?

Of course, such a society would not be based on exactly equal shares of
everything. Rather, it would mean equal opportunity and free, or equal,
access to resources (for example, that only ill people use medical
resources is unproblematic for egalitarians!). So a society with unequal
distributions of resources is not automatically a non-anarchist one.
What **is** against anarchist principles is centralised power,
oppression, and exploitation, all of which flow from large inequalities
of income and private property. This is the source of anarchist concern
about equality -- concern that is not based on some sort of *"politics
of envy."* Anarchists oppose inequality because it soon leads to the few
oppressing the many (a relationship which distorts the individuality and
liberty of all involved as well as the health and very lives of the
oppressed).

Anarchists desire to create a society in which such relationships are
impossible, believing that the most effective way to do this is by
empowering all, by creating an egoistic concern for liberty and equality
among the oppressed, and by developing social organisations which
encourage self-management. As for individuals' trying to improve their
lot, anarchists maintain that co-operation is the best means to do so,
**not** competition. And there is substantial evidence to support this
claim (see, for example, Alfie Kohn's **No Contest: The Case Against
Competition** and Robert Axelrod's **The Evolution of Co-operation**
present abundant evidence that co-operation is in our long term
interests and provides better results than short term competition). This
suggests that, as Kropotkin argued, mutual aid, not mutual struggle,
will be in an individual's self-interest and so competition in a free,
sane society would be minimised and reduced to sports and other
individual pastimes. As Stirner argued, co-operation is just as egoistic
as competition (a fact sometimes lost on many due to the obvious ethical
superiority of co-operation):

> *"But should competition some day disappear, because concerted effort
> will have been acknowledged as more beneficial than isolation, then
> will not every single individual inside the associations be equally
> egoistic and out for his own interests?"* [**No Gods, No Masters**,
> vol. 1, p. 22]

Now to the "competition" objection, which we'll begin to answer by
noting that it ignores a few key points.

Firstly, the assumption that a libertarian society would "become
capitalist" in the absence of a **state** is obviously false. If
competition did occur between collectives and did lead to massive wealth
inequalities, then the newly rich would have to create a state to
protect their private property against the dispossessed. So inequality,
not equality, leads to the creation of states. It is no co-incidence
that the anarchic communities that existed for millennia were also
egalitarian.

Secondly, as noted in [section A.2.5](secA2.html#seca25), anarchists do
not consider *"equal"* to mean *"identical."* Therefore, to claim that
wage differences mean the end of anarchism makes sense only if one
thinks that *"equality"* means everyone getting **exactly** equal
shares. As anarchists do not hold such an idea, wage differences in an
otherwise anarchistically organised syndicate do not indicate a lack of
equality. How the syndicate is **run** is of far more importance,
because the most pernicious type of inequality from the anarchist
standpoint is inequality of **power,** i.e. unequal influence on
political and economic decision making.

Under capitalism, wealth inequality translates into such an inequality
of power, and vice versa, because wealth can buy private property (and
state protection of it), which gives owners authority over that property
and those hired to produce with it; but under libertarian socialism,
minor or even moderate differences in income among otherwise equal
workers would not lead to this kind of power inequality, because
self-management and socialisation severs the link between wealth and
power. Moreover, when labour becomes free in a society of rebels (and,
surely, an anarchist society could be nothing but) few would tolerate
relatively minor income inequalities becoming a source of power.

Thirdly, anarchists do not pretend that an anarchist society will be
perfect. Hence there may be periods, particularly just after capitalism
has been replaced by self-management, when differences in skill, etc.,
leads to some people exploiting their position and getting more wages,
better hours and conditions, and so forth. This problem existed in the
industrial collectives in the Spanish Revolution. As Kropotkin pointed
out, *"[b]ut, when all is said and done, some inequalities, some
inevitable injustice, undoubtedly will remain. There are individuals in
our societies whom no great crisis can lift out of the deep mire of
egoism in which they are sunk. The question, however, is not whether
there will be injustices or no, but rather how to limit the number of
them."* [**The Conquest of Bread**, p. 94]

In other words, these problems will exist, but there are a number of
things that anarchists can do to minimise their impact. There will be a
*"gestation period"* before the birth of an anarchist society, in which
social struggle, new forms of education and child-rearing, and other
methods of consciousness-raising increase the number of anarchists and
decrease the number of authoritarians.

The most important element in this gestation period is social struggle.
Such self-activity will have a major impact on those involved in it (see
[section J.2](secJ2.html)). By direct action and solidarity, those
involved develop bounds of friendship and support with others, develop
new forms of ethics and new ideas and ideal. This radicalisation process
will help to ensure that any differences in education and skill do not
develop into differences in power in an anarchist society by making
people less likely to exploit their advantages nor, more importantly,
for others to tolerate them doing so!

In addition, education within the anarchist movement should aim, among
other things, to give its members familiarity with technological skills
so that they are not dependent on "experts" and can thus increase the
pool of skilled workers who will be happy working in conditions of
liberty and equality. This will ensure that differentials between
workers can be minimised. In the long run, however, popularisation of
non-authoritarian methods of child-rearing and education (see [section
J.6](secJ6.html)) are particularly important because, as we suggested in
[section B.1.5](secB1.html#secb15), secondary drives such as greed and
the desire the exercise power over others are products of authoritarian
upbringing based on punishments and fear. Only if the prevalence of such
drives is reduced among the general population can we be sure that an
anarchist revolution will not degenerate into some new form of
domination and exploitation.

However, there are other reasons why economic inequality -- say, in
differences of income levels or working conditions, which may arise from
competition for "better" workers -- would be far less severe under any
form of anarchist society than it is under capitalism.

Firstly, the syndicates would be democratically managed. This would
result in much smaller wage differentials, because there is no board of
wealthy directors setting wage levels for their own gain. So without
hierarchies in the workplace no one would be in a position to monopolise
the work of others and grow rich as a result:

> *"Poverty is the symptom: slavery the disease. The extremes of riches
> and destitution follow inevitably upon the extremes of license and
> bondage. The many are not enslaved because they are poor, they are
> poor because they are enslaved. Yet Socialists have all too often
> fixed their eyes upon the material misery of the poor without
> realising that it rests upon the spiritual degradation of the slave."*
> [G.D.H. Cole, **Self-Government in Industry**, p. 41]

Empirical evidence supports anarchist claims as co-operatives have a far
more egalitarian wage structure than capitalist firms. This can be seen
from the experience of the Mondragon co-operatives, where the wage
difference between the highest paid and lowest paid worker was 4 to 1.
This was only increased when they had to compete with large capitalist
companies, and even then the new ratio of 9 to 1 is **far** smaller than
those in capitalist companies (in America the ratio is 200 to 1 and
beyond!). Thus, even under capitalism, *"[t]here is evidence that the
methods of distribution chosen by worker-controlled or self-managed
firms are more egalitarian than distribution according to market
precepts."* [Christopher Eaton Gunn, **Workers' Self-Management in the
United States**, p. 45] Given that market precepts fail to take into
account power differences, this is unsurprising. Thus we can predict
that a fully self-managed economy would be just, if not, more
egalitarian as differences in power would be eliminated, as would
unemployment (James K. Galbraith, in his book **Created Unequal**, has
presented extensive evidence that unemployment increases inequality, as
would be expected).

It is a common myth that managers, executives and so on are paid so
highly because of their unique abilities. Actually, they are so highly
paid because they are bureaucrats in command of large hierarchical
institutions. It is the hierarchical nature of the capitalist firm that
ensures inequality, **not** exceptional skills. Even enthusiastic
supporters of capitalism provide evidence to support this claim. In the
1940s Peter Drucker, a supporter of capitalism, brushed away the claim
that corporate organisation brings managers with exceptional ability to
the top when he noted that *"[n]o institution can possibly survive if it
needs geniuses or supermen to manage it. It must be organised in such a
way as to be able to get along under a leadership of average human
beings."* For Drucker, *"the things that really count are not the
individual members but the relations of command and responsibility among
them."* [**Concept of the Corporation**, p. 35 and p. 34] Little has
changed, beyond the power of PR to personalise the bureaucratic
structures of corporations.

Secondly, having no means of unearned income (such as rent, interest and
intellectual property rights), anarchism will reduce income
differentials substantially.

Thirdly, management positions would be rotated, ensuring that everyone
gets experience of the work, thus reducing the artificial scarcity
created by the division of labour. Also, education would be extensive,
ensuring that engineers, doctors, and other skilled workers would do the
work because they **enjoyed** doing it and not for financial reward.

Fourthly, we should like to point out that people work for many reasons,
not just for high wages. Feelings of solidarity, empathy, friendship
with their fellow workers would also help reduce competition between
syndicates.

Of course, the "competition" objection assumes that syndicates and
members of syndicates will place financial considerations above all
else. This is not the case, and few individuals are the economic robots
assumed in capitalist dogma. Indeed, the evidence from co-operatives
refutes such claims (ignoring, for the moment, the vast evidence of our
own senses and experiences with real people rather than the insane
*"economic man"* of capitalist economic ideology). As noted in [section
I.3.1](secI3.html#seci31) neo-classical economic theory, deducing from
its basic assumptions, argues that members of co-operatives will aim to
maximise profit per worker and so, perversely, fire their members during
good times. Reality contradicts these claims. In other words, the
underlying assumption that people are economic robots cannot be
maintained -- there is extensive evidence pointing to the fact that
different forms of social organisation produce different considerations
which motivate people accordingly.

So, while recognising that competition could exist, anarchists think
there are plenty of reasons not to worry about massive economic
inequality being created, which in turn would re-create the state. The
apologists for capitalism who put forward this argument forget that the
pursuit of self-interest is universal, meaning that everyone would be
interested in maximising his or her liberty, and so would be unlikely to
allow inequalities to develop which threatened that liberty. It would be
in the interests of communes and syndicates which to share with others
instead of charging high prices for them as they may find themselves
boycotted by others, and so denied the advantages of social
co-operation. Moreover, they may be subject to such activities
themselves and so it would wise for them to remember to *"treat others
as you would like them to treat you under similar circumstances."* As
anarchism will never come about unless people desire it and start to
organise their own lives, it is clear that an anarchist society would be
inhabited by individuals who followed that ethical principle.

So it is doubtful that people inspired by anarchist ideas would start to
charge each other high prices, particularly since the syndicates and
community assemblies are likely to vote for a wide basis of surplus
distribution, precisely to avoid this problem and to ensure that
production will be for use rather than profit. In addition, as other
communities and syndicates would likely boycott any syndicate or commune
that was acting in non-co-operative ways, it is likely that social
pressure would soon result in those willing to exploit others rethinking
their position. Co-operation does not imply a willingness to tolerate
those who desire to take advantage of you. In other words, neither
mutual aid nor anarchist theory implies people are naive indiscriminate
altruists but rather people who, while willing to work with others
co-operatively, will act to stop others taking advantage of them. Mutual
aid, in other words is based on reciprocal relationships. If someone or
a syndicate does not co-operate but rather seeks to take advantage of
others, then the others are well within their rights to boycott them and
otherwise protest against them. A free society is based on **all**
people pursuing their self-interest, not just the few. This suggests
that anarchists reject the assumption that those who lose by competition
should be altruistic and let competition ruin their lives.

Moreover, given the experience of the neo-liberal period from the 1980s
onwards (with rising inequality marked by falling growth, lower wage
growth, rising unemployment and increased economic instability) the
impact of increased competition and inequality harms the vast majority.
It is doubtful that people aware of these tendencies (and that, as we
argued in [section F.3](secF3.html), *"free exchange"* in an unequal
society tends to **increase**, not decrease, inequality) would create
such a regime.

Unsurprisingly, examples of anarchism in action show that there is
working together to reduce the dangers of isolation and competition. One
thing to remember is that anarchy will not be created "overnight" and so
potential problems will be worked out over time. Underlying all these
kinds of objections is the assumption that co-operation will **not** be
more beneficial to all involved than competition. However, in terms of
quality of life, co-operation will soon be seen to be the better system,
even by the most highly paid workers. There is far more to life than the
size of one's pay packet, and anarchism exists in order to ensure that
life is far more than the weekly grind of boring work and the few hours
of hectic consumption in which people attempt to fill the "spiritual
hole" created by a way of life which places profits above people.

I.3.7 What about people who do not want to join a syndicate?
------------------------------------------------------------

In this case, they are free to work alone, by their own labour.
Anarchists have no desire to force people to join a syndicate. Emma
Goldman spoke for all anarchists when she stated that *"[w]e believe in
every person living his own life in his own way and not in coercing
others to follow any one's dictation."* [**A Documentary History of the
American Years**, vol. 2, p. 324]

Therefore, the decision to join a syndicate will be a free one, with the
potential for living outside it guaranteed for non-exploitative and
non-oppressive individuals and groups. Malatesta stressed this when he
argued that in an anarchist revolution *"what has to be destroyed at
once . . . is **capitalistic property,** that is, the fact that a few
control the natural wealth and the instruments of production and can
thus oblige others to work for them"* but one must have a *"right and
the possibility to live in a different regime, collectivist, mutualist,
individualist -- as one wishes, always on the condition that there is no
oppression or exploitation of others."* [**Errico Malatesta: Life and
Ideas**, p. 102] In other words, different forms of social life will be
experimented with, depending on what people desire.

Of course some people ask how anarchists can reconcile individual
freedom with expropriation of capital. All we can say is that these
critics subscribe to the idea that one should not interfere with the
"individual freedom" of those in positions of authority to oppress
others, and that this premise turns the concept of individual freedom on
its head, making oppression a "right" and the denial of freedom a form
of it!

However, it is a valid question to ask if anarchism would result in
self-employed people being forced into syndicates as the result of a
popular movement. The answer is no. This is because the destruction of
title deeds would not harm the independent worker, whose real title is
possession and the work done. What anarchists want to eliminate is not
possession but capitalist ***property***. Thus such workers *"may prefer
to work alone in his own small shop"* rather than join an association or
a federation. [James Guillaume, *"On Building the New Social Order"*,
pp. 356-79, **Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 362]

This means that independent producers will still exist within an
anarchist society, and some workplaces -- perhaps whole areas -- will
not be part of a confederation. This is natural in a free society, for
different people have different ideas and ideals. Nor does such
independent producers imply a contradiction with libertarian socialism,
for *"[w]hat we concerned with is the destruction of the titles of
proprietors who exploit the labour of others and, above all, of
expropriating them in fact in order to put . . . all the means of
production at the disposal of those who do the work."* [Malatesta, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 103] Such freedom to work independently or associate as
desired does **not** imply any support for private property (as
discussed in [section I.6.2](secI6.html#seci62)). Thus any individual in
a libertarian socialist economy *"always has the liberty to isolate
himself and work alone, without being considered a bad citizen or a
suspect."* [Proudhon, quoted by K. Steven Vincent, **Pierre-Joseph
Proudhon and the Rise of French Republican Socialism**, p. 145]

In summary, in a free society people need not join syndicates nor does a
co-operative need to confederate with others. Given we have discussed
the issue of freedom of economic arrangements at length in [section
G.2.1](secG2.html#secg21) we will leave this discussion here.

I.3.8 Do anarchists seek *"small autonomous communities, devoted to small scale production"*?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No. The idea that anarchism aims for small, self-sufficient, communes is
a Leninist slander. They misrepresent anarchist ideas on this matter,
suggesting that anarchists seriously want society based on *"small
autonomous communities, devoted to small scale production."* In
particular, they point to Kropotkin, arguing that he *"looked backwards
for change"* and *"witnessed such communities among Siberian peasants
and watchmakers in the Swiss mountains."* [Pat Stack, *"Anarchy in the
UK?"*, **Socialist Review**, no. 246] Another Leninist, Donny
Gluckstein, makes a similar assertion about Proudhon wanting a
federation of *"tiny economic units"*. [**The Paris Commune**, p. 75]

While it may be better to cover this issue in [section H.2](secH2.html),
we discuss it here simply because it relates directly to what an
anarchist society could look like and so it allows us to that more
fully.

So what do anarchists make of the assertion that we aim for *"small
autonomous communities, devoted to small scale production"*? Simply put,
we think it is nonsense (as would be quickly obvious from reading
anarchist theory). Indeed, it is hard to know where this particular
anarchist "vision" comes from. As Luigi Fabbri noted, in his reply to an
identical assertion by the leading Bolshevik Nikolai Bukharin, *"[i]t
would be interesting to learn in what anarchist book, pamphlet or
programme such an 'ideal' is set out, or even such a hard and fast
rule!"* [*"Anarchy and 'Scientific' Communism"*, pp. 13-49, **The
Poverty of Statism**, Albert Meltzer (ed.), p. 21]

If we look at, say, Proudhon, we soon see no such argument for *"small
scale"* production. For Proudhon, *"[l]arge industry . . . come to us by
big monopoly and big property: it is necessary in the future to make
them rise from the [workers] association."* [quoted by K. Steven
Vincent, **Proudhon and the Rise of French Republican Socialism**, p.
156] In fact, The Frenchman **explicitly** rejected the position Stack
inflicts on him by arguing that it *"would be to retrograde"* and
*"impossible"* to wish *"the division of labour, with machinery and
manufactures, to be abandoned, and each family to return to the system
of primitive indivision, - that is, to **each one by himself, each one
for himself**, in the most literal meaning of the words."* [**System of
Economic Contradictions**, p. 206] As historian K. Steven Vincent
correctly summarises:

> *"On this issue, it is necessary to emphasise that, contrary to the
> general image given in the secondary literature, Proudhon was not
> hostile to large industry. Clearly, he objected to many aspects of
> what these large enterprises had introduced into society. For example,
> Proudhon strenuously opposed the degrading character of . . . work
> which required an individual to repeat one minor function
> continuously. But he was not opposed in principle to large-scale
> production. What he desired was to humanise such production, to
> socialise it so that the worker would not be the mere appendage to a
> machine. Such a humanisation of large industries would result,
> according to Proudhon, from the introduction of strong workers'
> associations. These associations would enable the workers to determine
> jointly by election how the enterprise was to be directed and operated
> on a day-to-day basis."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 156]

Moreover, Proudhon did not see an anarchist society as one of isolated
communities or workplaces. Like other anarchists, as we discussed in
[section I.3.4](secI3.html#seci34), Proudhon saw a free society's
productive activity centred around federations of syndicates.

This vision of a federation of workplaces can also be found in Bakunin's
writings: *"The future organisation of society must proceed from the
bottom up only, through free association or federations of the workers,
into their associations to begin with, then into communes, regions,
nations and, finally, into a great international and universal
federation."* [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 1, p. 176] Like Proudhon,
Bakunin also explicitly rejected the idea of seeking small-scale
production, arguing that *"if [the workers] tried to divide among
themselves the capital that exists, they would . . . reduce to a large
decree its productive power."* Therefore the need was for *"the
collective property of capital"* to ensure *"the emancipation **of
labour and of the workers.**"* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 91] Bakunin,
again like Proudhon, considered that *"[i]ntelligent free labour will
necessarily be associated labour"* as under capitalism the worker
*"works for others"* and her labour is *"bereft of liberty, leisure and
intelligence."* Under anarchism, *"the free productive associations"*
would become *"their own masters and the owners of the necessary
capital"* and *"amalgamate among themselves"* and *"sooner or later"*
will *"expand beyond national frontiers"* and *"form one vast economic
federation."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, pp. 81-3]

Nor can such a vision be attributed to Kropotkin. While, of course,
supporting decentralisation of power and decision making as did Proudhon
and Bakunin, he did not reject the necessity of federations to
co-ordinate activity. As he put it, the *"commune of tomorrow will know
that it cannot admit any higher authority; above it there can only be
the interests of the Federation, freely accepted by itself as well as
the other communes"*/ For anarchists the commune *"no longer means a
territorial agglomeration; it is rather a generic name, a synonym for
the grouping of equals which knows neither frontiers nor walls . . .
Each group in the Commune will necessarily be drawn towards similar
groups in other communes; they will come together and the links that
federate them will be as solid as those that attach them to their fellow
citizens."* [**Words of a Rebel**, p. 83 and p. 88] Nor did he reject
industry or machinery, stating he *"understood the poetry of machinery"*
and that while in *"our present factories, machinery work is killing for
the worker"* this was *"a matter of bad organisation, and has nothing to
do with the machine itself."* [**Memiors of a Revolutionist**, p. 111]

Kropotkin's vision was one of federations of decentralised communities
in which production would be based on the *"scattering of industries
over the country -- so as to bring the factory amidst the fields . . .
agriculture . . . combined with industry . . . to produce a combination
of industrial with agricultural work."* He considered this as *"surely
the next step to be made, as soon as a reorganisation of our present
conditions is possible"* and *"is imposed by the very necessity of
**producing for the producers themselves.**"* [**Fields, Factories and
Workshops Tomorrow**, pp. 157-8] He based this vision on a detailed
analysis of current economic statistics and trends.

Kropotkin did not see such an anarchist economy as being based around
the small community, taking the basic unit of a free society as one
*"large enough to dispose of a certain variety of natural resources --
it may be a nation, or rather a region -- produces and itself consumes
most of its own agricultural and manufactured produce."* Such a region
would *"find the best means of combining agriculture with manufacture --
the work in the field with a decentralised industry."* Moreover, he
recognised that the *"geographical distribution of industries in a given
country depends . . . to a great extent upon a complexus of natural
conditions; it is obvious that there are spots which are best suited for
the development of certain industries . . . The[se] industries always
find some advantages in being grouped, to some extent, according to the
natural features of separate regions."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 26, p. 27 and
pp. 154-5]

Kropotkin stressed that agriculture *"cannot develop without the aid of
machinery and the use of a perfect machinery cannot be generalised
without industrial surroundings . . . The village smith would not do."*
He supported the integration of agriculture and industry, with *"the
factory and workshop at the gates of your fields and gardens"* in which
a *"variety of agricultural, industrial and intellectual pursuits are
combined in each community"* to ensure *"the greatest sum total of
well-being."* He thought that *"large establishments"* would still
exist, but these would be *"better placed at certain spots indicated by
Nature."* He stressed that it *"would be a great mistake to imagine
industry ought to return to its hand-work stage in order to be combined
with agriculture. Whenever a saving of human labour can be obtained by
means of a machine, the machine is welcome and will be resorted to; and
there is hardly one single branch of industry into which machinery work
could not be introduced with great advantage, at least at some of the
stages of the manufacture."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 156, p. 197, p. 18, pp.
154-5 and pp. 151-2]

Clearly Kropotkin was **not** opposed to large-scale industry for *"if
we analyse the modern industries, we soon discover that for some of them
the co-operation of hundred, even thousands, of workers gathered at the
same spot is really necessary. The great iron works and mining
enterprises decidedly belong to that category; oceanic steamers cannot
be built in village factories."* However, he stressed that this
objective necessity was not the case in many other industries and
centralised production existed in these purely to allow capitalists *"to
hold command of the market"* and *"to suit the temporary interests of
the few -- by no means those of the nation."* Kropotkin made a clear
division between economic tendencies which existed to aid the capitalist
to dominate the market and enhance their profits and power and those
which indicated a different kind of future. Once we consider the *"moral
and physical advantages which man would derive from dividing his work
between field and the workshop"* we must automatically evaluate the
structure of modern industry with the criteria of what is best for the
worker (and society and the environment) rather than what was best for
capitalist profits and power. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 153, p. 147 and p. 153]

Clearly, Leninist summaries of Kropotkin's ideas on this subject are
nonsense. Rather than seeing "small-scale" production as the basis of
his vision of a free society, he saw production as being geared around
the economic unit of a nation or region: *"Each region will become its
own producer and its own consumer of manufactured goods . . . [and] its
own producer and consumer of agricultural produce."* Industry would come
to the village *"not in its present shape of a capitalist factory"* but
*"in the shape of a socially organised industrial production, with the
full aid of machinery and technical knowledge."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 40
and p. 151]

Industry would be decentralised and integrated with agriculture and
based around communes, but these communes would be part of a federation
and so production would be based around meeting the needs of these
federations. A system of rational decentralisation would be the basis of
Kropotkin's communist-anarchism, with productive activity and a free
society's workplaces geared to the appropriate level. For those forms of
industry which would be best organised on a large-scale would continue
to be so organised, but for those whose current (i.e., capitalist)
structure had no objective need to be centralised would be broken up to
allow the transformation of work for the benefit of both workers and
society. Thus we would see a system of workplaces geared to local and
district needs complementing larger factories which would meet regional
and wider needs.

Anarchism rejects the idea of small-scale production and isolated
communes and, as we discussed in [section H.2.3](secH2.html#sech23), it
does **not** look backwards for its ideal. The same applies to other
forms of libertarian socialism with, for example, G.D.H. Cole arguing
that we *"cannot go back to 'town economy', a general regime of
handicraft and master-craftmanship, tiny-scale production. We can
neither pull up our railways, fill our mines, and dismantle our
factories nor conduct our large-scale enterprises under a system
developed to fit the needs of a local market and a narrowly-restricted
production."* The aim is *"to reintroduce into industry the communal
spirit, by re-fashioning industrialism in such a way as to set the
communal motives free to co-operate."* [**Guild Socialism Reststed**,
pp. 45-6 and p. 46]

The obvious implication of Leninist comments arguments against anarchist
ideas on industrial transformation after a revolution is that they think
that a socialist society will basically be the same as capitalism, using
the technology, industry and industrial structure developed under class
society without change (as noted in [section
H.3.12](secH3.html#sech312), Lenin did suggest that was the case).
Needless to say, capitalist industry, as Kropotkin was aware, has not
developed neutrally nor purely because of technical needs. Rather it has
been distorted by the twin requirements to maintain capitalist profits
and power. One of the first tasks of a social revolution will be to
transform the industrial structure, not keep it as it is. You cannot use
capitalist means for socialist ends. So while we will "inherent" an
industrial structure from capitalism it would be the greatest possible
error to leave it unchanged and an even worse one to accelerate the
processes by which capitalists maintain and increase their power (i.e.
centralisation and concentration) in the name of "socialism."

We are sorry to have laboured this point, but this issue is one which
arises with depressing frequency in Marxist accounts of anarchism. It is
best that we indicate that those who make the claim that anarchists seek
*"small scale"* production geared for *"small autonomous communities"*
simply show their ignorance. In actually, anarchists see production as
being geared to whatever makes most social, economic and ecological
sense. Some production and workplaces will be geared to the local
commune, some will be geared to the district federation, some to the
regional federation, and so on. It is for this reason anarchists support
the federation of workers' associations as the means of combining local
autonomy with the needs for co-ordination and joint activity. To claim
otherwise is simply to misrepresent anarchist theory.

Finally, it must be psychologically significant that Leninists
continually go on about anarchists advocating "small" and "tiny"
workplaces. Apparently size **does** matter and Leninists think their
productive units are much, much bigger than anarchist ones. As has been
proven, anarchists advocate **appropriately sized** workplaces and are
not hung-up about their size. Why Leninists are could be a fruitful area
of research...
