J.2 What is direct action?
==========================

Direct action, to use Rudolf Rocker's words, is *"every method of
immediate warfare by the workers [or other sections of society] against
their economic and political oppressors. Among these the outstanding
are: the strike, in all its graduations from the simple wage struggle to
the general strike; the boycott; sabotage in all its countless forms;
anti-militarist propaganda, and in particularly critical cases . . .
armed resistance of the people for the protection of life and liberty."*
[**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 78]

Not that anarchists think that direct action is only applicable within
the workplace. Far from it. Direct action must occur everywhere! So, in
non-workplace situations, direct action includes rent strikes, consumer
boycotts, occupations (which, of course, can include sit-down strikes by
workers), eco-tage, individual and collective non-payment of taxes,
blocking roads and holding up construction work of an anti-social nature
and so forth. Also direct action, in a workplace setting, includes
strikes and protests on social issues, not directly related to working
conditions and pay. Such activity aims to ensure the *"protection of the
community against the most pernicious outgrowths of the present system.
The social strike seeks to force upon the employers a responsibility to
the public. Primarily it has in view the protection of the customers, of
whom the workers themselves [and their families] constitute the great
majority"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 86]

Basically, direct action means that instead of getting someone else to
act for you (e.g. a politician), you act for yourself. Its essential
feature is an organised protest by ordinary people to make a change by
their own efforts. Thus Voltairine De Cleyre's excellent statement on
this topic:

> *"Every person who ever thought he had a right to assert, and went
> boldly and asserted it, himself, or jointly with others that shared
> his convictions, was a direct actionist. Some thirty years ago I
> recall that the Salvation Army was vigorously practicing direct action
> in the maintenance of the freedom of its members to speak, assemble,
> and pray. Over and over they were arrested, fined, and imprisoned; but
> they kept right on singing, praying, and marching, till they finally
> compelled their persecutors to let them alone. The Industrial Workers
> [of the World] are now conducting the same fight, and have, in a
> number of cases, compelled the officials to let them alone by the same
> direct tactics.*

> *"Every person who ever had a plan to do anything, and went and did
> it, or who laid his plan before others, and won their co-operation to
> do it with him, without going to external authorities to please do the
> thing for them, was a direct actionist. All co-operative experiments
> are essentially direct action.*

> *"Every person who ever in his life had a difference with anyone to
> settle, and went straight to the other persons involved to settle it,
> either by a peaceable plan or otherwise, was a direct actionist.
> Examples of such action are strikes and boycotts; many persons will
> recall the action of the housewives of New York who boycotted the
> butchers, and lowered the price of meat; at the present moment a
> butter boycott seems looming up, as a direct reply to the price-makers
> for butter.*

> *"These actions are generally not due to any one's reasoning overmuch
> on the respective merits of directness or indirectness, but are the
> spontaneous retorts of those who feel oppressed by a situation. In
> other words, all people are, most of the time, believers in the
> principle of direct action, and practisers of it."* [**The Voltairine
> De Cleyre Reader**, pp. 47-8]

So direct action means acting for yourself against injustice and
oppression. It can, sometimes, involve putting pressure on politicians
or companies, for example, to ensure a change in an oppressive law or
destructive practices. However, such appeals are direct action simply
because they do not assume that the parties in question we will act for
us -- indeed the assumption is that change only occurs when we act to
create it. Regardless of what it is, *"if such actions are to have the
desired empowerment effect, they must be largely self-generated, rather
than being devised and directed from above"* and be *"ways in which
people could take control of their lives"* so that it *"empowered those
who participated in it."* [Martha Ackelsberg, **Free Women of Spain**,
p. 55]

So, in a nutshell, direct action is any form of activity which people
themselves decide upon and organise themselves which is based on their
own collective strength and does not involve getting intermediates to
act for them. As such direct action is a natural expression of liberty,
of self-government, for direct action *"against the authority in the
shop, direct action against the authority of the law, direct action
against the invasive, meddlesome authority of our moral code, is the
logical, consistent method of Anarchism."* [Emma Goldman, **Red Emma
Speaks**, pp. 76-7] It is clear that by acting for yourself you are
expressing the ability to govern yourself. Thus it is a means by which
people can take control of their own lives. It is a means of
self-empowerment and self-liberation.

Anarchists reject the view that society is static and that people's
consciousness, values, ideas and ideals cannot be changed. Far from it
and anarchists support direct action **because** it actively encourages
the transformation of those who use it. Direct action is the means of
creating a new consciousness, a means of self-liberation from the chains
placed around our minds, emotions and spirits by hierarchy and
oppression.

As direct action is the expression of liberty, the powers that be are
vitally concerned only when the oppressed use direct action to win its
demands, for it is a method which is not easy or cheap to combat. Any
hierarchical system is placed into danger when those at the bottom start
to act for themselves and, historically, people have invariably gained
more by acting directly than could have been won by playing ring around
the rosy with indirect means. Direct action tore the chains of open
slavery from humanity. Over the centuries it has established individual
rights and modified the life and death power of the master class. Direct
action won political liberties such as the vote and free speech. Used
fully, used wisely and well, direct action can forever end injustice and
the mastery of humans by other humans.

In the sections that follow, we will indicate why anarchists are in
favour of direct action and why they are against electioneering as a
means of change.

J.2.1 Why do anarchists favour using direct action to change things?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Simply because it is effective and it has a radicalising impact on those
who practice it. As it is based on people acting for themselves, it
shatters the dependency and marginalisation created by hierarchy. This
is key:

*"What is even more important about direct action is that it forms a
decisive step toward recovering the personal power over social life that
the centralised, over-bearing bureaucracies have usurped from the people
. . . we not only gain a sense that we can control the course of social
events again; we recover a new sense of selfhood and personality without
which a truly free society, based in self-activity and self-management,
is utterly impossible."* [Murray Bookchin, **Toward an Ecological
Society**, p. 47]

By acting for themselves, people gain a sense of their own power and
abilities. This is essential if people are to run their own lives. As
such, direct action is **the** means by which individuals empower
themselves, to assert their individuality, to make themselves count as
individuals by organising and acting collectively. It is the opposite of
hierarchy, within which individuals are told again and again that they
are nothing, are insignificant and must dissolve themselves into a
higher power (the state, the company, the party, the people, etc.) and
feel proud in participating in the strength and glory of this higher
power. Direct action, in contrast, is the means of asserting your
individual opinion, interests and happiness, of fighting against
self-negation:

> *"man has as much liberty as he is willing to take. Anarchism
> therefore stands for direct action, the open defiance of, and
> resistance to, all laws and restrictions, economic, social and moral.
> But defiance and resistance are illegal. Therein lies the salvation of
> man. Everything illegal necessitates integrity, self-reliance, and
> courage. In short, it calls for free independent spirits, for men who
> are men, and who have a bone in their back which you cannot pass your
> hand through."* [Emma Goldman, **Red Emma Speaks**, pp. 75-6]

In addition, because direct action is based around individuals solving
their own problems, by their own action, it awakens those aspects of
individuals crushed by hierarchy and oppression -- such as initiative,
solidarity, imagination, self-confidence and a sense of individual and
collective power, that what you do matters and that you with others like
you **can** change the world. Direct action is the means by which people
can liberate themselves and educate themselves in the ways of and skills
required for self-management and liberty:

> *"Direct action meant that the goal of . . . these activities was to
> provide ways for people to get in touch with their own powers and
> capacities, to take back the power of naming themselves and their
> lives . . . we learn to think and act for ourselves by joining
> together in organisations in which our experience, our perception, and
> our activity can guide and make the change. Knowledge does not precede
> experience, it flows from it . . . People learn to be free only by
> exercising freedom. [As one Spanish Anarchist put it] 'We are not
> going to find ourselves . . . with people ready-made for the future .
> . . Without continued exercise of their faculties, there will be no
> free people . . . The external revolution and the internal revolution
> presuppose one another, and they must be simultaneous in order to be
> successful.'"* [Martha Ackelsberg, **Free Women of Spain**, pp. 54-5]

So direct action, to use Bookchin's words, is *"the means whereby each
individual awakens to the hidden powers within herself and himself, to a
new sense of self-confidence and self-competence; it is the means
whereby individuals take control of society directly."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 48]

In addition, direct action creates the need for new forms of social
organisation. These new forms of organisation will be informed and
shaped by the process of self-liberation, so be more anarchistic and
based upon self-management. Direct action, as well as liberating
individuals, can also create the free, self-managed organisations which
can replace the current hierarchical ones (see [section
I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23)). For example, for Kropotkin, unions were
*"natural organs for the direct struggle with capitalism and for the
composition of the future order."* [quoted by Paul Avrich, **The Russian
Anarchists**, p. 81] In other words, direct action helps create the new
world in the shell of the old:

> *"direct action not only empowered those who participated in it, it
> also had effects on others . . . [it includes] exemplary action that
> attracted adherents by the power of the positive example it set.
> Contemporary examples . . . include food or day-care co-ops,
> collectively run businesses, sweat equity housing programmes, women's
> self-help health collectives, urban squats or women's peace camps [as
> well as traditional examples as industrial unions, social centres,
> etc.]. While such activities empower those who engage in them, they
> also demonstrate to others that non-hierarchical forms of organisation
> can and do exist -- and that they can function effectively."*
> [Ackelsberg, **Op. Cit.**, p. 55]

Also, direct action such as strikes encourage and promote class
consciousness and class solidarity. According to Kropotkin, *"the strike
develops the sentiment of solidarity"* while, for Bakunin, it *"is the
beginnings of the social war of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie
. . . Strikes are a valuable instrument from two points of view.
Firstly, they electrify the masses, invigorate their moral energy and
awaken in them the feeling of the deep antagonism which exists between
their interests and those of the bourgeoisie . . . secondly they help
immensely to provoke and establish between the workers of all trades,
localities and countries the consciousness and very fact of solidarity:
a twofold action, both negative and positive, which tends to constitute
directly the new world of the proletariat, opposing it almost in an
absolute way to the bourgeois world."* [quoted by Caroline Cahm,
**Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism 1872-1886**, p. 256
and pp. 216-217]

Direct action, therefore, helps to create anarchists and anarchist
alternatives within capitalism and statism. As such, it plays an
essential role in anarchist theory and activity. For anarchists, direct
action *"is not a 'tactic' . . . it is a moral principle, an ideal, a
sensibility. It should imbue every aspect of our lives and behaviour and
outlook."* [Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 48]

J.2.2 Why do anarchists reject voting as a means for change?
------------------------------------------------------------

Simply because electioneering does not work. History is littered with
examples of radicals being voted into office only to become as, or even
more, conservative than the politicians they replaced.

As we have discussed previously (see [section B.2](secB2.html)) any
government is under pressure from two sources of power, the state
bureaucracy and big business. This ensures that any attempts at social
change would be undermined and made hollow by vested interests, assuming
they even reached that level to begin with (the de-radicalising effects
of electioneering is discussed in [section J.2.6](secJ2.html#secj26)).
Here we will highlight the power of vested interests within democratic
government.

For anarchists, the general nature of the state and its role within
society is to ensure *"the preservation of the economic 'status quo,'
the protection of the economic privileges of the ruling class, whose
agent and **gendarme** it is"*. [Luigi Galleani, **The End of
Anarchism?**, p. 28] As such, the state and capital restricts and
controls the outcome of political action of the so-called sovereign
people as expressed by voting.

Taking capital to begin with, if we assume that a relatively reformist
government were elected it would soon find itself facing various
economic pressures. Either capital would disinvest, so forcing the
government to back down in the face of economic collapse, or the
government in question would control capital leaving the country and so
would soon be isolated from new investment and its currency would become
worthless. Either is an effective weapon to control democratically
elected governments as before ensure that the economy would be severely
damaged and the promised "reforms" would be dead letters. Far fetched?
No, not really. As discussed in [section D.2.1](secD2.html#secd21) such
pressures were inflicted on the 1974 Labour Government in Britain and we
see the threat reported everyday when the media reports on what *"the
markets"* think of government policies or when loans are given only
guarantee that the country is structurally adjusted in-line with
corporate interests and bourgeous economic dogma.

As far as political pressures go, we must remember that there is a
difference between the state and government. The state is the permanent
collection of institutions that have entrenched power structures and
interests. The government is made up of various politicians. It is the
institutions that have power in the state due to their permanence, not
the representatives who come and go. In other words, the state
bureaucracy has vested interests and elected politicians cannot
effectively control them:

> *"Such a bureaucracy consists of armed forces, police forces, and a
> civil service. These are largely autonomous bodies. Theoretically they
> are subordinate to a democratically elected Parliament, but the Army,
> Navy, and Air Forces are controlled by specially trained officers who
> from their schooldays onwards are brought up in a narrow caste
> tradition, and who always, in dealing with Parliament, can dominate
> that body by their superior technical knowledge, professional secrecy,
> and strategic bluff. As for the bureaucracy proper, the Civil Service,
> anyone who has had any experience of its inner workings knows the
> extent to which it controls the Cabinet, and through the Cabinet,
> Parliament itself. We are really ruled by a secret shadow cabinet . .
> . All these worthy servants of the State are completely out of touch
> with the normal life of the nation."* [Herbert Read, **Anarchy and
> Order**, p. 100]

As an aside, it should be noted that while *"in a society of rich and
poor nothing is more necessary"* than a bureaucracy as it is *"necessary
to protect an unfair distribution of property"* it would be wrong to
think that it does not have its own class interests: *"Even if you
abolish all other classes and distinctions and retain a bureaucracy you
are still far from the classless society, for the bureaucracy is itself
the nucleus of a class whose interests are totally opposed to the people
it supposedly serves."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 99 and p. 100]

In addition to the official bureaucracies and their power, there is also
the network of behind the scenes agencies which are its arm. This can be
termed *"the permanent government"* and *"the secret state"*,
respectively. The latter, in Britain, is *"the security services, MI5,
Special Branch and the secret intelligence service, MI6."* Other states
have their equivalents (the FBI, CIA, and so on in the USA). By the
former, it is meant *"the secret state plus the Cabinet Office and upper
echelons of Home and Foreign and Commonwealth Offices, the Armed Forces
and Ministry of Defence . . . and the so-called 'Permanent Secretaries
Club,' the network of very senior civil servants -- the 'Mandarins.'"*
In short, the upper-echelons of the bureaucracy and state apparatus. Add
to this *"its satellites"*, including M.P.s (particularly right-wing
ones), *"agents of influence"* in the media, former security services
personnel, think tanks and opinion forming bodies, front companies of
the security services, and so on. [Stephen Dorril and Robin Ramsay,
**Smear! Wilson and the Secret State**, pp. X-XI]

These bodies, while theoretically under the control of the elected
government, can effectively (via disinformation, black operations,
bureaucratic slowdowns, media attacks, etc.) ensure that any government
trying to introduce policies which the powers that be disagree with will
be stopped. In other words the state is **not** a neutral body, somehow
rising above vested interests and politics. It is, and always will be, a
institution which aims to protect specific sections of society as well
as its own.

An example of this "secret state" at work can be seen in the campaign
against Harold Wilson, the Labour Prime Minister of Britain in the
1970s, which resulted in his resignation (as documented by Stephen
Dorril and Robin Ramsay). Left-wing Labour M.P. Tony Benn was subjected
to intense pressure by "his" Whitehall advisers during the same period:

> *"In early 1975, the campaign against Benn by the media was joined by
> the secret state. The timing is interesting. In January, his Permanent
> Secretary had 'declared war' and the following month began the most
> extraordinary campaign of harassment any major British politician has
> experienced. While this is not provable by any means, it does look as
> though there is a clear causal connection between withdrawal of Prime
> Ministerial support, the open hostility from the Whitehall mandarins
> and the onset of covert operations."* [Dorril and Ramsay, **Op.
> Cit.**, p. 279]

This is not to forget the role of the secret state in undermining
reformist and radical organisations and movements. This involvement goes
from pure information gathering on "subversives", to disruption and
repression. Taking the example of the US secret state, Howard Zinn notes
that in 1975:

> *"congressional committees . . . began investigations of the FBI and
> CIA.*

> *"The CIA inquiry disclosed that the CIA had gone beyond its original
> mission of gathering intelligence and was conducting secret operations
> of all kinds . . . [for example] the CIA - with the collusion of a
> secret Committee of Forty headed by Henry Kissinger - had worked to
> 'destabilize' the [democratically elected, left-wing] Chilean
> government . . .*

> *"The investigation of the FBI disclosed many years of illegal actions
> to disrupt and destroy radical groups and left-wing groups of all
> kinds. The FBI had sent forged letters, engaged in burglaries . . .
> opened mail illegally, and in the case of Black Panther leader Fred
> Hampton, seems to have conspired in murder . . .*

> *"The investigations themselves revealed the limits of government
> willingness to probe into such activities . . . [and they] submitted
> its findings on the CIA to the CIA to see if there was material the
> Agency wanted omitted."* [**A People's History of the United States**,
> pp. 542-3]

Also, the CIA secretly employs several hundred American academics to
write books and other materials to be used for propaganda purposes, an
important weapon in the battle for hearts and minds. In other words, the
CIA, FBI (and their equivalents in other countries) and other state
bodies can hardly be considered neutral bodies, who just follow orders.
They are a network of vested interests, with specific ideological
viewpoints and aims which usually place the wishes of the voting
population below maintaining the state-capital power structure in place.

Therefore we cannot expect a different group of politicians to react in
different ways to the same economic and institutional influences and
interests. Its no coincidence that left-wing, reformist parties have
introduced right-wing, pro-capitalist ("Thatcherite/Reaganite") policies
similiar to those right-wing, explicitly pro-capitalist parties have.
This is to be expected as the basic function of any political system is
to manage the existing state and economic structures and a society's
power relationships. It is **not** to alter them radically, The great
illusion of politics is the notion that politicians have the power to
make whatever changes they like. Looking at the international picture,
the question obviously arises as to what real control do the politicians
have over the international economy and its institutions or the pattern
of world trade and investment. These institutions have great power and,
moreover, have a driving force (the profit motive) which is essentially
out of control (as can be seen by the regular financial crises during
the neo-liberal era).

This can be seen most dramatically in the military coup in Chile against
the democratically re-elected (left-wing) Allende government by the
military, aided by the CIA, US based corporations and the US government
to make it harder for the Allende regime. The coup resulted in thousands
murdered and years of terror and dictatorship, but the danger of a
pro-labour government was ended and the business environment was made
healthy for profits (see [section C.11](secC11.html)). An extreme
example, we know, but an important one for any believer in freedom or
the idea that the state machine is somehow neutral and can be captured
and used by left-wing parties -- particularly as the fate of Chile has
been suffered by many other reformist governments across the world.

Of course there have been examples of quite extensive reforms which did
benefit working class people in major countries. The New Deal in the USA
and the 1945-51 Labour Governments spring to mind. Surely these indicate
that our claims are false? Simply put, no, they do not. Reforms can be
won from the state when the dangers of not giving in outweigh any
weakening of ruling class power implied in the reforms. In the face of
economic crisis and working class protest, the ruling elite often
tolerates changes it would otherwise fight tooth-and-nail in other
circumstances. Reforms will be allowed if they can be used to save the
capitalist system and the state from its own excesses and even improve
their operation or if not bending will mean being broke in the storm of
social protest. After all, the possibility of getting rid of the reforms
when they are no longer required will always exist as long as class
society remains.

This can be seen from the reformist governments of 1930s USA and 1940s
UK. Both faced substantial economic problems and both were under
pressure from below, by waves of militant working class struggle which
could have developed beyond mere reformism. The waves of sit-down
strikes in the 1930s ensured the passing of pro-union laws which allowed
workers to organise without fear of being fired. This measure also
partly integrated the unions into the capitalist-state machine by making
them responsible for controlling "unofficial" workplace action (and so
ensuring profits). The nationalisation of roughly 20% of the UK economy
during the Labour administration of 1945 (the most unprofitable sections
of it as well) was also the direct result of ruling class fear. As
Conservative M.P. Quintin Hogg acknowledged in the House of Commons on
the 17th February 1943: *"If you do not give the people reform they are
going to give you revolution"*. Memories of the near revolutions across
Europe after the First World War were obviously in many minds, on both
sides. Not that nationalisation was particularly feared as "socialism."
Indeed it was argued that it was the best means of improving the
performance of the British economy. As anarchists at the time noted
*"the real opinions of capitalists can be seen from Stock Exchange
conditions and statements of industrialists than the Tory Front bench"*
and from these it be seen *"that the owning class is not at all
displeased with the record and tendency of the Labour Party."*
[**Neither Nationalisation nor Privatisation**, Vernon Richards (ed.),
p. 9]

History confirms Proudhon's argument that the state *"can only turn into
something and do the work of the revolution insofar as it will be so
invited, provoked or compelled by some power outside of itself that
seizes the initiative and sets things rolling,"* namely by *"a body
representative of the proletariat be formed in Paris . . . in opposition
to the bourgeoisie’s representation."* [**Le Représentant du Peuple**,
5th May 1848] So, if extensive reforms have implemented by the state,
just remember what they were in response to militant pressure from below
and that we could have got so much more. In general, things have little
changed since this anarchist argument against electioneering was put
forward in the 1880s:

> *"in the electoral process, the working class will always be cheated
> and deceived . . . if they did manage to send, one, or ten, or fifty
> of them[selves to Parliament], they would become spoiled and
> powerless. Furthermore, even if the majority of Parliament were
> composed of workers, they could do nothing. Not only is there the
> senate . . . the chiefs of the armed forces, the heads of the
> judiciary and of the police, who would be against the parliamentary
> bills advanced by such a chamber and would refuse to enforce laws
> favouring the workers (it has happened); but furthermore laws are not
> miraculous; no law can prevent the capitalists from exploiting the
> workers; no law can force them to keep their factories open and employ
> workers at such and such conditions, nor force shopkeepers to sell as
> a certain price, and so on."* [S. Merlino, quoted by Galleani, **Op.
> Cit.**, p. 13]

As any worker will tell you, just because there are laws on such things
as health and safety, union organising, working hours or whatever, it
does not mean that bosses will pay any attention to them. While firing
people for joining a union is illegal in America, it does not stop
bosses doing so. Similarly, many would be surprised to discover that the
8 hour working day was legally created in many US states by the 1870s
but workers had to strike for it in 1886 as it as not enforced.
Ultimately, political action is dependent on direct action to be
enforced where it counts (in the workplace and streets). And if only
direct action can enforce a political decision once it is made, then it
can do so beforehand so showing the limitations in waiting for
politicians to act.

Anarchists reject voting for other reasons. The fact is that electoral
procedures are the opposite of direct action. They are **based** on
getting someone else to act on your behalf. Therefore, far from
empowering people and giving them a sense of confidence and ability,
electioneering **dis**-empowers them by creating a "leader" figure from
which changes are expected to flow. As Brian Martin observes:

> *"all the historical evidence suggests that parties are more a drag
> than an impetus to radical change. One obvious problem is that parties
> can be voted out. All the policy changes they brought in can simply be
> reversed later.*

> *"More important, though, is the pacifying influence of the radical
> party itself. On a number of occasions, radical parties have been
> elected to power as a result of popular upsurges. Time after time, the
> 'radical' parties have become chains to hold back the process of
> radical change."* [*"Democracy without Elections"*, pp. 123-36,
> **Reinventing Anarchy, Again**, Howard J. Ehrlich (ed.), p. 124]

This can easily be seen from the history of various left-wing parties.
Labour or socialist parties, elected in periods of social turbulence,
have often acted to reassure the ruling elite by dampening popular
action that could have threatened capitalist interests. For example, the
first action undertaken by the Popular Front elected in France in 1936
was to put an end to strikes and occupations and generally to cool
popular militancy, which was the Front's strongest ally in coming to
power. The Labour government elected in Britain in 1945 got by with as
few reforms as it could, refusing to consider changing basic social
structures and simply replaced wage-labour to a boss with wage-labour to
the state via nationalisation of certain industries. It did, however,
manage to find time within the first days of taking office to send
troops in to break a dockers' strike (this was no isolated event: Labour
has used troops to break strikes far more often than the Conservatives
have).

These points indicate why existing power structures cannot effectively
be challenged through elections. For one thing, elected representatives
are not **mandated,** which is to say they are not tied in any binding
way to particular policies, no matter what promises they have made or
what voters may prefer. Around election time, the public's influence on
politicians is strongest, but after the election, representatives can do
practically whatever they want, because there is no procedure for
**instant recall.** In practice it is impossible to recall politicians
before the next election, and between elections they are continually
exposed to pressure from powerful special-interest groups -- especially
business lobbyists, state bureaucracies and political party power
brokers.

Under such pressure, the tendency of politicians to break campaign
promises has become legendary. Generally, such promise breaking is
blamed on bad character, leading to periodic "throw-the-bastards-out"
fervour -- after which a new set of representatives is elected, who also
mysteriously turn out to be bastards! In reality it is the system itself
that produces "bastards," the sell-outs and shady dealing we have come
to expect from politicians. In light of modern "democracy", it is
amazing that anyone takes the system seriously enough to vote at all. In
fact, voter turnout in the US and other nations where "democracy" is
practiced in this fashion is typically low. Nevertheless, some voters
continue to participate, pinning their hopes on new parties or trying to
reform a major party. For anarchists this activity is pointless as it
does not get at the root of the problem, it is the system which shapes
politicians and parties in its own image and marginalises and alienates
people due to its hierarchical and centralised nature. No amount of
party politics can change that.

However, we should make it clear that most anarchists recognise there is
a difference between voting for a government and voting in a referendum.
Here we are discussing the former, electioneering, as a means of social
change. Referenda are closer to anarchist ideas of direct democracy and
are, while flawed, far better than electing a politician to office once
every four years or so. In addition, Anarchists are not necessarily
against **all** involvement in electoral politics. Some advocate voting
when the possible outcome of an election could be disastrous (for
example, if a fascist or quasi-fascist party looks likely to win the
election). Some Social Ecologists, following Murray Bookchin's
arguments, support actual standing in elections and think anarchists by
taking part in local elections can use them to create self-governing
community assemblies. However, few anarchists support such means to
create community assemblies (see [section J.5.14](secJ5.html#secj514)
for a discussion on this).

The problem of elections in a statist system, even on a local scale,
means that the vast majority of anarchists reject voting as a means of
change. Instead we wholeheartedly support direct action as the means of
getting improvements in the here and now as well as the means of
creating an alternative to the current system.

J.2.3 What are the political implications of voting?
----------------------------------------------------

At its most basic, voting implies agreement with the status quo. It is
worth quoting the Scottish libertarian socialist James Kelman at length
on this:

> *"State propaganda insists that the reason why at least 40 percent of
> the voting public don't vote at all is because they have no feelings
> one way or the other. They say the same thing in the USA, where some
> 85 percent of the population are apparently 'apolitical' since they
> don't bother registering a vote. Rejection of the political system is
> inadmissible as far as the state is concerned . . . Of course the one
> thing that does happen when you vote is that someone else has endorsed
> an unfair political system . . . A vote for any party or any
> individual is always a vote for the political system. You can
> interpret your vote in whichever way you like but it remains an
> endorsement of the apparatus . . . If there was any possibility that
> the apparatus could effect a change in the system then they would
> dismantle it immediately. In other words the political system is an
> integral state institution, designed and refined to perpetuate its own
> existence. Ruling authority fixes the agenda by which the public are
> allowed 'to enter the political arena' and that's the fix they've
> settled on."* [**Some Recent Attacks**, p. 87]

We are taught from an early age that voting in elections is right and a
duty. In US schools, for example, children elect class presidents and
other officers. Often mini-general elections are held to "educate"
children in "democracy." Periodically, election coverage monopolises the
media. We are made to feel guilty about shirking our "civic
responsibility" if we do not vote. Countries that have no elections, or
only rigged elections, are regarded as failures. As a result, elections
have become a quasi-religious ritual. Yet, in reality, *"elections in
practice have served well to maintain dominant power structures such as
private property, the military, male domination, and economic
inequality. None of these has been seriously threatened through voting.
It is from the point of view of radical critics that elections are most
limiting."* [*"Democracy without Elections"*, pp. 123-36, **Reinventing
Anarchy, Again**, Howard J. Ehrlich (ed.), p. 124]

Elections serve the interests of state power in other ways. First,
voting helps to legitimate government; hence suffrage has often been
expanded at times when there was little popular demand for it but when
mass support of government was crucial, as during a war or revolution.
Second, it comes to be seen as the only legitimate form of political
participation, thus making it likely that any revolts by oppressed or
marginalised groups will be viewed by the general public as
illegitimate. It helps focus attention away from direct action and
building new social structures back into institutions which the ruling
class can easily control. The general election during the May '68 revolt
in France, for example, helped diffuse the revolutionary situation, as
did the elections during the Argentine revolt against neo-liberalism in
the early 2000s.

So by turning political participation into the "safe" activities of
campaigning and voting, elections have reduced the risk of more radical
direct action as well as building a false sense of power and sovereignty
among the general population. Voting disempowers the grassroots by
diverting energy from grassroots action. After all, the goal of
electoral politics is to elect a representative who will act **for** us.
Therefore, instead of taking direct action to solve problems ourselves,
action becomes indirect, though the government. This is an insidiously
easy trap to fall into, as we have been conditioned in hierarchical
society from day one into attitudes of passivity and obedience, which
gives most of us a deep-seated tendency to leave important matters to
the "experts" and "authorities." Kropotkin described well the net
effect:

> *"Vote! Greater men that you will tell you the moment when the
> self-annihilation of capital has been accomplished. They will then
> expropriate the few usurpers left . . . and you will be freed without
> having taken any more trouble than that of writing on a bit of paper
> the name of the man whom the heads of your faction of the party told
> you to vote for!"* [quoted by Ruth Kinna, *"Kropotkin's theory of
> Mutual Aid in Historical Context"*, pp. 259-283, **International
> Review of Social History**, No. 40, pp. 265-6]

Anarchists also criticise elections for giving citizens the false
impression that the government serves, or can serve, the people. As
Martin remains us *"the founding of the modern state a few centuries ago
was met with great resistance: people would refuse to pay taxes, to be
conscripted or to obey laws passed by national governments. The
introduction of voting and the expanded suffrage have greatly aided the
expansion of state power. Rather than seeing the system as one of ruler
and ruled, people see at least the possibility of using state power to
serve themselves. As electoral participation has increased, the degree
of resistance to taxation, military service, and the immense variety of
laws regulating behaviour, has been greatly attenuated"* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 126]

Ironically, voting has legitimated the growth of state power to such an
extent that the state is now beyond any real popular control by the form
of participation that made that growth possible. Nevertheless, the idea
that electoral participation means popular control of government is so
deeply implanted in people's psyches that even the most overtly
sceptical radical often cannot fully free themselves from it.

Therefore, voting has the important political implication of encouraging
people to identify with state power and to justify the status quo. In
addition, it feeds the illusion that the state is neutral and that
electing parties to office means that people have control over their own
lives. Moreover, elections have a tendency to make people passive, to
look for salvation from above and not from their own self-activity. As
such it produces a division between leaders and led, with the voters
turned into spectators of activity, not the participants within it.

All this does not mean, obviously, that anarchists prefer dictatorship
or an "enlightened" monarchy. Far from it, democratising state power can
be an important step towards abolishing it. All anarchists agree with
Bakunin when he argued that *"the most imperfect republic is a thousand
times better that even the most enlightened monarchy."* [quoted by
Daniel Guerin, **Anarchism**, p. 20] It simply means that anarchists
refuse to join in with the farce of electioneering, particularly when
there are more effective means available for changing things for the
better. Anarchists reject the idea that our problems can be solved by
the very institutions that cause them in the first place!

J.2.4 Surely voting for radical parties will be effective?
----------------------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that voting can lead to changes in policies, which can
be a good thing as far as it goes. However, such policies are formulated
and implemented within the authoritarian framework of the hierarchical
capitalist state -- a framework which itself is never open to challenge
by voting. On the contrary, voting legitimates the state framework
ensuring that social change will be (at best) mild, gradual, and
reformist rather than rapid and radical. Indeed, the "democratic"
process has resulted in all successful political parties becoming
committed to "more of the same" or tinkering with the details at best
(which is usually the limits of any policy changes). This seems unlikely
to change.

Given the need for radical systemic changes as soon as possible due to
the exponentially accelerating crises of modern civilisation, working
for gradual reforms within the electoral system must be seen as a
potentially deadly tactical error. Electioneering has always been the
death of radicalism. Political parties are only radical when they do not
stand a chance of election. However, many social activists continue to
try to use elections, so participating in the system which disempowers
the majority and so helps create the social problems they are protesting
against. It should be a widely recognised truism in radical circles that
elections empower the politicians and not the voters. Thus elections
focus attention to a few leaders, urging them to act **for** rather than
acting for ourselves (see [section H.1.5](secH1.html#sech15)). If
genuine social change needs mass participation then, by definition,
using elections will undermine that. This applies to within the party as
well, for working "within the system" disempowers grassroots activists,
as can be seen by the Green party in Germany during the early eighties.
The coalitions into which the Greens entered with Social Democrats in
the German legislature often had the effect of strengthening the status
quo by co-opting those whose energies might otherwise have gone into
more radical and effective forms of activism. Principles were ignored in
favour of having some influence, so producing watered-down legislation
which tinkered with the system rather than transforming it.

As discussed in [section H.3.9](secH3.html#sech39), the state is more
complicated than the simple organ of the economically dominant class
pictured by Marxists. There are continual struggles both inside and
outside the state bureaucracies, struggles that influence policies and
empower different groups of people. This can produce clashes with the
ruling elite, while the need of the state to defend the system **as a
whole** causes conflict with the interests of sections of the capitalist
class. Due to this, many radical parties believe that the state is
neutral and so it makes sense to work within it -- for example, to
obtain labour, consumer, and environmental protection laws. However,
this reasoning ignores the fact that the organisational structure of the
state is not neutral. To quote Brian Martin:

> *"The basic anarchist insight is that the structure of the state, as a
> centralised administrative apparatus, is inherently flawed from the
> point of view of human freedom and equality. Even though the state can
> be used occasionally for valuable ends, as a means the state is flawed
> and impossible to reform. The non-reformable aspects of the state
> include, centrally, its monopoly over 'legitimate' violence and its
> consequent power to coerce for the purpose of war, internal control,
> taxation and the protection of property and bureaucratic privilege.*

> *"The problem with voting is that the basic premises of the state are
> never considered open for debate, much less challenge. The state's
> monopoly over the use of violence for war is never at issue. Neither
> is the state's use of violence against revolt from within. The state's
> right to extract economic resources from the population is never
> questioned. Neither is the state's guarantee of either private
> property (under capitalism) or bureaucratic prerogative (under state
> socialism) -- or both."* [*"Democracy without Elections",* pp. 123-36,
> **Reinventing Anarchy, Again**, Howard J. Ehrlich (ed.), p. 127]

It may be argued that if a new political group is radical enough it will
be able to use state power for good purposes. While we discuss this in
more detail in [section J.2.6](secJ2.html#secj26), let us consider a
specific case, that of the Greens as many of them believe that the best
way to achieve their aims is to work within the current political
system.

By pledging to use the electoral system to achieve change, Green parties
necessarily commit themselves to formulating their proposals as
legislative agendas. But once legislation is passed, the coercive
mechanisms of the state will be needed to enforce it. Therefore, Green
parties are committed to upholding state power. However, our analysis in
[section B.2](secB2.html) indicated that the state is a set of
hierarchical institutions through which a ruling elite dominates society
and individuals. And, as we have seen in [section E](secEcon.html),
ecologists, feminists, and peace activists -- who are key constituencies
of the Green movement -- all need to **dismantle** hierarchies and
domination in order to achieve their respective aims. Therefore, since
the state is not only the largest and most powerful hierarchy but also
serves to maintain the hierarchical form of all major institutions in
society (since this form is the most suitable for achieving ruling-class
interests), the state itself is the main obstacle to the success of key
constituencies of the Green movement. Hence it is impossible **in
principle** for a parliamentary Green party to achieve the essential
objectives of the Green movement. A similar argument would apply to any
radical party whose main emphasis was social justice, which like the
goals of feminists, radical ecologists, and peace activists, depends on
dismantling hierarchies.

As we argued in the [previous section](secJ2.html#secj23), radical
parties are under pressure from economic and state bureaucracies that
ensure that even a sincere radical party would be powerless to introduce
significant reforms. The only real response to the problems of
representative democracy is to urge people not to vote. Such
anti-election campaigns can be a valuable way of making others aware of
the limitations of the current system, which is a necessary condition
for their seriously considering the anarchist alternative of using
direct action and build alternative social and economic organisations.
The implications of abstentionism are discussed in the [next
section](secJ2.html#secj25).

J.2.5 Why do anarchists support abstentionism and what are its implications?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

At its most basic, anarchists support abstentionism because
*"participation in elections means the transfer of one's will and
decisions to another, which is contrary to the fundamental principles of
anarchism."* [Emma Goldman, **Vision on Fire**, p. 89] For, as Proudhon
stressed, in a statist democracy, the people *"is limited to choosing,
every three or four years, its chiefs and its imposters."* [quoted by
George Woodcock, **Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 152]

If you reject hierarchy then participating in a system by which you
elect those who will govern you is almost like adding insult to injury!
For, as Luigi Galleani pointed out, *"whoever has the political
competence to choose his own rulers is, by implication, also competent
to do without them."* [**The End of Anarchism?**, p. 37] In other words,
because anarchists reject the idea of authority, we reject the idea that
picking the authority (be it bosses or politicians) makes us free.
Therefore, anarchists reject governmental elections in the name of
self-government and free association. We refuse to vote as voting is
endorsing authoritarian social structures. We are (in effect) being
asked to make obligations to the state, not our fellow citizens, and so
anarchists reject the symbolic process by which our liberty is alienated
from us.

Anarchists are aware that elections serve to legitimate government. We
have always warned that since the state is an integral part of the
system that perpetuates poverty, inequality, racism, imperialism,
sexism, environmental destruction, and war, we should not expect to
solve any of these problems by changing a few nominal state leaders
every four or five years. Therefore anarchists (usually) advocate
abstentionism at election time as a means of exposing the farce of
"democracy", the disempowering nature of elections and the real role of
the state.

For anarchists, then, when you vote, you are choosing between rulers.
Instead of urging people to vote we raise the option of choosing to rule
yourself, to organise freely with others -- in your workplace, in your
community, everywhere -- as equals. The option of something you cannot
vote for, a new society. Instead of waiting for others to make some
changes for you, anarchists urge that you do it yourself. In this way,
you cannot but build an alternative to the state which can reduce its
power now and, in the long run, replace it. This is the core of the
anarchist support for abstentionism.

In addition, beyond this basic anarchist rejection of elections from an
anti-statist position, anarchists also support abstentionism as it
allows us to put across our ideas at election time. It is a fact that at
such times people are often more interested in politics than usual. So,
by arguing for abstentionism we can get our ideas across about the
nature of the current system, how elected politicians do not control the
state bureaucracy, now the state acts to protect capitalism and so on.
In addition, it allows us to present the ideas of direct action and
encourage those disillusioned with political parties and the current
system to become anarchists by presenting a viable alternative to the
farce of politics. For, after all, a sizeable percentage of non-voters
and voters are disillusioned with the current set-up. Many who vote do
so simply against the other candidate, seeking the least-worse option.
Many who do not vote do so for essentially political reasons, such as
being fed up with the political system, failing to see any major
differences between the parties, or recognition that the candidates were
not interested in people like them. These non-voters are often
disproportionately left-leaning, compared with those who did vote. So,
anarchist abstentionism is a means of turning this negative reaction to
an unjust system into positive activity.

So, anarchist opposition to electioneering has deep political
implications which Luigi Galleani addressed when he wrote:

> *"The anarchists' electoral abstentionism implies not only a
> conception that is opposed to the principle of representation (which
> is totally rejected by anarchism), it implies above all an absolute
> lack of confidence in the State . . . Furthermore, anarchist
> abstentionism has consequences which are much less superficial than
> the inert apathy ascribed to it by the sneering careerists of
> 'scientific socialism' [i.e. Marxism]. It strips the State of the
> constitutional fraud with which it presents itself to the gullible as
> the true representative of the whole nation, and, in so doing, exposes
> its essential character as representative, procurer and policeman of
> the ruling classes.*

> *"Distrust of reforms, of public power and of delegated authority, can
> lead to direct action [in the class struggle] . . . It can determine
> the revolutionary character of this . . . action; and, accordingly,
> anarchists regard it as the best available means for preparing the
> masses to manage their own personal and collective interests; and,
> besides, anarchists feel that even now the working people are fully
> capable of handling their own political and administrative
> interests."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 13-14]

Therefore abstentionism stresses the importance of self-activity and
self-libertarian as well as having an important educational effect in
highlighting that the state is not neutral but serves to protect class
rule and that meaningful change only comes from below, by direct action.
For the dominant ideas within any class society reflect the opinions of
the ruling elite of that society and so any campaign at election times
which argues for abstentionism and indicates why voting is a farce will
obviously challenge them. In other words, abstentionism combined with
direct action and the building of libertarian alternatives is a very
effective means of changing people's ideas and encouraging a process of
self-education and, ultimately, self-liberation.

In summary, anarchists urge abstentionism in order to **encourage**
activity, not apathy. Not voting is **not** enough, and anarchists urge
people to **organise** and **resist** as well. Abstentionism must be the
political counterpart of class struggle, self-activity and
self-management in order to be effective -- otherwise it is as pointless
as voting is.

J.2.6 What are the effects of radicals using electioneering?
------------------------------------------------------------

While many radicals would be tempted to agree with our analysis of the
limitations of electioneering and voting, few would automatically agree
with anarchist abstentionist arguments. Instead, they argue that we
should combine direct action with electioneering. In that way (it is
argued) we can overcome the limitations of electioneering by
invigorating it with self-activity. In addition, they suggest, the state
is too powerful to leave in the hands of the enemies of the working
class. A radical politician will refuse to give the orders to crush
social protest that a right-wing, pro-capitalist one would.

While these are important arguments in favour of radicals using
elections, they ultimately fail to take into account the nature of the
state and the corrupting effect it has on radicals. This reformist idea
has met a nasty end. If history is anything to go by, the net effect of
radicals using elections is that by the time they are elected to office
the radicals will happily do what they claimed the right-wing would have
done. In 1899, for example, the Socialist Alexandre Millerand joined the
French Government. Nothing changed. During industrial disputes strikers
*"appealed to Millerand for help, confident that, with him in the
government, the state would be on their side. Much of this confidence
was dispelled within a few years. The government did little more for
workers than its predecessors had done; soldiers and police were still
sent in to repress serious strikes."* [Peter N. Stearns, **Revolutionary
Syndicalism and French Labour**, p. 16] Aristide Briand, another
socialist politician was the Minister of the Interior in 1910 and
*"broke a general strike of railwaymen by use of the most draconian
methods. Having declared a military emergency he threatened all strikers
with court martial."* [Jeremy Jennings, **Syndicalism in France** p. 36]
These events occurred, it should be noted, during the period when social
democratic parties were self-proclaimed revolutionaries and arguing
against anarcho-syndicalism by using the argument that working people
needed their own representatives in office to stop troops being used
against them during strikes!

Looking at the British Labour government of 1945 to 1951 we find the
same actions. What is often considered the most left-wing Labour
government ever used troops to break strikes in every year it was in
office, starting with a dockers' strike days after it became the new
government. Again, in the 1970s, Labour used troops to break strikes.
Indeed, the Labour Party has used troops to break strikes more often
than the Conservative Party.

Many blame the individuals elected to office for these betrayals,
arguing that we need to elect **better** politicians, select **better**
leaders. For anarchists nothing could be more wrong as its the means
used, not the individuals involved, which is the problem. Writing of his
personal experience as a member of Parliament, Proudhon recounted that
*"[a]s soon as I set foot in the parliamentary Sinai, I ceased to be in
touch with the masses; because I was absorbed by my legislative work, I
entirely lost sight of the current events . . . One must have lived in
that isolator which is called a National Assembly to realise how the men
who are most completely ignorant of the state of the country are almost
always those who represent it."* There was *"ignorance of daily facts"*
and *"fear of the people"* (*"the sickness of all those who belong to
authority"*) for *"the people, for those in power, are the enemy."*
[**The Anarchist Reader**, p. 111] Ultimately, as syndicalist Emile
Pouget argued, this fate was inevitable as any socialist politician
*"could not break the mould; he is only a cog in the machine of
oppression and whether he wishes it or not he must, as minister,
participate in the job of crushing the proletariat."* [quoted by
Jennings, **Op. Cit.**, p. 36]

These days, few enter Parliament as radicals like Proudhon. The notion
of using elections for radical change is rare. Such a development in
itself shows the correctness of the anarchist critique of
electioneering. At its most basic, electioneering results in the party
using it becoming more moderate and reformist -- it becomes the victim
of its own success. In order to gain votes, the party must appear
"moderate" and "practical" and that means working within the system:

> *"Participation in the politics of the bourgeois States has not
> brought the labour movement a hair's-breadth nearer to Socialism, but
> thanks to this method, Socialism has almost been completely crushed
> and condemned to insignificance . . . Participation in parliamentary
> politics has affected the Socialist Labour movement like an insidious
> poison. It destroyed the belief in the necessity of constructive
> Socialist activity, and, worse of all, the impulse to self-help, by
> inoculating people with the ruinous delusion that salvation always
> comes from above."* [Rudolf Rocker, **Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 54]

This corruption does not happen overnight. Alexander Berkman indicated
how it slowly developed:

> *"In former days the Socialists . . . claimed that they meant to use
> politics only for the purpose of propaganda . . . and took part in
> elections on order to have an opportunity to advocate Socialism*

> *"It may seem a harmless thing but it proved the undoing of Socialism.
> Because nothing is truer than the means you use to attain your object
> soon themselves become your object . . . Little by little they changed
> their attitude. Instead of electioneering being merely an educational
> method, it gradually became their only method to secure political
> office, to get elected to legislative bodies and other government
> positions. The change naturally led the Socialists to tone down their
> revolutionary ardour; it compelled them to soften their criticism of
> capitalism and government in order to avoid persecution and secure
> more votes . . . they have ceased to be revolutionists; they have
> become reformers who want to change things by law . . . And
> everywhere, without exception, they have followed the same course,
> everywhere they have forsworn their ideals, have duped the masses . .
> . There is a deeper reason for this constant and regular betrayal
> [than individual scoundrels being elected] . . . no man turns
> scoundrel or traitor overnight.*

> *"It is **power** which corrupts . . . The filth and contamination of
> politics everywhere proves that. Moreover, even with the best
> intentions Socialists in legislative bodies or in governments find
> themselves entirely powerless to accomplishing anything of a
> socialistic nature . . . The demoralisation and vitiation take place
> little by little, so gradually that one hardly notices it himself . .
> . [The elected Socialist] finds himself in a strange and unfriendly
> atmosphere . . . and he must participate in the business that is being
> transacted. Most of that business . . . has no bearing whatever on the
> things the Socialist believes in, no connection with the interests of
> the working class voters who elected him . . . when a bill of some
> bearing upon labour . . . comes up . . . he is ignored or laughed at
> for his impractical ideas on the matter . . .*

> *"Our Socialist perceives that he is regarded as a laughing stock [by
> the other politicians] . . . and finds more and more difficulty in
> securing the floor. . . he knows that neither by his talk nor by his
> vote can he influence the proceedings . . . His speeches don't even
> reach the public . . . He appeals to the voters to elect more
> comrades. . . Years pass . . . [and a] number . . . are elected. Each
> of them goes through the same experience . . . [and] quickly come to
> the conclusion . . . [that they] must show that they are practical men
> . . . that they are doing something for their constituency . . . In
> this manner the situation compels them to take a 'practical' part in
> the proceedings, to 'talk business,' to fall in line with the matters
> actually dealt with in the legislative body . . . Spending years in
> that atmosphere, enjoying good jobs and pay, the elected Socialists
> have themselves become part and parcel of the political machinery . .
> . With growing success in elections and securing political power they
> turn more and more conservative and content with existing conditions.
> Removal from the life and suffering of the working class, living in
> the atmosphere of the bourgeoisie . . . they have become what they
> call 'practical' . . . Power and position have gradually stifled their
> conscience and they have not the strength and honesty to swim against
> the current . . . They have become the strongest bulwark of
> capitalism."* [**What is Anarchism?**, pp. 92-8]

So the *"political power which they had wanted to conquer had gradually
conquered their Socialism until there was scarcely anything left of
it."* [Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, p. 55]

Not that these arguments are the result of hindsight, we must add.
Bakunin was arguing in the early 1870s that the *"inevitable result [of
using elections] will be that workers' deputies, transferred to a purely
bourgeois environment, and into an atmosphere of purely bourgeois
political ideas . . . will become middle class in their outlook, perhaps
even more so than the bourgeois themselves."* As long as universal
suffrage *"is exercised in a society where the people, the mass of
workers, are **economically** dominated by a minority holding exclusive
possession the property and capital of the country"* elections *"can
only be illusory, anti-democratic in their results."* [**The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 216 and p. 213] This meant that *"the
election to the German parliament of one or two workers . . . from the
Social Democratic Party"* was *"not dangerous"* and, in fact, was
*"highly useful to the German state as a lightning-rod, or a
safety-valve."* Unlike the *"political and social theory"* of the
anarchists, which *"leads them directly and inexorably to a complete
break with all governments and all forms of bourgeois politics, leaving
no alternative but social revolution,"* Marxism, he argued, *"inexorably
enmeshes and entangles its adherents, under the pretext of political
tactics, in endless accommodation with governments and the various
bourgeois political parties - that is, it thrusts them directly into
reaction."* [Bakunin, **Statism and Anarchy**, p. 193 and pp. 179-80] In
the case of the German Social Democrats, this became obvious in 1914,
when they supported their state in the First World war, and after 1918,
when they crushed the German Revolution.

So history proved Bakunin's prediction correct (as it did with his
prediction that Marxism would result in elite rule). Simply put, for
anarchists, the net effect of socialists using bourgeois elections would
be to put them (and the movements they represent) into the quagmire of
bourgeois politics and influences. In other words, the parties involved
will be shaped by the environment they are working within and not vice
versa.

History is littered with examples of radical parties becoming a part of
the system. From Marxian Social Democracy at the turn of the 19th
century to the German Green Party in the 1980s, we have seen radical
parties, initially proclaiming the need for direct action and
extra-parliamentary activity denouncing these activities once in power.
From only using parliament as a means of spreading their message, the
parties involved end up considering votes as more important than the
message. Janet Biehl sums up the effects on the German Green Party of
trying to combine radical electioneering with direct action:

> *"the German Greens, once a flagship for the Green movement worldwide,
> should now be considered stink normal, as their **de facto** boss
> himself declares. Now a repository of careerists, the Greens stand out
> only for the rapidity with which the old cadre of careerism, party
> politics, and business-as-usual once again played itself out in their
> saga of compromise and betrayal of principle. Under the superficial
> veil of their old values -- a very thin veil indeed, now -- they can
> seek positions and make compromises to their heart's content . . .
> They have become 'practical,' 'realistic' and 'power-orientated.' This
> former New Left ages badly, not only in Germany but everywhere else.
> But then, it happened with the S.P.D. [The German Social Democratic
> Party] in August 1914, then why not with Die Grunen in 1991? So it
> did."* [*"Party or Movement?"*, **Greenline**, no. 89, p. 14]

This, sadly, is the end result of all such attempts. Ultimately,
supporters of using political action can only appeal to the good
intentions and character of their candidates. Anarchists, however,
present an analysis of state structures and other influences that will
determine how the character of the successful candidates will change. In
other words, in contrast to Marxists and other radicals, anarchists
present a materialist, scientific analysis of the dynamics of
electioneering and its effects on radicals. Like most forms of idealism,
the arguments of Marxists and other radicals flounder on the rocks of
reality.

However, many radicals refuse to learn this lesson of history and keep
trying to create a new party which will not repeat the saga of
compromise and betrayal which all other radical parties have suffered.
And they say that anarchists are utopian! *"You cannot dive into a swamp
and remain clean."* [Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 99] Such is the result of
rejecting (or "supplementing" with electioneering) direct action as the
means to change things, for any social movement *"to ever surrender
their commitment to direct action for 'working within the system' is to
destroy their personality as socially innovative movements. It is to
dissolve back into the hopeless morass of 'mass organisations' that seek
respectability rather than change."* [Murray Bookchin, **Toward an
Ecological Society**, p. 47]

Moreover, the use of electioneering has a centralising effect on the
movements that use it. Political actions become considered as
parliamentary activities made **for** the population by their
representatives, with the 'rank and file' left with no other role than
that of passive support. Only the leaders are actively involved and the
main emphasis falls upon them and it soon becomes taken for granted that
they should determine policy. Conferences become little more than
rallies with politicians freely admitting that they will ignore any
conference decisions as and when required. Not to mention the
all-too-common sight of politicians turning round and doing the exact
opposite of what they promised. In the end, party conferences become
simply like parliamentary elections, with party members supporting this
leader against another.

Soon the party reflects the division between manual and mental labour so
necessary for the capitalist system. Instead of working class
self-activity and self-determination, there is a substitution of a
non-working class leadership acting **for** people. This replaces
self-management in social struggle and within the party itself.
Electoralism strengthens the leaders dominance over the party and the
party over the people it claims to represent. The real causes and
solutions to the problems we face are mystified by the leadership and
rarely discussed in order to concentrate on the popular issues that will
get them elected. Ultimately, radicals *"instead of weakening the false
and enslaving belief in law and government . . . actually work to
**strengthen** the people's faith in forcible authority and
government."* [Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 100] Which has always proved
deadly to encouraging a spirit of revolt, self-management and self-help
-- the very keys to creating change in a society. Thus this 1870
resolution of the Spanish section of the First International seems to
have been proven to be correct:

> *"Any participation of the working class in the middle class political
> government would merely consolidate the present state of affairs and
> necessarily paralyse the socialist revolutionary action of the
> proletariat. The Federation [of unions] is the true representative of
> labour, and should work outside the political system."* [quoted by
> Jose Pierats, **Anarchists in the Spanish Revolution**, p. 169]

Instead of trying to gain control of the state, for whatever reasons,
anarchists try to promote a culture of resistance within society that
makes the state subject to pressure from outside (see [section
J.2.9](secJ2.html#secj29)). And, we feel, history has proven us right
time and time again.

J.2.7 Surely we should vote for reformist parties in order to expose them?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some Leninist socialists (like the British **Socialist Workers Party**
and its offshoots) argue that we should urge people to vote for Labour
and other social democratic parties. In this they follow Lenin's 1920
argument against the anti-Parliamentarian left that revolutionaries
*"help"* elect such parties as many workers still follow their lead so
that they will be *"convinced by their own experience that we are
right,"* that such parties *"are absolutely good for nothing, that they
are petty-bourgeois and treacherous by nature, and that their bankruptcy
is inevitable."* If we *"want the **masses** to follow us"*, we need to
*"support"* such parties *"in the same way as the rope supports a hanged
man."* In this way, by experiencing the reformists in official, *"the
majority will soon become disappointed in their leaders and will begin
to support communism."* [**The Lenin Anthology**, p. 603, p. 605 and p.
602]

This tactic is suggested for two reasons. The first is that
revolutionaries will be able to reach more people by being seen to
support popular, trade union based, parties. If they do not, then they
are in danger of alienating sizeable sections of the working class by
arguing that such parties will be no better than explicitly
pro-capitalist ones. The second, and the more important one, is that by
electing reformist parties into office the experience of living under
such a government will shatter whatever illusions its supporters had in
them. The reformist parties will be given the test of experience and
when they betray their supporters to protect the status quo it will
radicalise those who voted for them, who will then seek out **real**
socialist parties (namely the likes of the SWP and ISO).

Libertarians reject these arguments for three reasons.

Firstly, it is deeply dishonest as it hides the true thoughts of those
who support the tactic. To tell the truth is a revolutionary act.
Radicals should not follow the capitalist media by telling half-truths,
distorting the facts, hiding what they believe or supporting a party
they are opposed to. If this means being less popular in the short run,
then so be it. Attacking nationalism, capitalism, religion, or a host of
other things can alienate people but few revolutionaries would be so
opportunistic as to hold their tongues on these. In the long run being
honest about your ideas is the best way of producing a movement which
aims to get rid of a corrupt social system. Starting such a movement
with half-truths is doomed to failure.

Secondly, anarchists reject the basis of this argument. The logic
underlying it is that by being disillusioned by their reformist leaders
and party, voters will look for **new,** "better" leaders and parties.
However, this fails to go to the root of the problem, namely the
dependence on leaders which hierarchical society creates within people.
Anarchists do not want people to follow the "best" leadership, they want
them to govern themselves, to be **self**-active, manage their own
affairs and not follow **any** would-be leaders. If you seriously think
that the liberation of the oppressed is the task of the oppressed
themselves (as Leninists claim to do) then you **must** reject this
tactic in favour of ones that promote working class self-activity.

The third reason we reject this tactic is that it has been proven to
fail time and time again. What most of its supporters seem to fail to
notice is that voters have indeed put reformist parties into office many
times. Lenin suggested this tactic in 1920 and there has been no general
radicalisation of the voting population by this method, nor even in
reformist party militants in spite of the many Labour Party governments
in Britain which all attacked the working class. Moreover, the
disillusionment associated with the experience of reformist parties
often expresses itself as a demoralisation with socialism **as such**,
rather than with the reformist's watered down version of it. If Lenin's
position could be persuasive to some in 1920 when it was untried, the
experience of subsequent decades should show its weakness.

This failure, for anarchists, is not surprising, considering the reasons
why we reject this tactic. Given that this tactic does not attack
hierarchy or dependence on leaders, does not attack the ideology and
process of voting, it will obviously fail to present a real alternative
to the voting population (who will turn to other alternatives available
at election time and not embrace direct action). Also the sight of a
so-called "socialist" or "radical" government managing capitalism,
imposing cuts, breaking strikes and generally attacking its supporters
will damage the credibility of any form of socialism and discredit all
socialist and radical ideas in the eyes of the population. If the
experience of the Labour Government in Britain during the 1970s and New
Labour after 1997 are anything to go by, it may result in the rise of
the far-right who will capitalise on this disillusionment.

By refusing to argue that no government is "on our side," radicals who
urge us to vote reformist "without illusions" help to disarm
theoretically the people who listen to them. Working class people,
surprised, confused and disorientated by the constant "betrayals" of
left-wing parties may turn to right wing parties (who can be elected) to
stop the attacks rather than turn to direct action as the radical
minority within the working class did not attack voting as part of the
problem. How many times must we elect the same party, go through the
same process, the same betrayals before we realise this tactic does not
work? Moreover, if it **is** a case of having to experience something
before people reject it, few state socialists take this argument to its
logical conclusion. We rarely hear them argue we must experience the
hell of fascism or Stalinism or the nightmare of free market capitalism
in order to ensure working class people "see through" them.

Anarchists, in contrast, say that we can argue against reformist
politics without having to associate ourselves with them by urging
people to vote for them. By arguing for abstentionism we can help to
theoretically arm the people who will come into conflict with these
parties once they are in office. By arguing that all governments will be
forced to attack us (due to the pressure from capital and state) and
that we have to rely on our own organisations and power to defend
ourselves, we can promote working class self-confidence in its own
abilities, and encourage the rejection of capitalism, the state and
hierarchical leadership as well as the use of direct action.

Finally, we must add, it is not required for radicals to associate
themselves with the farce of parliamentary propaganda in order to win
people over to our ideas. Non-anarchists will see us use **direct
action,** see us **act,** see the anarchistic alternatives we create and
see our propaganda. Non-anarchists can be reached quite well without
taking part in, or associating ourselves with, parliamentary action.

J.2.8 Will abstentionism lead to the right winning elections?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Possibly. However anarchists don't just say "don't vote", we say
"organise" as well. Apathy is something anarchists have no interest in
encouraging.

The reasons **why** people abstain is more important than the act. The
idea that the USA is closer to anarchy because around 50% of people do
not vote is nonsense. Abstentionism in this case is the product of
apathy and cynicism, not political ideas. So anarchists recognise that
apathetic abstentionism is **not** revolutionary or an indication of
anarchist sympathies. It is produced by apathy and a general level of
cynicism at **all** forms of political ideas and the possibility of
change.

That is why anarchist abstentionism always stresses the need for direct
action and organising economically and socially to change things, to
resist oppression and exploitation. In such circumstances, the effect of
an electoral strike would be fundamentally different than an apathy
induced lack of voting. *"If the anarchists",* Vernon Richards argued,
*"could persuade half the electorate to abstain from voting this would,
from an electoral point of view, contribute to the victory of the Right.
But it would be a hollow victory, for what government could rule when
half the electorate by not voting had expressed its lack of confidence
in all governments?"* The party in office would have to rule over a
country in which a sizeable minority, even a majority, had rejected
government as such. This would mean that the politicians *"would be
subjected to real pressures from people who believed in their own
power"* and acted accordingly. So anarchists call on people **not** to
vote, but instead organise themselves and be conscious of their own
power. Only this *"can command the respect of governments, can curb the
power of government as millions of crosses on bits of paper never
will."* [**The Impossibilities of Social Democracy**, p. 142]

For, as Emma Goldman pointed out, *"if the Anarchists were strong enough
to swing the elections to the Left, they must also have been strong
enough to rally the workers to a general strike, or even a series of
strikes . . . In the last analysis, the capitalist class knows too well
that officials, whether they belong to the Right or the Left, can be
bought. Or they are of no consequence to their pledge."* [**Vision on
Fire**, p. 90] The mass of the population, however, cannot be bought off
and if they are willing and able to resist then they can become a power
second to none. Only by organising, fighting back and practicing
solidarity where we live and work can we **really** change things. That
is where **our** power lies, that is where we can create a **real**
alternative. By creating a network of self-managed, pro-active community
and workplace organisations we can impose by direct action that which
politicians can never give us from Parliament. Only such a movement can
stop the attacks upon us by whoever gets into office. A government (left
or right) which faces a mass movement based upon direct action and
solidarity will always think twice before proposing cuts or introducing
authoritarian laws. Howard Zinn expressed it well:

> *"I think a way to behave is to think not in terms of representative
> government, not in terms of voting, not in terms of electoral
> politics, but thinking in terms of organising social movements,
> organising in the workplace, organising in the neighborhood,
> organising collectives that can become strong enough to eventually
> take over -- first to become strong enough to resist what has been
> done to them by authority, and second, later, to become strong enough
> to actually take over the institutions . . . the crucial question is
> not who is in office, but what kind of social movement do you have.
> Because we have seen historically that if you have a powerful social
> movement, it doesn’t matter who is in office. Whoever is in office,
> they could be Republican or Democrat, if you have a powerful social
> movement, the person in office will have to yield, will have to in
> some ways respect the power of social movements . . . voting is not
> crucial, and organising is the important thing."* [**An Interview with
> Howard Zinn on Anarchism: Rebels Against Tyranny**]

Of course, all the parties claim that they are better than the others
and this is the logic of this question -- namely, we must vote for the
lesser evil as the right-wing in office will be terrible. But what this
forgets is that the lesser evil is still an evil. What happens is that
instead of the greater evil attacking us, we get the lesser evil doing
what the right-wing was going to do. Let us not forget it was the
"lesser evil" of the Democrats (in the USA) and Labour (in the UK) who
first introduced, in the 1970s, the monetarist and other policies that
Reagan and Thatcher made their own in the 1980s.

This is important to remember. The central fallacy in this kind of
argument is the underlying assumption that "the left" will **not**
implement the same kind of policies as the right. History does not
support such a perspective and it is a weak hope to place a political
strategy on. As such, when people worry that a right-wing government
will come into power and seek to abolish previous social gains (such as
abortion rights, welfare programmes, union rights, and so forth) they
seem to forget that so-called left-wing administrations have also
undermined such reforms. In response to queries by the left on how
anarchists would seek to defend such reforms if their abstentionism
aided the victory of the right, anarchists reply by asking the left how
they seek to defend such reforms when their "left-wing" government
starts to attack them.

Ultimately, voting for other politicians will make little difference.
The reality is that politicians are puppets. As we argued in [section
J.2.2](secJ2.html#secj22), real power in the state does not lie with
politicians, but instead within the state bureaucracy and big business.
Faced with these powers, we have seen left-wing governments from Spain
to New Zealand introduce right-wing policies. So even if we elected a
radical party, they would be powerless to change anything important and
soon be forced to attack us in the interests of capitalism. Politicians
come and go, but the state bureaucracy and big business remain forever!
Simply put, we cannot expect a different group of politicians to react
that differently to the same economic and political pressures and
influences.

Therefore we cannot rely on voting for the lesser evil to safe us from
the possible dangers of a right-wing election victory. All we can hope
for is that no matter who gets in, the population will resist the
government because it knows and can use its real power: **direct
action**. For the *"only limit to the oppression of government is the
power with which the people show themselves capable of opposing it."*
[Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 196] Hence
Vernon Richards:

> *"If the anarchist movement has a role to play in practical politics
> it is surely that of suggesting to, and persuading, as many people as
> possible that their freedom from the Hitlers, Francos and the rest,
> depends not on the right to vote or securing a majority of votes 'for
> the candidate of ones choice,' but on evolving new forms of political
> and social organisation which aim at the direct participation of the
> people, with the consequent weakening of the power, as well of the
> social role, of government in the life of the community."*
> [*"Anarchists and Voting"*, pp. 176-87, **The Raven**, no. 14, pp.
> 177-8]

We discuss what this could involve in the [next
section](secJ2.html#secj29).

J.2.9 What do anarchists do instead of voting?
----------------------------------------------

While anarchists reject electioneering and voting, it does not mean that
we are politically apathetic. Indeed, part of the reason why anarchists
reject voting is because we think that voting is not part of the
solution, it is part of the problem. This is because it endorses an
unjust and unfree political system and makes us look to others to fight
our battles for us. It **blocks** constructive self-activity and direct
action. It **stops** the building of alternatives in our communities and
workplaces. Voting breeds apathy and apathy is our worse enemy.

Given that we have had universal suffrage for some time in the West and
we have seen the rise of Labour and Radical parties aiming to use that
system to effect change in a socialistic direction, it seems strange
that we are probably further away from socialism than when they started.
The simple fact is that these parties have spent so much time trying to
win elections that they have stopped even thinking about creating
socialist alternatives in our communities and workplaces. That is in
itself enough to prove that electioneering, far from eliminating apathy,
in fact helps to create it.

So, because of this, anarchists argue that the only way to not waste
your vote is to spoil it! We are the only political movement which
argues that nothing will change unless you act for yourself, take back
the power and fight the system **directly.** Only direct action breaks
down apathy and gets results. It is the first steps towards real
freedom, towards a free and just society. Unsurprisingly, then,
anarchists are the first to point out that not voting is not enough: we
need to actively struggle for an alternative to both voting **and** the
current system. Just as the right to vote was won after a long series of
struggles, so the creation of a free, decentralised, self-managed,
libertarian socialist society will be the product of social struggle.

Anarchists are the last people to deny the importance of political
liberties or the importance in wining the right to vote. The question we
must ask is whether it is a more a fitting tribute to the millions of
people who used direct action, fought and suffered for the right to vote
to use that victory to endorse a deeply unfair and undemocratic system
or to use other means (indeed the means they used to win the vote) to
create a system based upon true popular self-government? If we are true
to our (and their) desire for a real, meaningful democracy, we would
have to reject political action in favour of direct action.

This obviously gives an idea of what anarchists do instead of voting, we
agitate, organise and educate. Or, to quote Proudhon, the *"problem
before the labouring classes . . . consists not in capturing, but in
subduing both power and monopoly, -- that is, in generating from the
bowels of the people, from the depths of labour, a greater authority, a
more potent fact, which shall envelop capital and the state and
subjugate them."* For, *"to combat and reduce power, to put it in its
proper place in society, it is of no use to change the holders of power
or introduce some variation into its workings: an agricultural and
industrial combination must be found by means of which power, today the
ruler of society, shall become its slave."* [**System of Economical
Contradictions**, p. 398 and p. 397]

We do this by organising what Bakunin called *"antipolitical social
power of the working classes."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 263] This
activity which bases itself on the two broad strategies of encouraging
direct action and building alternatives where we live and work.

Taking the first strategy, anarchists say that by using direct action we
can force politicians to respect the wishes of the people. For example,
if a government or boss tries to limit free speech, then anarchists
would try to encourage a free speech fight to break the laws in question
until such time as they are revoked. If a government or landlord refuses
to limit rent increases or improve safety requirements for
accommodation, anarchists would organise squats and rent strikes. In the
case of environmental destruction, anarchists would support and
encourage attempts at halting the damage by mass trespassing on sites,
blocking the routes of developments, organising strikes and so on. If a
boss refuses to introduce an 8 hour day, then workers should form a
union and go on strike or simply stop working after 8 hours. Unlike
laws, the boss cannot ignore direct action. Similarly, strikes combined
with social protest would be effective means of stopping authoritarian
laws being passed. For example, anti-union laws would be best fought by
strike action and community boycotts (and given the utterly ineffectual
defence pursued by pro-labour parties using political action to stop
anti-union laws who can seriously say that the anarchist way would be
any worse?). Collective non-payment of taxes would ensure the end of
unpopular government decisions. The example of the poll tax rebellion in
the UK in the late in 1980s shows the power of such direct action. The
government could happily handle hours of speeches by opposition
politicians but they could not ignore social protest (and we must add
that the Labour Party which claimed to oppose the tax happily let the
councils controlled by them introduce the tax and arrest non-payers).

The aim would be to spread struggles and involve as many people as
possible, for it is *"merely stupid for a group of workers -- even for
the workers organised as a national group -- to invite the making of a
distinction between themselves and the community. The real protagonists
in this struggle are the community and the State -- the community as an
organic and inclusive body and the State as the representatives of a
tyrannical minority . . . The General Strike of the future must be
organised as a strike of the community against the State. The result of
that strike will not be in doubt."* [Herbert Read, **Anarchy and
Order**, p. 52]

Such a counter-power would focus the attention of those in power far
more than a ballot in a few years time (particularly as the state
bureaucracy is not subject to even that weak form of accountability). As
Noam Chomsky argues, *"[w]ithin the constraints of existing state
institutions, policies will be determined by people representing centres
of concentrated power in the private economy, people who, in their
institutional roles, will not be swayed by moral appeals but by the
costs consequent upon the decisions they make -- not because they are
'bad people,' but because that is what the institutional roles
demands."* He continues: *"Those who own and manage the society want a
disciplined, apathetic and submissive public that will not challenge
their privilege and the orderly world in which it thrives. The ordinary
citizen need not grant them this gift. Enhancing the Crisis of Democracy
by organisation and political engagement is itself a threat to power, a
reason to undertake it quite apart from its crucial importance in itself
as an essential step towards social change."* [**Turning the Tide**, pp.
251-2]

In this way, by encouraging social protest, any government would think
twice before pursuing authoritarian, destructive and unpopular policies.
In the final analysis, governments can and will ignore the talk of
opposition politicians, but they cannot ignore social action for very
long. In the words of a Spanish anarchosyndicalist, anarchists *"do not
ask for any concessions from the government. Our mission and our duty is
to impose from the streets that which ministers and deputies are
incapable of realising in parliament."* [quoted by Graham Kelsey,
**Anarchosyndicalism, Libertarian Communism and the State**, p. 79] This
was seen after the Popular Front was elected February 1936 and the
Spanish landless workers, sick and tired of waiting for the politicians
to act, started to occupy the land. The government *"resorted to the
time-tested procedure of expelling the peasants with the Civil Guard."*
The peasants responded with a *"dramatic rebellion"* which forced the
politicians to *"legalise the occupied farms. This proved once again
that the only effective reforms are those imposed by force from below.
Indeed, direct action was infinitely more successful than all the
parliamentary debates that took place between 1931 and 1933 about
whether to institute the approved Agrarian Reform law."* [Abel Paz,
**Durruti in the Spanish Revolution**, p. 391]

The second strategy of building alternatives flows naturally from the
first. Any form of campaign requires organisation and by organising in
an anarchist manner we build organisations that *"bear in them the
living seed of the new society which is replace the old world."*
[Bakunin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 255] In organising strikes in the workplace
and community we can create a network of activists and union members who
can encourage a spirit of revolt against authority. By creating
assemblies where we live and work we can create an effective countering
power to the state and capital. Such a union, as the anarchists in Spain
and Italy proved, can be the focal point for recreating self-managed
schools, social centres and so on. In this way the local community can
ensure that it has sufficient independent, self-managed resources
available to educate its members. Also, combined with credit unions (or
mutual banks), cooperative workplaces and stores, a self-managed
infrastructure could be created which would ensure that people can
directly provide for their own needs without having to rely on
capitalists or governments. In the words of a C.N.T. militant:

> *"We must create that part of libertarian communism which can be
> created within bourgeois society and do so precisely to combat that
> society with our own special weapons."* [quoted by Kelsey, **Op.
> Cit.**, p. 79]

So, far from doing nothing, by not voting the anarchist actively
encourages alternatives. As the British anarchist John Turner argued, we
*"have a line to work upon, to teach the people self-reliance, to urge
them to take part in non-political [i.e. non-electoral] movements
directly started by themselves for themselves . . . as soon as people
learn to rely upon themselves they will act for themselves . . . We
teach the people to place their faith in themselves, we go on the lines
of self-help. We teach them to form their own committees of management,
to repudiate their masters, to despise the laws of the country."*
[quoted by John Quail, **The Slow Burning Fuse**, p. 87] In this way we
encourage self-activity, self-organisation and self-help -- the opposite
of apathy and doing nothing.

Ultimately, what the state and capital gives, they can also take away.
What we build by our own self-activity can last as long as we want it to
and act to protect it:

> *"The future belongs to those who continue daringly, consistently, to
> fight power and governmental authority. The future belongs to us and
> to our social philosophy. For it is the only social ideal that teaches
> independent thinking and direct participation of the workers in their
> economic struggle. For it is only through the organised economic
> strength of the masses that they can and will do away with the
> capitalist system and all the wrongs and injustices it contains. Any
> diversion from this stand will only retard our movement and make it a
> stepping stone for political climbers."* [Emma Goldman, **Vision on
> Fire**, p. 92]

In short, what happens in our communities, workplaces and environment is
too important to be left to politicians -- or the ruling elite who
control governments. Anarchists need to persuade *"as many people as
possible that their freedom . . . depends not on the right to vote or
securing a majority of votes . . . but on evolving new forms of
political and social organisation which aim at the direct participation
of the people, with the consequent weakening of the power, as well as of
the social role, of government in the life of the community."*
[*"Anarchists and Voting"*, pp. 176-87, **The Raven**, No. 14, pp.
177-8] We discuss what new forms of economic and social organisations
that this could involve in [section J.5](secJ5.html).

J.2.10 Does rejecting electioneering mean that anarchists are apolitical?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

No. Far from it. The "apolitical" nature of anarchism is Marxist
nonsense. As it desires to fundamentally change society, anarchism can
be nothing but political. However, anarchism does reject (as we have
seen) "normal" political activity as ineffectual and corrupting.
However, many (particularly Marxists) imply this rejection of the con of
capitalist politics means that anarchists concentrate on purely
"economic" issues like wages, working conditions and so forth. By so
doing, Marxists claim that anarchists leave the political agenda to be
dominated by capitalist ideology, with disastrous results for the
working class.

This view, however, is **utterly** wrong. Indeed, Bakunin explicitly
rejected the idea that working people could ignore politics and actually
agreed with the Marxists that political indifference only led to
capitalist control of the labour movement:

> *"[some of] the workers in Germany . . . [were organised in] a kind of
> federation of small associations . . . 'Self-help' . . . was its
> slogan, in the sense that labouring people were persistently advised
> not to anticipate either deliverance or help from the state and the
> government, but only from their own efforts. This advice would have
> been excellent had it not been accompanied by the false assurance that
> liberation for the labouring people is possible under **current
> conditions of social organisation** . . . Under this delusion . . .
> the workers subject to [this] influence were supposed to disengage
> themselves systematically from all political and social concerns and
> questions about the state, property, and so forth . . . [This]
> completely subordinated the proletariat to the bourgeoisie which
> exploits it and for which it was to remain an obedient and mindless
> tool."* [**Statism and Anarchy**, p. 174]

In addition, Bakunin argued that the labour movement (and so the
anarchist movement) would have to take into account political ideas and
struggles but to do so in a working class way:

> *"The International does not reject politics of a general kind; it
> will be compelled to intervene in politics so long as it is forced to
> struggle against the bourgeoisie. It rejects only bourgeois
> politics."* [**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 313]

To state the obvious, anarchists only reject working class *"political
action"* if you equate (as did the early Marxists) "political action"
with electioneering, standing candidates for Parliament, local town
councils and so on -- what Bakunin termed bourgeois politics. We do not
reject "political action" in the sense of direct action to effect
political changes and reforms. As two American syndicalists argued,
libertarians use *"the term 'political action' . . . in its ordinary and
correct sense. Parliamentary action resulting from the exercise of the
franchise is political action. Parliamentary action caused by the
influence of direct action tactics . . . is not political action. It is
simply a registration of direct action."* They also noted that
syndicalists *"have proven time and again that they can solve the many
so-called political questions by direct action."* [Earl C. Ford and
William Z. Foster, **Syndicalism**, p. 19f and p. 23]

So, anarchists reject capitalist politics (i.e. electioneering), but we
do not ignore politics, wider political discussion or political
struggles. Anarchists have always recognised the importance of political
debate and ideas in social movements. Bakunin asked should a workers
organisation *"cease to concern itself with political and philosophical
questions? Would [it] . . . ignore progress in the world of thought as
well as the events which accompany or arise from the political struggle
in and between states, concerning itself only with the economic
problem?"* He rejected such a position: *"We hasten to say that it is
absolutely impossible to ignore political and philosophical questions.
An exclusive pre-occupation with economic questions would be fatal for
the proletariat. Doubtless the defence and organisation of its economic
interests . . . must be the principle task of the proletariat. But is
impossible for the workers to stop there without renouncing their
humanity and depriving themselves of the intellectual and moral power
which is so necessary for the conquest of their economic rights."*
[**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 301]

Nor do anarchists ignore elections. As Vernon Richards suggested,
anarchists *"cannot be uninterested in . . . election results, whatever
their view about the demerits of the contending Parties. The fact that
the anarchist movement has campaigned to persuade people not to use
their vote is proof of our commitment and interest. If there is, say, a
60 per cent. poll we will not assume that the 40 per cent. abstentions
are anarchists, but we would surely be justified in drawing the
conclusion that among the 40 per cent. there are a sizeable minority who
have lost faith in political parties and were looking for other
instruments, other values."* [**The Impossibilities of Social
Democracy**, p. 141] Nor, needless to say, are anarchists indifferent to
struggles for political reforms and the need to stop the state pursuing
authoritarian policies, imperialist adventures and such like.

Thus the charge anarchists are apolitical or indifferent to politics
(even capitalist politics) is a myth. Rather, *"we are not concerned
with choosing between governments but with creating the situation where
government can no longer operate, because only then will we organise
locally, regionally, nationally and internationally to satisfy real
needs and common aspirations."* For *"so long as we have capitalism and
government, the job of anarchists is to fight both, and at the same time
encourage people to take what steps they can to run their own lives."*
[*"Anarchists and Voting"*, pp. 176-87, **The Raven**, No. 14, p. 179]

Part of this process will be the discussion of political, social and
economic issues in whatever self-managed organisations people create in
their communities and workplaces (as Bakunin argued) and the use of
these organisations to fight for (political, social and economic)
improvements and reforms in the here and now using direct action and
solidarity. This means, as Rudolf Rocker pointed out, anarchists desire
a unification of political and economic struggles as the two as
inseparable:

> *"Within the socialist movement itself the Anarchists represent the
> viewpoint that the war against capitalism must be at the same time a
> war against all institutions of political power, for in history
> economic exploitation has always gone hand in hand with political and
> social oppression. The exploitation of man by man and the domination
> of man over man are inseparable, and each is the condition of the
> other."* [**Anarcho-Syndicalism**, p. 11]

Such a unification must take place on the social and economic field, not
the political, as that is where the working class is strongest. So
anarchists are well aware of the need to fight for political issues and
reforms, and so are *"not in any way opposed to the political struggle,
but in their opinion this struggle . . . must take the form of direct
action, in which the instruments of economic [and social] power which
the working class has at its command are the most effective. The most
trivial wage-fight shows clearly that, whenever the employers find
themselves in difficulties, the state steps in with the police, and even
in some cases with the militia, to protect the threatened interests of
the possessing classes. It would, therefore, be absurd for them to
overlook the importance of the political struggle. Every event that
affects the life of the community is of a political nature. In this
sense every important economic action . . . is also a political action
and, moreover, one of incomparably greater importance than any
parliamentary proceeding."* In other words, *"just as the worker cannot
be indifferent to the economic conditions of his life in existing
society, so he cannot remain indifferent to the political structure of
his country. Both in the struggle for his daily bread and for every kind
of propaganda looking towards his social liberation he needs political
rights and liberties, and he must fight for these himself with all his
strength whenever the attempt is made to wrest them from him."* So the
*"focal point of the political struggle lies, then, not in the political
parties, but in the economic [and social] fighting organisations of the
workers."* [Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, p. 77, p. 74 and p. 77] Hence the
comments in the CNT's newspaper **Solidaridad Obrera**:

> *"Does anyone not know that we want to participate in public life?
> Does anyone not know that we have always done so? Yes, we want to
> participate. With our organisations. With our papers. Without
> intermediaries, delegates or representatives. No. We will not go to
> the Town Hall, to the Provincial Capitol, to Parliament."* [quoted by
> Jose Pierats, **Anarchists in the Spanish Revolution**, p. 173]

Indeed, Rudolf Rocker makes the point very clear. *"It has often been
charged against Anarcho-Syndicalism,"* he wrote, *"that it has no
interest in the political structure of the different countries, and
consequently no interest in the political struggles of the time, and
confines its activities entirely to the fight for purely economic
demands. This idea is altogether erroneous and springs either from
outright ignorance or wilful distortion of the facts. It is not the
political struggle as such which distinguishes the Anarcho-Syndicalist
from the modern labour parties, both in principle and tactics, but the
form of this struggle and the aims which it has in view . . . their
efforts are also directed, even today, at restricting the activities of
the state . . . The attitude of Anarcho-Syndicalism towards the
political power of the present-day state is exactly the same as it takes
towards the system of capitalist exploitation"* and *"pursue the same
tactics in their fight against . . . the state."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp.
73-4]

As historian Bob Holton suggests, the notion that syndicalism is
apolitical *"is certainly a deeply embedded article of faith among those
marxists who have taken Lenin's strictures against syndicalism at face
value. Yet it bears little relation to the actual nature of
revolutionary industrial movements . . . Nor did syndicalists neglect
politics and the state. Revolutionary industrial movements were on the
contrary highly 'political' in that they sought to understand, challenge
and destroy the structure of capitalist power in society, They quite
clearly perceived the oppressive role of the state whose periodic
intervention in industrial unrest could hardly have been missed."* For
example, the *"vigorous campaign against the 'servile state' certainly
disproves the notion that syndicalists ignored the role of the state in
society. On the contrary, their analysis of bureaucratic state
capitalism helped to make considerable inroads into prevailing Labourist
and state socialist assumptions that the existing state could be
captured by electoral means and used as an agent of through-going social
reform."* [**British Syndicalism, 1900-1914**, pp. 21-2 and p. 204]

Thus anarchism is not indifferent to or ignores political struggles and
issues. Rather, it fights for political change and reforms as it fights
for economic ones -- by direct action and solidarity. If anarchists
*"reject any participation in the works of bourgeois parliaments, it is
not because they have no sympathy with political struggles in general,
but because they are firmly convinced that parliamentary activity is for
the workers the very weakest and most hopeless form of the political
struggle."* [Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, p. 76] Anarchists reject the idea
that political and economic struggles can be divided. Such an argument
just reproduces the artificially created division of labour between
mental and physical activity of capitalism within working class
organisations and within anti-capitalist movements. We say that we
should not separate out politics into some form of specialised activity
that only certain people (i.e. our "representatives") can do. Instead,
anarchists argue that political struggles, ideas and debates must be
brought into the **social** and **economic** organisations of our class
where they must be debated freely by all members as they see fit and
that political and economic struggle and change must go hand in hand.
Rather than being something other people discuss on behalf of working
class people, anarchists, argue that politics must no longer be in the
hands of so-called experts (i.e. politicians) but instead lie in the
hands of those directly affected by it. Also, in this way the social
struggle encourages the political development of its members by the
process of participation and self-management.

In other words, political issues must be raised in economic and social
organisations and discussed there, where working class people have real
power. As Bakunin put it, *"the proletariat itself will pose"* political
and philosophical questions in their own organisations and so the
political struggle (in the widest scene) will come from the class
struggle, for *"[w]ho can entertain any doubt that out of this
ever-growing organisation of the militant solidarity of the proletariat
against bourgeois exploitation there will issue forth the political
struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie?"* Anarchists simply
think that the *"policy of the proletariat"* should be *"the destruction
of the State"* rather than working within it and we argue for a union of
political ideas and social organisation and activity. This is essential
for promoting radical politics as it *"digs a chasm between the
bourgeoisie and the proletariat and places the proletariat outside the
activity and political conniving of all parties within the State . . .
in placing itself outside all bourgeois politics, the proletariat
necessarily turns against it."* So, by *"placing the proletariat outside
the politics in the State and of the bourgeois world, [the working class
movement] thereby constructed a new world, the world of the united
proletarians of all lands."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 302 p. 276, p. 303 and p.
305]

History supports Bakunin's arguments, as it indicates that any attempt
at taking social and economic issues into political parties has
resulting in wasted energy and their watering down into, at best,
reformism and, at worse, the simple ignoring of them by politicians once
in office (see [section J.2.6](secJ2.html#secj26)). Only by rejecting
the artificial divisions of capitalist society can we remain true to our
ideals of liberty, equality and solidarity. Every example of radicals
using electioneering has resulted in them being changed by the system
instead of them changing it. They have become dominated by capitalist
ideas and activity (what is usually termed "realistic" and "practical")
and by working within capitalist institutions they have, to use
Bakunin's words, *"filled in at a single stroke the abyss . . . between
the proletariat and the bourgeoisie"* that economic and social struggle
creates and, worse, *"have tied the proletariat to the bourgeois
towline."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 290]

In addition, so-called "economic" struggles do not occur in a vacuum.
They take place in a social and political context and so, necessarily,
there can exist an separation of political and economic struggles only
in the mind. Strikers or eco-warriors, for example, face the power of
the state enforcing laws which protect the power of employers and
polluters. This necessarily has a "political" impact on those involved
in struggle. By channelling any "political" conclusions drawn by those
involved in struggle into electoral politics, this development of
political ideas and discussion will be distorted into discussions of
what is possible in the current system, and so the radical impact of
direct action and social struggle is weakened. Given this, is it
surprising that anarchists argue that the people *"must organise their
powers apart from and against the State."* [Bakunin, **The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 376]

To conclude, anarchists are only "apolitical" about bourgeois elections
and the dubious liberty and benefits associated with picking who will
rule us and maintain capitalism for the next four or five years as well
as the usefulness of socialists participating in them. We feel that our
predictions have been confirmed time and time again. Anarchists reject
electioneering not because they are "apolitical" but because they do not
desire to see politics remain a thing purely for politicians and
bureucrats. Political issues are far too important to leave to such
people. Anarchists desire to see political discussion and change develop
from the bottom up, this is hardly "apolitical" -- in fact with our
desire to see ordinary people directly discuss the issues that affect
them, act to change things by their own action and draw their own
conclusions from their own activity anarchists are very "political." The
process of individual and social liberation is the most political
activity we can think of!
