J.4 What trends in society aid anarchist activity?
==================================================

In this section we will examine some modern trends which we regard as
being potential openings for anarchists to organise and which point in
an anarchist direction. These trends are of a general nature, partly as
a product of social struggle, partly as a response to economic and
social crisis, partly involving people's attitudes to big government and
big business, partly in relation to the communications revolution we are
currently living through, and so on.

Of course, looking at modern society we see multiple influences, changes
which have certain positive aspects in some directions but negative ones
in others. For example, the business-inspired attempts to decentralise
or reduce (certain) functions of governments should in the abstract be
welcomed by anarchists for they lead to the reduction of government. In
practice such a conclusion is deeply suspect simply because these
developments are being pursued to increase the power and influence of
capital as well as to increase wage-labour to, and exploitation by, the
economic master class and to undermine working class power and autonomy.
As such, there are as anti-libertarian as the status quo (as Proudhon
stressed, anarchism is *"the denial of Government and of Property."*
[**General Idea of the Revolution**, p. 100]). Similarly, increases in
self-employment can be seen, in the abstract, as reducing wage slavery.
However, if, in practice, this increase is due to corporations
encouraging "independent" contractors in order to cut wages and worsen
working conditions, increase job insecurity and undermine paying for
health and other employee packages then it is hardly a positive sign.
Obviously increases in self-employment would be different if it were the
result of an increase in the number of co-operatives, for example.

Thus few anarchists celebrate many apparently "libertarian" developments
as they are not the product of social movements and activism, but are
the product of elite lobbying for private profit and power. Decreasing
the power of the state in (certain) areas while leaving (or increasing)
the power of capital is a retrograde step in most, if not all, ways.
Needless to say, this "rolling back" of the state does not bring into
question its role as defender of property and the interests of the
capitalist class -- nor could it, as it is the ruling class who
introduces and supports these developments.

In this section, we aim to discuss tendencies from **below**, not above
-- tendencies which can truly "roll back" the state rather than reduce
its functions purely to that of the armed thug of property. The
tendencies we discuss here are not the be all nor end all of anarchist
activism or tendencies. We discuss many of the more traditionally
anarchist "openings" in [section J.5](secJ5.html) (such as industrial
and community unionism, mutual credit, co-operatives, modern schools and
so on) and so will not do so here. However, it is important to stress
here that such "traditional" openings are not being downplayed --
indeed, much of what we discuss here can only become fully libertarian
in combination with these more "traditional" forms of **"anarchy in
action."**

For a lengthy discussion of anarchistic trends in society, we recommend
Colin Ward's classic book **Anarchy in Action**. Ward covers many areas
in which anarchistic tendencies have been expressed, far more than we
can cover here. The libertarian tendencies in society are many. No
single work could hope to do them justice.

J.4.1 Why is social struggle a good sign?
-----------------------------------------

Simply because it shows that people are unhappy with the existing
society and, more importantly, are trying to change at least some part
of it. It suggests that certain parts of the population have reflected
on their situation and, potentially at least, seen that **by their own
actions** they can influence and change it for the better.

Given that the ruling minority draws its strength by the acceptance and
acquiescence of the majority, the fact that a part of that majority no
longer accepts and acquiesces is a positive sign. After all, if the
majority did not accept the status quo and acted to change it, the class
and state system could not survive. Any hierarchical society survives
because those at the bottom follow the orders of those above it. Social
struggle suggests that some people are considering their own interests,
thinking for themselves and saying "no" and this, by its very nature, is
an important, indeed, the most important, tendency towards anarchism. It
suggests that people are rejecting the old ideas which hold the system
up, acting upon this rejection and creating new ways of doing thinks.

*"Our social institutions,"* argued Alexander Berkman, *"are founded on
certain ideas; as long as the latter are generally believed, the
institutions built upon them are safe. Government remains strong because
people think political authority and legal compulsion necessary.
Capitalism will continue as long as such an economic system is
considered adequate and just. The weakening of the ideas which support
the evil and oppressive present-day conditions means the ultimate
breakdown of government and capitalism."* [**What is Anarchism?**, p.
xii]

Social struggle is the most obvious sign of this change of perspective,
this change in ideas, this progress towards freedom.

Social struggle is expressed by direct action. We have discussed both
social struggle ([section J.1](secJ1.html)) and direct action ([section
J.2](secJ2.html)) before and some readers may wonder why we are covering
this again here. We do so as we are discussing what trends in society
help anarchist activity, it would be wrong **not** to highlight social
struggle and direct action here. This is because these factors are key
tendencies towards anarchism as social struggle is the means by which
people create the new world in the shell of the old, transforming
themselves and society.

So social struggle is a good sign as it suggests that people are
thinking for themselves, considering their own interests and working
together collectively to change things for the better. As the French
syndicalist Emile Pouget argued:

> *"Direct action . . . means that the working class, forever bridling
> at the existing state of affairs, expects nothing from outside people,
> powers or forces, but rather creates its own conditions of struggle
> and looks to itself for its methodology . . . Direct Action thus
> implies that the working class subscribes to notions of freedom and
> autonomy instead of genuflecting before the principle of authority.
> Now, it is thanks to this authority principle, the pivot of the modern
> world -- democracy being its latest incarnation -- that the human
> being, tied down by a thousand ropes, moral as well as material, is
> bereft of any opportunity to display will and initiative."* [**Direct
> Action**, p. 1]

Social struggle means that people come into opposition with the boss and
other authorities such as the state and the dominant morality. This
challenge to existing authorities generates two related processes: the
tendency of those involved to begin taking over the direction of their
own activities and the development of solidarity with each other.
Firstly, in the course of a struggle, such as a strike, occupation,
boycott, and so on, the ordinary life of people, in which they act under
the constant direction of the bosses or state, ceases, and they have to
think, act and co-ordinate their actions for themselves. This reinforces
the expression towards autonomy that the initial refusal that lead to
the struggle indicates. Secondly, in the process of struggle those
involved learn the importance of solidarity, of working with others in a
similar situation, in order to win. This means the building of links of
support, of common interests, of organisation. The practical need for
solidarity to help win the struggle is the basis for the solidarity
required for a free society to be viable.

Therefore the real issue in social struggle is that it is an attempt by
people to wrestle at least part of the power over their own lives away
from the managers, state officials and so on who currently have it and
exercise it themselves. This is, by its very nature, anarchistic and
libertarian. Thus we find politicians and, of course, managers and
property owners, often denouncing strikes and other forms of direct
action. This is logical. As direct action challenges the real
power-holders in society and because, if carried to its logical
conclusion, it would remove them, social struggle and direct action can
be considered in essence a revolutionary process.

Moreover, the very act of using direct action suggests a transformation
within the people using it. *"Direct action's very powers to
fertilise,"* argued Pouget, *"reside in such exercises in imbuing the
individual with a sense of his own worth and in extolling such worth. It
marshals human resourcefulness, tempers characters and focuses energies.
It teaches self-confidence! And self-reliance! And self-mastery! And
shifting for oneself!"* Moreover, *"direct action has an unmatched
educational value: It teaches people to reflect, to make decisions and
to act. It is characterised by a culture of autonomy, an exaltation of
individuality and is a fillip to initiative, to which it is the leaven.
And this superabundance of vitality and burgeoning of 'self' in no way
conflicts with the economic fellowship that binds the workers one with
another and far from being at odds with their common interests, it
reconciles and bolsters these: the individual's independence and
activity can only erupt into splendour and intensity by sending its
roots deep into the fertile soil of common agreement."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 2 and p. 5]

Social struggle is the beginning of a transformation of the people
involved and their relationships to each other. While its external
expression lies in contesting the power of existing authorities, its
inner expression is the transformation of people from passive and
isolated competitors into empowered, self-directing, self-governing
co-operators. Moreover, this process widens considerably what people
think is "possible." Through struggle, by collective action, the fact
people **can** change things is driven home, that **they** have the
power to govern themselves and the society they live in. Thus struggle
can change people's conception of "what is possible" and encourage them
to try and create a better world. As Kropotkin argued:

> *"since the times of the [first] International Working Men's
> Association, the anarchists have always advised taking an active part
> in those workers' organisations which carry on the **direct** struggle
> of labour against capital and its protector -- the State.*

> *"Such a struggle . . . permits the worker to obtain some temporary
> improvements . . ., while it opens his [or her] eyes to the evil that
> is done by capitalism and the State . . . , and wakes up his [or her]
> thoughts concerning the possibility of organising consumption,
> production, and exchange without the intervention of the capitalist
> and the State."* [**Anarchism**, p. 171]

In other words, social struggle has a **radicalising** and
**politicising** effect, an effect which brings into a new light
existing society and the possibilities of a better world (direct action,
in Pouget's words, *"develops the feeling for human personality as well
as the spirit of initiative . . . it shakes people out of their torpor
and steers them to consciousness."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 5]). The practical
need to unite and resist the boss also helps break down divisions within
the working class. Those in struggle start to realise that they need
each other to give them the power necessary to get improvements, to
change things. Thus solidarity spreads and overcomes divisions between
black and white, male and female, heterosexual and homosexual, trades,
industries, nationalities and so on. The real need for solidarity to win
the fight helps to undermine artificial divisions and show that there
are only two groups in society, the oppressed and the oppressors.
Moreover, struggle as well as transforming those involved is also the
basis for transforming society as a whole simply because, as well as
producing transformed individuals, it also produces new forms of
organisation, organisations created to co-ordinate their struggle and
which can, potentially at least, become the framework of a libertarian
socialist society (see [section I.2.3](secI2.html#seci23)).

Thus anarchists argue that social struggle opens the eyes of those
involved to self-esteem and a sense of their own strength, and the
groupings it forms at its prompting are living, vibrant associations
where libertarian principles usually come to the fore. We find almost
all struggles developing new forms of organisation, forms which are
often based on direct democracy, federalism and decentralisation. If we
look at every major revolution, we find people creating mass
organisations such as workers' councils, factory committees,
neighbourhood assemblies and so on as a means of taking back the power
to govern their own lives, communities and workplaces. In this way
social struggle and direct action lay the foundations for the future. By
actively taking part in social life, people are drawn into creating new
forms of organisation, new ways of doing things. In this way they
educate themselves in participation, in self-government, in initiative
and in asserting themselves. They begin to realise that the only
alternative to management by others is self-management and organise to
achieve it.

Given that remaking society has to begin at the bottom, this finds its
expression in direct action, individuals taking the initiative and using
the power they have just generated by collective action and organisation
to change things by their own efforts. Social struggle is therefore a
two way transformation -- the external transformation of society by the
creation of new organisations and the changing of the power relations
within it and the internal transformation of those who take part in the
struggle. This is key:

> *"Whatever may be the practical results of the struggle for immediate
> gains, the greatest value lies in the struggle itself. For thereby
> workers learn that the bosses interests are opposed to theirs and that
> they cannot improve their conditions, and much less emancipate
> themselves, except by uniting and becoming stronger than the bosses.
> If they succeed in getting what they demand, they will be better off .
> . . and immediately make greater demands and have greater needs. If
> they do not succeed they will be led to study the causes of their
> failure and recognise the need for closer unity and greater activism
> and they will in the end understand that to make their victory secure
> and definitive, it is necessary to destroy capitalism. The
> revolutionary cause, the cause of the moral elevation and emancipation
> of the workers must benefit by the fact that workers unite and
> struggle for their interests."* [Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta: His
> Life and Ideas**, p. 191]

Hence Nestor Makhno's comment that *"[i]n fact, it is only through that
struggle for freedom, equality and solidarity that you reach an
understanding of anarchism."* [**The Struggle Against the State and
other Essays**, p. 71] The creation of an anarchist society is a
**process** and social struggle is the key anarchistic tendency within
society which anarchists look for, encourage and support. Its
radicalising and transforming nature is the key to the growth of
anarchist ideas, the creation of libertarian structures and alternatives
within capitalism (structures which may, one day, replace it) and the
creation of anarchists and those sympathetic to anarchist ideas. Its
importance cannot be underestimated!

J.4.2 Won't social struggle do more harm than good?
---------------------------------------------------

It is often argued that social struggle, resisting the powerful and the
wealthy, will just do more harm than good. Employers often use this
approach in anti-union propaganda, for example, arguing that creating a
union will force the company to close and move to less "militant" areas.

There is some truth in this. Yes, social struggle can lead to bosses
moving to more compliant workforces -- but this also happens in periods
lacking social struggle too! If we look at the down-sizing mania that
gripped the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s, we see companies firing tens of
thousands of people during a period when unions were weak, workers
scared about losing their jobs and class struggle basically becoming
mostly informal, atomised and "underground." Moreover, this argument
actually indicates the need for anarchism. It is a damning indictment of
any social system that it requires people to kow-tow to their masters
otherwise they will suffer economic hardship. It boils down to the
argument *"do what you are told, otherwise you will regret it."* Any
system based on that maxim is an affront to human dignity!

It would, in a similar fashion, be easy to "prove" that slave rebellions
are against the long term interests of the slaves. After all, by
rebelling the slaves will face the anger of their masters. Only by
submitting without question can they avoid this fate and, perhaps, be
rewarded by better conditions. Of course, the evil of slavery would
continue but by submitting to it they can ensure their life can become
better. Needless to say, any thinking and feeling person would quickly
dismiss this reasoning as missing the point and being little more than
apologetics for an evil social system that treated human beings as
things. The same can be said for the argument that social struggles
within capitalism do more harm than good. It betrays a slave mentality
unfitting for human beings (although fitting for those who desire to
live of the backs of workers or desire to serve those who do).

Moreover, this kind of argument ignores a few key points.

Firstly, by resistance the conditions of the oppressed can be maintained
or even improved. If the boss knows that their decisions will be
resisted they may be less inclined to impose speed-ups, longer hours and
so on. If, on the other hand, they know that their employees will agree
to anything then there is every reason to expect them to impose all
kinds of oppressions, just as a state will impose draconian laws if it
knows that it can get away with it. History is full of examples of
non-resistance producing greater evils in the long term and of
resistance producing numerous important reforms and improvements (such
as higher wages, shorter hours, the right to vote for working class
people and women, freedom of speech, the end of slavery, trade union
rights and so on).

So social struggle has been proven time and time again to gain
successful reforms. For example, before the 8 hour day movement of 1886
in America most companies argued they could not introduce that reform
without doing bust. However, after displaying a militant mood and
conducting an extensive strike campaign, hundreds of thousands of
workers discovered that their bosses had been lying and they got shorter
hours. Indeed, the history of the labour movement shows what bosses say
they can afford and the reforms workers can get via struggle are
somewhat at odds. Given the asymmetry of information between workers and
bosses, this is unsurprising as workers can only guess at what is
available and bosses like to keep their actual finances hidden. Even the
threat of labour struggle can be enough to gain improvements. For
example, Henry Ford's \$5 day is often used as an example of capitalism
rewarding good workers. However, this substantial pay increase was
largely motivated by the unionisation drive by the **Industrial Workers
of the World** among Ford workers in the summer of 1913. [Harry
Braverman, **Labour and Monopoly Capitalism**, p. 144] More recently, it
was the mass non-payment campaign against the poll-tax in Britain during
the late 1980s and early 1990s which helped ensure its defeat. In the
1990s, France also saw the usefulness of direct action. Two successive
prime ministers (Edouard Balladur and Alain Juppe) tried to impose large
scale neo-liberal "reform" programmes that swiftly provoked mass
demonstrations and general strikes amongst students, workers, farmers
and others. Confronted by crippling disruptions, both governments gave
in.

Secondly, and in some ways more importantly, the radicalising effect of
social struggle can open new doors for those involved, liberate their
minds, empower them and create the potential for deep social change.
Without resistance to existing forms of authority a free society cannot
be created as people adjust themselves to authoritarian structures and
accept "what is" as the only possibility. By resisting, people transform
and empower themselves as well as transforming society. New
possibilities can be seen (possibilities before dismissed as "utopian")
and, via the organisation and action required to win reforms, the
framework for these possibilities (i.e. of a new, libertarian, society)
created. The transforming and empowering effect of social struggle is
expressed well by the Nick DiGaetano, a one-time Wobbly who had joined
during the 1912 Lawrence strike and then became a UAW-CIO shop floor
militant:

> *"the workers of my generation from the early days up to now [1958]
> had what you might call a labour insurrection in changing from a
> plain, humble, submissive creature into a man. The union made a man
> out of him . . . I am not talking about the benefits . . . I am
> talking about the working conditions and how they affected the men in
> the plant . . . Before they were submissive. Today they are men."*
> [quoted by David Brody, *"Workplace Contractualism in comparative
> perspective"*, pp. 176-205, Helson Lichtenstein and Howell John Harris
> (eds.), **Industrial Democracy in America**, p. 204]

Other labour historians note the same radicalising process elsewhere
(modern day activists could give more examples!):

> *"The contest [over wages and conditions] so pervaded social life that
> the ideology of acquisitive individualism, which explained and
> justified a society regulated by market mechanisms and propelled by
> the accumulation of capital, was challenged by an ideology of
> mutualism, rooted in working-class bondings and struggles . . .
> Contests over pennies on or off existing piece rates had ignited
> controversies over the nature and purpose of the American republic
> itself."* [David Montgomery, **The Fall of the House of Labour**, p.
> 171]

This radicalising effect is far more dangerous to authoritarian
structures than better pay, more liberal laws and so on as they need
submissiveness to work. Little wonder that direct action is usually
denounced as pointless or harmful by those in power or their
spokespersons for direct action will, taken to its logical conclusion,
put them out of a job! Struggle, therefore, holds the possibility of a
free society as well as of improvements in the here and now. It also
changes the perspectives of those involved, creating new ideas and
values to replace the ones of capitalism.

Thirdly, it ignores the fact that such arguments do not imply the end of
social struggle and working class resistance and organisation, but
rather its **extension.** If, for example, your boss argues that they
will move to Mexico if you do not "shut up and put up" then the obvious
solution is to make sure the workers in Mexico are also organised!
Bakunin argued this basic point over one hundred years ago, and it is
still true: *"in the long run the relatively tolerable position of
workers in one country can be maintained only on condition that it be
more or less the same in other countries."* The *"conditions of labour
cannot get worse or better in any particular industry without
immediately affecting the workers in other industries, and that workers
of all trades are inter-linked with real and indissoluble ties of
solidarity."* Ultimately, *"in those countries the workers work longer
hours for less pay; and the employers there can sell their products
cheaper, successfully competing against conditions where workers working
less earn more, and thus force the employers in the latter countries to
cut wages and increase the hours of their workers."* [**The Political
Philosophy of Bakunin**, pp. 306-7] Bakunin's solution was to organise
internationally, to stop this undercutting of conditions by solidarity
between workers. As history shows, his argument was correct. Thus it is
**not** social struggle or militancy which perhaps could have negative
results, just **isolated** militancy, struggle which ignores the ties of
solidarity required to win, extend and keep reforms and improvements. In
other words, our resistance must be as transnational as capitalism is.

The idea that social struggle and working class organisation are harmful
was expressed constantly in the 1970s and 80s. With the post-war
Keynesian consensus crumbling, the "New Right" argued that trade unions
(and strikes) hampered growth and that wealth redistribution (i.e.
welfare schemes which returned some of the surplus value workers
produced back into our own hands) hindered "wealth creation" (i.e.
economic growth). Do not struggle over income, they argued, let the
market decide and everyone will be better off.

This argument was dressed up in populist clothes. Thus we find the
right-wing guru F.A. von Hayek arguing that, in the case of Britain, the
*"legalised powers of the unions have become the biggest obstacle to
raising the standards of the working class as a whole. They are the
chief cause of the unnecessarily big differences between the best- and
worse-paid workers."* He maintained that *"the elite of the British
working class . . . derive their relative advantages by keeping workers
who are **worse off** from improving their position."* Moreover, he
*"predict[ed] that the average worker's income would rise fastest in a
country where relative wages are flexible, and where the exploitation of
workers by monopolistic trade union organisations of specialised workers
are effectively outlawed."* [**1980s Unemployment and the Unions**, p.
107, p. 108 and p. 110]

Now, if von Hayek's claims were true we could expect that in the
aftermath of Thatcher government's trade union reforms we would have
seen: a rise in economic growth (usually considered as **the** means to
improve living standards for workers by the right); that this growth
would be more equally distributed; a decrease in the differences between
high and low paid workers; a reduction in the percentage of low paid
workers as they improved their positions when freed from union
*"exploitation"*; and that wages rise fastest in countries with the
highest wage flexibility. Unfortunately for von Hayek, the actual
trajectory of the British economy exposed his claims as nonsense.

Looking at each of his claims in turn we discover that rather than
"exploit" other workers, trade unions are an essential means to shift
income from capital to labour (which is why capital fights labour
organisers tooth and nail). And, equally important, labour militancy
aids **all** workers by providing a floor under which wages cannot drop
(non-unionised firms have to offer similar programs to prevent
unionisation and be able to hire workers) and by maintaining aggregate
demand. This positive role of unions in aiding **all** workers can be
seen by comparing Britain before and after Thatcher's von Hayek inspired
trade union and labour market reforms.

There has been a steady fall in growth in the UK since the trade union
"reforms". In the "bad old days" of the 1970s, with its strikes and
"militant unions" growth was 2.4% in Britain. It fell to 2% in the 1980s
and fell again to 1.2% in the 1990s. A similar pattern of slowing growth
as wage flexibility and market reform has increased can be seen in the
US economy (it was 4.4% in the 1960s, 3.2% in the 1970s, 2.8% in the
1980s and 1.9% in the first half of the 1990s). [Larry Elliot and Dan
Atkinson, **The Age of Insecurity**, p. 236] Given that the free-market
right proclaims higher economic growth is the only way to make workers
better off, growth rates have steadily fallen internationally since the
domination of their ideology. Thus growth of output per head in the USA,
Europe, Japan and the OECD countries between 1979 to 1990 was lower than
in 1973-9, and 1990-2004 lower still. The deregulation, privatisation,
anti-union laws and other neo-liberal policies have *"failed to bring an
increase in the growth rate."* [Andrew Glyn, **Capitalism Unleashed**,
p. 131] What growth spurts there have been were associated with
speculative bubbles (in the American economy, dot.com stocks in the late
1990s and housing in the 2000s) which burst with disastrous
consequences.

So the rate of "wealth creation" (economic growth) has steadily fallen
as unions were "reformed" in line with von Hayek's ideology (and lower
growth means that the living standards of the working class as a whole
do not rise as fast as they did under the "exploitation" of the
"monopolistic" trade unions).

If we look at the differences between the highest and lowest paid
workers, we find that rather than decrease, they have in fact shown *"a
dramatic widening out of the distribution with the best-workers doing
much better"* since Thatcher was elected in 1979 [Andrew Glyn and David
Miliband (eds.), **Paying for Inequality**, p. 100] This is important,
as average figures can hide how badly those in the bottom (80%!) are
doing. In an unequal society, the gains of growth are monopolised by the
few and we would expect rising inequality over time alongside average
growth. In America inequality has dramatically increased since the
1970s, with income and wealth growth in the 1980s going predominately to
the top 20% (and, in fact, mostly to the top 1% of the population). The
bottom 80% of the population saw their wealth grow by 1.2% and their
income by 23.7% in the 1980s, while for the top 20% the respective
figures were 98.2% and 66.3% (the figures for the top 1% were 61.6% and
38.9%, respectively). [Edward N. Wolff, *"How the Pie is Sliced"*, **The
American Prospect**, no. 22, Summer 1995] There has been a *"fanning out
of the pay distribution"* with the gap between the top 10% of
wage-earners increasing compared to those in the middle and bottom 10%.
Significantly, in the neo-liberal countries the rise in inequality is
*"considerably higher"* than in European ones. In America, for example,
*"real wages at the top grew by 27.2% between 1979 and 2003 as compared
to 10.2% in the middle"* while real wages for the bottom 10% *"did not
grow at all between 1979 and 2003."* In fact, most of the gains in the
top 10% *"occurred amongst the top 5%, and two-thirds of it within the
top 1%."* Unsurprising, the neo-liberal countries of the UK, USA and New
Zealand saw the largest increases in inequality. [Glyn, **Op. Cit.**,
pp. 116-8 and p. 168]

Given that inequality has increased, the condition of the average worker
must have suffered. For example, Ian Gilmore states that *"[i]n the
1980s, for the first time for fifty years . . . the poorer half of the
population saw its share of total national income shirk."* [**Dancing
with Dogma**, p. 113] According to Noam Chomsky, *"[d]uring the Thatcher
decade, the income share of the bottom half of the population fell from
one-third to one-fourth"* and the between 1979 and 1992, the share of
total income of the top 20% grew from 35% to 40% while that of the
bottom 20% fell from 10% to 5%. In addition, the number of UK employees
with weekly pay below the Council of Europe's *"decency threshold"*
increased from 28.3% in 1979 to 37% in 1994. [**World Orders, Old and
New**, p. 144 and p. 145] Moreover, *"[b]ack in the early 1960s, the
heaviest concentration of incomes fell at 80-90 per cent of the mean . .
. But by the early 1990s there had been a dramatic change, with the peak
of the distribution falling at just 40-50 per cent of the mean.
One-quarter of the population had incomes below half the average by the
early 1990s as against 7 per cent in 1977 and 11 per cent in 1961."*
[Elliot and Atkinson, **Op. Cit.**, p. 235] *"Overall,"* notes Takis
Fotopoulos, *"average incomes increased by 36 per cent during this
period [1979-1991/2], but 70 per cent of the population had a below
average increase in their income."* [**Towards an Inclusive Democracy**,
p. 113]

The reason for this rising inequality is not difficult to determine.
When workers organise and strike, they can keep more of what they
produce in their own hands. The benefits of productivity growth,
therefore, can be spread. With unions weakened, such gains will
accumulate in fewer hands and flood upwards. This is precisely what
happened. Before (approximately) 1980 and the neo-liberal assault on
unions, productivity and wages rose hand-in-hand in America, afterward
productivity continued to rise while wages flattened. In fact, the value
of the output of an average worker *"has risen almost 50 percent since
1973. Yet the growing concentration of income in the hands of a small
minority had proceeded so rapidly that we're not sure whether the
typical American has gained **anything** from rising productivity."*
Rather than "trickle down" *"the lion's share of economic growth in
America over the past thirty years has gone to a small, wealthy
minority."* In short: *"The big winners . . . have been members of a
very narrow elite: the top 1 percent or less of the population."* [Paul
Krugman, **The Conscience of a Liberal**, p. 124, p. 244 and p. 8]

Looking at America, after the Second World War the real income of the
typical family ("exploited" by "monopolistic" trade unions) grew by 2.7%
per year, with *"incomes all through the income distribution grew at
about the same rate."* Since 1980 (i.e., after working people were freed
from the tyranny of unions), *"medium family income has risen only about
0.7 percent a year"* Median household income *"grew modestly"* from 1973
to 2005, the total gain was about 16%. Yet this *"modest gain"* may
*"overstate"* how well American families were doing, as it *was achieved
in part through longer working hours.* For example, *"a gain in family
income that occurs because a spouse goes to work isn't the same thing as
a wage increase. In particular it may carry hidden costs that offset
some of the gains in money."* This stagnation is, of course, being
denied by the right. Yet, as Krugman memorably puts it: *"Modern
economists debate whether American median income has risen or fallen
since the early 1970s. What's really telling is the fact that we're even
having this debate."* So while the average values may have went up,
because of *"rising inequality, good performance in overall numbers like
GDP hasn't translated into gains for ordinary workers."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 55, pp. 126-7, p. 124 and p. 201]

Luckily for American capitalism a poll in 2000 found that 39% of
Americans believe they are either in the wealthiest 1% or will be there
*"soon"*! [Glyn, **Op. Cit.**, p. 179] In fact, as we discussed in
[section B.7.2](secB7.html#sec72), social mobility has **fallen** under
neo-liberalism -- perhaps unsurprisingly as it is easier to climb a hill
than a mountain. This is just as important as the explosion in
inequality as the “free-market” right argue that dynamic social mobility
makes up for wealth and income inequality. As Krugman notes, Americans
*"may believe that anyone can succeed through hard work and
determination, but the facts say otherwise."* In reality, mobility is
*"highest in the Scandinavian countries, and most results suggest that
mobility is lower in the United States than it is in France, Canada, and
maybe even in Britain. Not only don't Americans have equal opportunity,
opportunity is less equal here than elsewhere in the West."* Without the
blinkers of free market capitalist ideology this should be unsurprising:
*"A society with highly unequal results is, more or less inevitably, a
society with highly unequal opportunity, too."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 247
and p. 249]

Looking at the claim that trade union members gained their *"relative
advantage by keeping workers who are **worse off** from improving their
position"* it would be fair to ask whether the percentage of workers in
low-paid jobs decreased in Britain after the trade union reforms. In
fact, the percentage of workers below the Low Pay Unit's definition of
low pay (namely two-thirds of men's median earnings) **increased** --
from 16.8% in 1984 to 26.2% in 1991 for men, 44.8% to 44.9% for women.
For manual workers it rose by 15% to 38.4%, and for women by 7.7% to
80.7% (for non-manual workers the figures were 5.4% rise to 13.7% for
men and a 0.5% rise to 36.6%). [Andrew Glyn and David Miliband (eds.),
**Op. Cit.**, p.102] If unions **were** gaining at the expense of the
worse off, you would expect a **decrease** in the number in low pay,
**not** an increase. An OECD study concluded that *"[t]ypically,
countries with high rates of collective bargaining and trade
unionisation tend to have low incidence of low paid employment."*
[**OECD Employment Outlook**, 1996, p. 94] Within America, we also
discover that higher union density is associated with fewer workers
earning around the minimum wage and that "right-to-work" states (i.e.,
those that pass anti-union laws) *"tend to have lower wages, lower
standard of living, and more workers earning around the minimum wage."*
It is hard not to conclude that states *"passed laws aimed at making
unionisation more difficult would imply that they sought to maintain the
monopoly power of employers at the expense of workers."* [Oren M.
Levin-Waldman, *"The Minimum Wage and Regional Wage Structure:
Implications for Income Distribution"*, pp. 635-57, **Journal of
Economic Issues**, Vol. XXXVI, No. 3, p. 639 and p. 655]

As far as von Hayek's prediction on wage flexibility leading to the
*"average worker's income"* rising fastest in a country where relative
wages are flexible, it has been proved totally wrong. Between 1967 and
1971, real wages grew (on average) by 2.95% per year in the UK (nominal
wages grew by 8.94%) [P. Armstrong, A. Glyn and J. Harrison,
**Capitalism Since World War II**, p. 272]. In comparison, real
household disposable income grew by just 0.5 percent between June 2006
and 2007. Average weekly earnings rose 2.9% between April 2006 and 2007
while inflation rose by 3.6% (Retail Prices Index) and 2.8% (Consumer
Prices Index). [Elliot and Atkinson, **The Gods That Failed**, p. 163]
This is part of a general pattern, with UK Real Wages per employee being
an average 3.17% per year between 1960 and 1974, falling to 1.8% between
1980 and 1999. In America, the equivalent figures are 2.37% and 1.02%.
[Eckhard Hein and Thorsten Schulten, **Unemployment, Wages and
Collective Bargaining in the European Union**, p. 9] Looking at the
wider picture, during the early 1970s when strikes and union membership
increased, *"real wage increases rose steadily to reach over 4% per
year"* in the West. However, after von Hayek's anti-union views were
imposed, *"real wages have grown very slowly."* In anti-union America,
the median wage was \$13.62 in 2003 compared to \$12.36 in 1979
(reckoned in 2003 prices). In Europe and Japan *"average wages have done
only a little better, having grown around 1% per year."* [Glyn, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 5 and p. 116] It gets worse as these are average figures.
Given that inequality soared during this period the limited gains of the
neo-liberal era were not distributed as evenly as before (in the UK, for
example, wage growth was concentrated at the top end of society. [Elliot
and Atkinson, **Fantasy Island**, p. 99]).

Nor can it be said that breaking the unions and lower real wages
translated into lower unemployment in the UK as the average unemployment
rate between 1996 and 1997 was 7.1% compared to 4.5% between 1975 and
1979 (the year Thatcher took power). The average between 1960 and 1974
was 1.87% compared to 8.7% over the whole Thatcherite period of 1980 to
1999. Perhaps this is not too surprising, given that (capitalist
economic theology aside) unemployment *"systematically weakens the
bargaining power of trade unions."* In short: *"Neither on the
theoretical nor empirical level can a strictly inverse relation between
the real wage rate and the level of unemployment be derived."* [Hein and
Schulten, **Op. Cit.**, p. 9, p. 3 and p. 2] As we discussed in [section
C.1.5](secC1.html#secc15) this should come as no surprise to anyone with
awareness of the real nature of unemployment and the labour market. So
unemployment did not fall after the trade union reforms, quite the
reverse: *"By the time Blair came to power [in 1997], unemployment in
Britain was falling, although it still remained higher than it had been
when the [last Labour Government of] Callaghan left office in May
1979."* [Elliot and Atkinson, **Age of Insecurity**, p. 258] To be fair,
von Hayek did argue that falls in unemployment would be *"a slow
process"* but nearly 20 years of far higher unemployment is moving
backwards!

So we have a stark contrast between the assertions of the right and the
reality their ideology helped create. The reason for this difference is
not hard to discover. As economist Paul Krugman correctly argues unions
*"raise average wages for their membership; they also, indirectly and to
a lesser extent, raise wages for similar workers . . . as nonunionised
employers try to diminish the appeal of union drives to their workers .
. . unions tend to narrow income gaps among blue-collar workers, by
negotiating bigger wage increases for their worse-paid members . . . And
nonunion employers, seeking to forestall union organisers, tend to echo
this effect."* He argues that *"if there's a single reason blue-collar
workers did so much better in the fifties than they had in the twenties,
it was the rise of unions"* and that unions *"were once an important
factor limiting income inequality, both because of their direct effect
in raising their members’ wages and because the union pattern of wage
settlements . . . was . . . reflected in the labour market as a whole."*
With the smashing of the unions came rising inequality, with the
*"sharpest increases in wage inequality in the Western world have taken
place in the United States and in Britain, both of which experience
sharp declines in union membership."* Unions restrict inequality because
*"they act as a countervailing force to management."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
51, p. 49, p. 149 and p. 263]

So under the neo-liberal regime instigated by Thatcher and Reagan the
power, influence and size of the unions were reduced considerably and
real wage growth fell considerably -- which is the **exact** opposite of
von Hayek's predictions. Flexible wages and weaker unions have harmed
the position of **all** workers (Proudhon: *"Contrary to all
expectation! It takes an economist not to expect these things"*
[**System of Economical Contradictions**, p. 203]). So comparing the
claims of von Hayek to what actually happened after trade union "reform"
and the reduction of class struggle suggests that claims that social
struggle is self-defeating are false (and self-serving, considering it
is usually bosses, employer supported parties and economists who make
these claims). A **lack** of social struggle has been correlated with
low economic growth and often stagnant (even declining) wages. So while
social struggle **may** make capital flee and other problems, lack of it
is no guarantee of prosperity (quite the reverse, if the last quarter of
the 20th century is anything to go by). Indeed, a lack of social
struggle will make bosses be more likely to cut wages, worsen working
conditions and so on -- after all, they feel they can get away with it!
Which brings home the fact that to make reforms last it is necessary to
destroy capitalism.

Of course, no one can **know** that struggle will make things better. It
is a guess; no one can predict the future. Not all struggles are
successful and many can be very difficult. If the *"military is a role
model for the business world"* (in the words of an ex-CEO of Hill &
Knowlton Public Relations), and it is, then **any** struggle against it
and other concentrations of power may, and often is, difficult and
dangerous at times. [quoted by John Stauber and Sheldon Rampton in
**Toxic Sludge Is Good For You!**, p. 47] But, as Zapata once said,
*"better to die on your feet than live on your knees!"* All we can say
is that social struggle can and does improve things and, in terms of its
successes and transforming effect on those involved, well worth the
potential difficulties it can create. Moreover, without struggle there
is little chance of creating a free society, dependent as it is on
individuals who refuse to bow to authority and have the ability and
desire to govern themselves. In addition, social struggle is always
essential, not only to **win** improvements, but to **keep** them as
well. In order to fully secure improvements you have to abolish
capitalism and the state. Not to do so means that any reforms can and
will be taken away (and if social struggle does not exist, they will be
taken away sooner rather than later). Ultimately, most anarchists would
argue that social struggle is not an option -- we either do it or we put
up with the all the petty (and not so petty) impositions of authority.
If we do not say "no" then the powers that be will walk all over us.

As the history of neo-liberalism shows, a lack of social struggle is
fully compatible with worsening conditions. Ultimately, if you want to
be treated as a human being you have to stand up for your dignity -- and
that means thinking and rebelling. As Bakunin argued in **God and the
State**, human freedom and development is based on these. Without
rebellion, without social struggle, humanity would stagnate beneath
authority forever and never be in a position to be free. So anarchists
agree wholeheartedly with the Abolitionist Frederick Douglass:

> *"If there is no struggle, there is no progress. Those who profess to
> favour freedom, and yet depreciate agitation, are men who want crops
> without ploughing up the ground. They want rain without thunder and
> lightning. They want the ocean without the awful roar of its many
> waters.*

> *"This struggle may be a moral one; or it may be a physical one; or it
> may be both moral and physical; but it must be a struggle. Power
> concedes nothing without a demand. It never did and it never will.
> Find out just what a people will submit to, and you have found out the
> exact amount of injustice and wrong which will be imposed upon them;
> and these will continue till they are resisted with either words or
> blows, or with both. The limits of tyrants are prescribed by the
> endurance of those whom they oppress."* [**The Life and Writings of
> Frederick Douglass**, vol. 2, p. 437]

Of course, being utterly wrong has not dented von Hayek's reputation
with the right nor stopped him being quoted in arguments in favour of
flexibility and free market reforms (what can we expect? The right still
quote Milton Friedman whose track-record was equally impressive). Still,
why let the actual development of the economies influenced by von
Hayek's ideology get in the way? Perhaps it is fortunate that he once
argued that economic theories can *"never be verified or falsified by
reference to facts. All that we can and must verify is the presence of
our assumptions in the particular case."* [**Individualism and Economic
Order**, p. 73] With such a position all is saved -- the obvious problem
is that capitalism is still not pure enough and the "reforms" must not
only continue but be made deeper... As Kropotkin stressed, *"economists
who continue to consider economic forces alone . . . without taking into
account **the ideology of the State**, or the forces that each State
necessarily places at the service of the rich . . . remain completely
outside the realities of the economic and social world."* [quoted by
Ruth Kinna, *"Fields of Vision: Kropotkin and Revolutionary Change"*,
pp. 67-86, **SubStance**, Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 72-3]

And, needless to say, while three decades of successful capitalist class
war goes without mention in polite circles, documenting its results gets
you denounced as advocating "class war"! It is more than pass the time
when working class people should make that a reality -- particularly
given the results of not doing so.

J.4.3 Are the new social movements a positive development for anarchists?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

When assessing the revolutionary potential of our own era, we must note
again that modern civilisation is under constant pressure from the
potential catastrophes of social breakdown, ecological destruction, and
proliferating weapons of mass destruction. These crises have drawn
attention as never before to the inherently counter-evolutionary nature
of the authoritarian paradigm, making more and more people aware that
the human race is headed for extinction if it persists in outmoded forms
of thought and behaviour. This awareness produces a favourable climate
for the reception of new ideas, and thus an opening for radical
educational efforts aimed at creating the mass transformation of
consciousness which must take place alongside the creation of new
liberatory institutions.

This receptiveness to new ideas has led to a number of new social
movements in recent years. From the point of view of anarchism, the four
most important of these are perhaps the feminist, ecology, peace, and
social justice movements. Each of these movements contain a great deal
of anarchist content, particularly insofar as they imply the need for
decentralisation and direct democracy. Since we have already commented
on the anarchist aspects of the ecology and feminist movements, here we
will limit our remarks to the peace and social justice movements.

It is clear to many members of the peace movement that international
disarmament, like the liberation of women, saving the planet's
ecosystem, and preventing social breakdown, can never be attained
without a shift of mass consciousness involving widespread rejection of
hierarchy, which is based on the authoritarian principles of domination
and exploitation. As C. George Bennello argued: *"Since peace involves
the positive process of replacing violence by other means of settling
conflict . . . it can be argued that some sort of institutional change
is necessary. For if insurgency is satisfied with specific reform goals,
and does not seek to transform the institutional structure of society by
getting at its centralised make-up, the war system will probably not go
away. This is really what we should mean by decentralising: making
institutions serve human ends again by getting humans to be responsible
at every level within them."* [**From the Ground Up**, p. 31]

When pursued along gender, class, racial, ethnic, or national lines,
domination and exploitation are the primary causes of resentment,
hatred, anger, and hostility, which often explode into individual or
organised violence. Given this, both domestic and international peace
depend on decentralisation, i.e. dismantling hierarchies, thus replacing
domination and exploitation by the anarchist principles of co-operation
and mutual aid.

Direct democracy is the other side of decentralisation. In order for an
organisation to spread power horizontally rather than concentrating it
at the apex of a hierarchy, all of its members have to have an equal
voice in making the decisions that affect them. Hence decentralisation
implies self-management. So, anarchists argue, the peace movement
implies anarchism because world peace is impossible without both
decentralisation and direct democracy (*"a federated people would be a
people organised for peace; what would they do with armies?"* [Proudhon,
**Du Principe Fédératif**, pp. 320-1]). As Benello correctly argued, the
*"anarchist perspective has an unparalleled relevance today because
prevailing nuclear policies can be considered as an ultimate stage in
the divergence between the interests of governments and their peoples .
. . the implications when revealed serve to raise fundamental questions
regarding the advisability of entrusting governments with questions of
life and death . . . There is thus a pressing impetus to re-think the
role, scale, and structure of national governments."* Moreover, *"[s]o
long as profits are tied to defence production, speaking truth to the
elites involved is not likely to get very far"* as *"it is only within
the boundaries of the profit system that the corporate elites would have
any space to move."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 138 and p. 34] Thus the peace
movement implicitly contains a libertarian critique of both forms of the
power system -- the political and economical.

In addition, certain of the practical aspects of the peace movement also
suggest anarchistic elements. The use of non-violent direct action to
protest against the war machine can only be viewed as a positive
development by anarchists. Not only does it use effective, anarchistic
methods of struggle it also radicalises those involved, making them more
receptive to anarchist ideas and analysis.

If we look at the implications of *"nuclear free zones"* we can detect
anarchistic tendencies within them. A nuclear free zone involves a town
or region declaring an end of its association with the nuclear military
industrial complex. They prohibit the research, production,
transportation and deployment of nuclear weapons as well as renouncing
the right to be defended by nuclear power. This movement was popular in
the 1980s, with many areas in Europe and the Pacific Basin declaring
that they were nuclear free zones. As Benello pointed out, *"[t]he
development of campaigns for nuclear free zones suggests a strategy
which can educate and radicalise local communities. Indeed, by extending
the logic of the nuclear free zone idea, we can begin to flesh out a
libertarian municipalist perspective which can help move our communities
several steps towards autonomy from both the central government and the
existing corporate system."* While the later development of these
initiatives did not have the radicalising effects that Benello hoped
for, they did *"represent a local initiative that does not depend on the
federal government for action. Thus it is a step toward local
empowerment . . . Steps that increase local autonomy change the power
relations between the centre and its colonies . . . The nuclear free
zone movement has a thrust which is clearly congruent with anarchist
ideas . . . The same motives which go into the declaration of a nuclear
free zone would dictate that in other areas where the state and the
corporate systems services are dysfunctional and involve excessive
costs, they should be dispensed with."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 137 and pp.
140-1]

The social justice movement is composed of people seeking fair and
compassionate solutions to problems such as poverty, unemployment,
economic exploitation, discrimination, poor housing, lack of health
insurance, wealth and income inequalities, and the like. In the
aftermath of decades of especially single-minded pursuit of this
priority by neo-liberal administrations, the United States, for example,
is reaping the grim harvest: wages stagnate, personal debt soars,
homelessness stalks the streets; social welfare budgets are slashed to
the bone while poverty, unemployment, and underemployment grow;
sweatshops mushrooming in the large cities; millions of Americans
without any health insurance while others face rocketing costs; obscene
wealth inequalities and falling social mobility; and so on. Britain
under the neo-liberal policies of Thatcher, Major and Blair experienced
a social deterioration similar to that in the US.

It is not difficult to show that the major problems concerning the
social justice movement can all be traced back to the hierarchy and
domination. For, given the purpose of hierarchy, the highest priority of
the elites who control the state is necessarily to maintain their own
power and privileges, regardless of the suffering involved for
subordinate classes.

In short, social injustice is inherent in the exploitative functions of
the state, which are made possible by the authoritarian form of state
institutions. Similarly, the authoritarian structure of capitalist
companies gives rise to social injustice due to exploitation producing
massive income differentials and wealth disparity between
owners/management and labour. Hence the success of the social justice
movement, like that of the feminist, ecology, and peace movements,
depends on dismantling hierarchies. This means not only that these
movements all imply anarchism but that they are related in such a way
that it is impossible to conceive one of them achieving its goals in
isolation from any of the others. To take just one example, let us
consider the relationship between social justice and peace, which can be
seen by examining a specific social justice issue: labour rights.

The production of advanced weapons systems is highly profitable for
capitalists, which is why more technologically complex and precise
weapons keep getting built with government help (with the public paying
the tab by way of taxes). Now, we may reasonably argue that it is a
fundamental human right to be able to choose freely whether or not one
will personally contribute to the production of technologies that could
lead to the extinction of the human race. Yet because of the
authoritarian form of the capitalist corporation, rank-and-file workers
have virtually no say in whether the companies for which they work will
produce such technologies. (To the objection that workers can always
quit if they don't like company policy, the reply is that they may not
be able to find other work and therefore that the choice is not
genuinely free). Hence the only way that ordinary workers can obtain the
right to be consulted on life-or-death company policies is to control
the production process themselves, through self-management as production
for need and use will never come from the employer. The owners of
production in a capitalist society will never begin to take social
priorities into account in the production process. The pursuit of ever
greater profits is not compatible with social justice and
responsibility.

For these reasons, the peace and social justice movements are
fundamentally linked through their shared need for a worker-controlled
economy. Moreover, extreme poverty makes military service one of the few
legal options open for many individuals to improve their social
situation. These considerations illustrate further links between the
peace and social justice movements -- and between those movements and
anarchism, which is the conceptual "glue" that can potentially unite all
the new social movement in a single anti-authoritarian coalition.

J.4.4 What is the *"economic structural crisis"*?
-------------------------------------------------

There is an ongoing structural crisis in the global capitalist economy.
Compared to the post-war "Golden Age" of 1950 to 1973, the period from
1974 has seen a continual worsening in economic performance in the West
and for Japan. For example, growth is lower, unemployment is far higher,
labour productivity lower as is investment. Average rates of
unemployment in the major industrialised countries have risen sharply
since 1973, especially after 1979. Unemployment *"in the advanced
capitalist countries . . . increased by 56 per cent between 1973 and
1980 (from an average 3.4 per cent to 5.3 per cent of the labour force)
and by another 50 per cent since then (from 5.3 per cent of the labour
force in 1980 to 8.0 per cent in 1994)."* Job insecurity has increased
with, for example, the USA, having the worse job insecurity since the
depression of the 1930s. [Takis Fotopoulos, **Towards and Inclusive
Democracy**, p. 35 and p. 141] In addition, the world economy have
become far less stable with regular financial crises sweeping the world
of de-regulated capitalism every few years or so.

This crisis is not confined to the economy. It extends into the
ecological and the social, with the quality of life and well-being
decreasing as GDP grows (as we noted in [section C.10](secC10.html),
economic factors cannot, and do not, indicate human happiness). However,
here we discuss economic factors. This does not imply that the social
and ecological crises are unimportant or are reducible to the economy.
Far from it. We concentrate on the economic factor simply because this
is the factor usually stressed by the establishment and it is useful to
indicate the divergence of reality and hype we are currently being
subjected to.

Ironically enough, as Marxist Robert Brenner points out, *"as the
neo-classical medicine has been administered in even stronger doses, the
economy has performed steadily less well. The 1970s were worse than the
1960s, the 1980s worse than the 1970s, and the 1990s have been worse
than the 1980s."* [*"The Economics of Global Turbulence"*, **New Left
Review**, no. 229, p. 236] This is ironic because during the crisis of
Keynesianism in the 1970s the right argued that too much equality and
democracy harmed the economy, and so us all worse-of in the long run
(due to lower growth, sluggish investment and so on). However, after
decades of pro-capitalist governments, rising inequality, increased
freedom for capital and its owners and managers, the weakening of trade
unions and so on, economic growth has become worse!

If we look at the USA in the 1990s (usually presented as an economy that
"got it right") we find that the *"cyclical upturn of the 1990s has, in
terms of the main macro-economic indicators of growth -- output,
investment, productivity, and real compensation -- has been even less
dynamic than its relatively weak predecessors of the 1980s and the 1970s
(not to mention those of the 1950s and 1960s)."* [Brenner, **Op. Cit.**,
p. 5] Of course, the economy is presented as a success -- inequality is
growing, the rich are getting richer and wealth is concentrating into
fewer and fewer hands and so for the rich and finance capital, it can be
considered a "Golden Age" and so is presented as such by the media. As
economist Paul Krugman summarises, in America while the bulk of the
population are working longer and harder to make ends meet *"the really
big gains went to the really, really rich."* In fact, *“only the top 1
percent has done better since the 1970s than it did in the generation
after World War II. Once you get way up the scale, however, the gains
have been spectacular -- the top tenth of a percent saw its income rise
fivefold, and the top .01 percent of American is seven times richer than
they were in 1973."* Significantly, *the top 0.1% of Americans, a class
with a minimum income of about \$1.3 million and an average of about
\$3.5 million, receives more than 7 percent of all income -- up from
just 2.2 percent in 1979."* [**The Conscience of a Liberal**, p. 129 and
p. 259]

So it is for this reason that it may be wrong to term this slow rot a
"crisis" as it is hardly one for the ruling elite as their share in
social wealth, power and income has steadily increased over this period.
However, for the majority it is undoubtedly a crisis (the term *"silent
depression"* has been accurately used to describe this). Unsurprisingly,
when the chickens came home to roost under the Bush Junta and the elite
faced economic collapse, the state bailed them out.

The only countries which saw substantial and dynamic growth after 1973
where those which used state intervention to violate the eternal "laws"
of neo-classical economics, namely the South East Asian countries (in
this they followed the example of Japan which had used state
intervention to grow at massive rates after the war). Of course, before
the economic crisis of 1997, capitalist ideologues argued that these
countries were classic examples of "free market" economies. Right-wing
icon F.A von Hayek asserted that *"South Korea and other newcomers"* had
*"discovered the benefits of free markets."* [**1980s Unemployment and
the Unions**, p. 113] In 1995, the **Heritage Foundation** (a right-wing
think-tank) released its index of economic freedom. Four of the top
seven countries were Asian, including Japan and Taiwan. All the Asian
countries struggling just a few years later qualified as "free." Yet, as
mentioned in [section C.10.1](secC10.html#secc101), such claims were
manifestly false: *"it was not **laissez-faire** policies that induced
their spectacular growth. As a number of studies have shown, the
expansion of the Asian Tigers was based on massive state intervention
that boosted their export sectors, by public policies involving not only
heavy protectionism but even deliberate distortion of market prices to
stimulate investment and trade."* [Fotopoulos, **Op. Cit.**, p. 115]
Moreover, for a long period these countries also banned unions and
protest, but then for the right "free markets" always seem compatible
with lack of freedom for workers to organise.

Needless to say, **after** the crisis of the late 1990s, the
free-marketeers discovered the statism that had always been there and
danced happily on the grave of what used to be called *"the Asian
miracle"*. It was perverse to see the supporters of "free-market"
capitalism concluding that history was rendering its verdict on the
Asian model of capitalism while placing into the Memory Hole the awkward
fact that until the crisis they themselves had taken great pains to deny
that such a model existed! Such hypocrisy is not only truly sickening,
it also undermines their own case for the wonders of "the market." For
until the crisis appeared, the world's investors -- which is to say "the
market" -- saw nothing but golden opportunities ahead for these "free"
economies. They showed their faith by shoving billions into Asian equity
markets, while foreign banks contentedly handed out billions in loans.
If Asia's problems were systemic and the result of these countries'
statist policies, then investors' failure to recognise this earlier is a
blow against the market, not for it.

So, as can be seen, the global economy has been marked by an increasing
stagnation, the slowing down of growth, weak (and jobless) recoveries,
speculative bubbles driving what growth there is and increasing
financial instability producing regular and deepening crisis. This is
despite (or, more likely, **because of**) the free market reforms
imposed and the deregulation of finance capital (we say "because of"
simply because neo-classical economics argue that pro-market reforms
would increase growth and improve the economy, but as we noted in
[section C.1](secC1.html) such economics has little basis in reality and
so their recommendations are hardly going to produce positive results).
Of course as the ruling class have been doing well this underlying
slowdown has been ignored and obviously claims of crisis are only raised
when economic distress reach the elite.

Crisis (particularly financial crisis) has become increasingly visible,
reflecting the underlying weakness of the global economy (rising
inequality, lack of investment in producing real goods in favour of
speculation in finance, etc.). This underlying weakness has been hidden
by the speculator performance of the world's stock markets, which,
ironically enough, has helped create that weakness to begin with! As one
expert on Wall Street argues, *"Bond markets . . . hate economic
strength . . . Stocks generally behave badly just as the real economy is
at its strongest . . . Stocks thrive on a cool economy, and wither in a
hot one."* In other words, real economic weakness is reflected in
financial strength. Unsurprisingly, then, *"[w]hat might be called the
rentier share of the corporate surplus -- dividends plus interest as a
percentage of pre-tax profits and interest -- has risen sharply, from
20-30% in the 1950s to 60% in the 1990s."* [Doug Henwood, **Wall
Street**, p. 124 and p. 73]

This helps explain the stagnation which has afflicted the economies of
the west. The rich have been placing more of their ever-expanding wealth
in stocks, allowing this market to rise in the face of general economic
torpor. Rather than being used for investment, surplus is being
funnelled into the finance market (retained earnings in the US have
decreased as interest and dividend payments have increased [Brenner,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 210]). However, such markets do concentrate wealth very
successfully even if *"the US financial system performs dismally at its
advertised task, that of efficiently directing society's savings towards
their optimal investment pursuits. The system is stupefyingly expensive,
gives terrible signals for the allocation of capital, and has
surprisingly little to do with real investment."* [Henwood, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 3] As most investment comes from internal funds, the rise in
the rentiers share of the surplus has meant less investment and so the
stagnation of the economy. The weakening economy has increased financial
strength, which in turn leads to a weakening in the real economy. A
vicious circle, and one reflected in the slowing of economic growth over
the last 30 years.

The increasing dominance of finance capital has, in effect, created a
market for government policies. As finance capital has become
increasingly global in nature governments must secure, protect and
expand the field of profit-making for financial capital and
transnational corporations, otherwise they will be punished by
dis-investment by global markets (i.e. finance capital). These policies
have been at the expense of the underlying economy in general, and of
the working class in particular:

> *"Rentier power was directed at labour, both organised and unorganised
> ranks of wage earners, because it regarded rising wages as a principal
> threat to the stable order. For obvious reasons, this goal was never
> stated very clearly, but financial markets understood the centrality
> of the struggle: protecting the value of their capital required the
> suppression of labour incomes."* [William Greider, **One World, Ready
> or Not**, p. 302]

For example, *"the practical effect of finance capital's hegemony was to
lock the advanced economies and their governments in a malignant spiral,
restricting them to bad choices. Like bondholders in general, the new
governing consensus explicitly assumed that faster economic growth was
dangerous -- threatening to the stable financial order -- so nations
were effectively blocked from measures that might reduce permanent
unemployment or ameliorate the decline in wages . . . The reality of
slow growth, in turn, drove the governments into their deepening
indebtedness, since the disappointing growth inevitably undermined tax
revenues while it expanded the public welfare costs. The rentier regime
repeatedly instructed governments to reform their spending priorities --
that is, withdraw benefits from dependent citizens."* [Greider, **Op.
Cit.**, pp. 297-8]

Of course, industrial capital **also** hates labour, so there is a basis
of an alliance between the two sides of capital, even if they do
disagree over the specifics of the economic policies implemented. Given
that a key aspect of the neo-liberal reforms was the transformation of
the labour market from a post-war sellers' market to a nineteenth
century buyers' market with its related effects on workplace discipline,
wage claims and proneness to strike, industrial capital could not but be
happy even if its members quibbled over details. Doug Henwood correctly
argues that *"Liberals and populists often search for potential allies
among industrialists, reasoning that even if financial interests suffer
in a boom, firms that trade in real, rather than fictitious, products
would thrive when growth is strong. In general, industrialists are less
sympathetic to these arguments. Employers in any industry like slack in
the labour market; it makes for a pliant workforce, one unlikely to make
demands or resist speedups."* In addition, *"many non-financial
corporations have heavy financial interests."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 123 and
p. 135]

Thus the general stagnation afflicting much of the world, a stagnation
which regularly develop into open crisis as the needs of finance
undermine the real economy which, ultimately, it is dependent upon. The
contradiction between short term profits and long term survival inherent
in capitalism strikes again.

Crisis, as we have noted above, has appeared in areas previously
considered as strong economies and it has been spreading. An important
aspect of this crisis is the tendency for productive capacity to
outstrip effective demand, which arises in large part from the imbalance
between capitalists' need for a high rate of profit and their
simultaneous need to ensure that workers have enough wealth and income
so that they can keep buying the products on which those profits depend.
Inequality has been increasing particularly in neo-liberal countries
like the UK and USA, which means that the economy faces as realisation
crisis (see [section C.7](secC7.html)), a crisis which was avoided in
the short-term by deepening debt for working people (debt levels more
than doubled between the 1950s to the 1990s, from 25% to over 60%). In
2007, the chickens came hole to roost with a global credit crunch much
worse than the previous finance crises of the neo-liberal era.

Over-investment has been magnified due to the East-Asian Tigers and
China which, thanks to their intervention in the market (and repressive
regimes against labour), ensured they were a more profitable place to
invest than elsewhere. Capital flooded into the area, ensuring a
relative over-investment was inevitable. As we argued in [section
C.7.2](secC7.html#secc72), crisis is possible simply due to the lack of
information provided by the price mechanism -- economic agents can react
in such a way that the collective result of individually rational
decisions is irrational. Thus the desire to reap profits in the Tiger
economies resulted in a squeeze in profits as the aggregate investment
decisions resulted in over-investment, and so over-production and
falling profits.

In effect, the South East Asian economies suffered from the "fallacy of
composition." When you are the first Asian export-driven economy, you
are competing with high-cost Western producers and so your cheap
workers, low taxes and lax environmental laws allow you to under-cut
your competitors and make profits. However, as more tigers joined into
the market, they end up competing against **each other** and so their
profit margins would decrease towards their actual cost price rather
than that of Western firms. With the decrease in profits, the capital
that flowed into the region flowed back out, thus creating a crisis (and
proving, incidentally, that free markets are destabilising and do not
secure the best of all possible outcomes). Thus, the rentier regime,
after weakening the Western economies, helped destabilise the Eastern
ones too.

So, in the short-run, many large corporations and financial companies
solved their profit problems by expanding production into
"underdeveloped" countries so as to take advantage of the cheap labour
there (and the state repression which ensured that cheapness) along with
weaker environmental laws and lower taxes. Yet gradually they are
running out of third-world populations to exploit. For the very process
of "development" stimulated by the presence of Transnational
Corporations in third-world nations increases competition and so,
potentially, over-investment and, even more importantly, produces
resistance in the form of unions, rebellions and so on, which tend to
exert a downward pressure on the level of exploitation and profits.

This process reflects, in many ways, the rise of finance capital in the
1970s. In the 1950s and 1960s, existing industrialised nations
experienced increased competition from Japan and Germany. As these
nations re-industrialised, they placed increased pressure on the USA and
other nations, reducing the global "degree of monopoly" and forcing them
to compete with lower cost producers. In addition, full employment
produced increasing resistance on the shop floor and in society as a
whole (see [section C.7.1](secC7.html#secc71)), squeezing profits even
more. Thus a combination of class struggle and global over-capacity
resulted in the 1970s crisis. With the inability of the real economy,
especially the manufacturing sector, to provide an adequate return,
capital shifted into finance. In effect, it ran away from the success of
working people asserting their rights at the point of production and
elsewhere. This, combined with increased international competition,
ensured the rise of finance capital which in return ensured the current
stagnationist tendencies in the economy (tendencies made worse by the
rise of the Asian Tiger economies in the 1980s).

From the contradictions between finance capital and the real economy,
between capitalists' need for profit and human needs, between
over-capacity and demand, and others, there has emerged what appears to
be a long-term trend toward **permanent** stagnation of the capitalist
economy with what growth spurts which do exist being fuelled by
speculative bubbles as well as its benefits being monopolised by the few
(so refuting the notion of "trickle down" economics). This trend has
been apparent for several decades, as evidenced by the continuous upward
adjustment of the rate of unemployment officially considered to be
"normal" or "acceptable" during those decades, and by other symptoms as
well such as falling growth, lower rates of profit and so on.

This stagnation has became even more obvious by the development of deep
crisis in many countries at the end of the 2000s. This caused central
banks to intervene in order to try and revive the real economies that
have suffered under their rentier inspired policies since the 1970s.
Such action may just ensure continued stagnation and reflated bubbles
rather than a real-up turn. One thing is true, however, and that is the
working class will pay the price of any "solution" -- unless they
organise and get rid of capitalism and the state. Ultimately, capitalism
need profits to survive and such profits came from the fact that workers
do not have economic liberty. Thus any "solution" within a capitalist
framework means the increased oppression and exploitation of working
class people.

J.4.5 Why is this *"economic structural crisis"* important to social struggle?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The **"economic structural crisis"** we out-lined in the [last
section](secJ4.html#secj44) has certain implications for anarchists and
social struggle. Essentially, as C. George Benello argued, *"[i]f
economic conditions worsen . . . then we are likely to find an openness
to alternatives which have not been thought of since the depression of
the 1930s . . . It is important to plan for a possible economic crisis,
since it is not only practical, but also can serve as a method of
mobilising a community in creative ways."* [**From the Ground Up**, p.
149]

In the face of economic stagnation and depression, attempts to generate
more profits (i.e., increase exploitation) by increasing the authority
of the boss grow. In addition, more people find it harder to make ends
meet, running up debts to survive, face homelessness if they are made
unemployed, and so on. This makes exploitation ever more visible and
tend to push oppressed strata together in movements that seek to
mitigate, and even remove, their oppression. As the capitalist era has
worn on, these strata have become increasingly able to rebel and gain
substantial political and economic improvements, which have, in
addition, lead to an increasing willingness to do so because of rising
expectations (about what is possible) and frustration (about what
actually is). It is true that libertarians, the left and labour have
suffered setbacks since the 1970s, but with increasing misery of the
working class due to neo-liberal policies (and the *"economic structural
crisis"* they create), it is only a matter of time before there is a
resurgence of radicalism.

Anarchists will be in the forefront of this resurgence. For, with the
discrediting and eventual fall of authoritarian state capitalism
("Communism") in Eastern Europe, the anti-authoritarian faction of the
left will increasingly be seen as its only credible one. Thus the
ongoing structural crisis of the global capitalist economy, combined
with the other developments springing from what Takis Fotopoulos calls
(in his book **Towards an Inclusive Democracy**) a *"multidimensional
crisis"* (which includes economic, political, social, ecological and
ideological aspects), could (potentially) lead to a new
**international** anti-authoritarian alliance linking together the new
(and not so new) social movements in the West (feminism, the Green
movement, rank-and-file labour militancy, etc.) with non-authoritarian
liberation movements in the Third World and new movements in formerly
Stalinist countries. However, this is only likely to happen if
anarchists take the lead in promoting alternatives and working with the
mass of the population. Ways in which anarchist can do this are
discussed in some detail in [section J.5](secJ5.html).

Thus the *"economic structural crisis"* can aid social struggle by
placing the contrast of *"what is"* with what *"could be"* in a clear
light. Any crisis brings forth the contradictions in capitalism, between
the production of use values (things people need) and of exchange value
(capitalist profits), between capitalism's claims of being based on
liberty and the authoritarianism associated with wage labour (*"The
general evidence of repression poses an ancient contradiction for
capitalism: while it claims to promote human freedom, it profits
concretely from the denial of freedom, most especially freedom for the
workers employed by capitalist enterprise."* [William Greider, **One
World, Ready or Not**, p. 388]) and so on. It shakes to the bone popular
faith in capitalism's ability to "deliver the goods" and gets more and
more people thinking about alternatives to a system that places profit
above and before people and planet. The crisis also, by its very nature,
encourages workers and other oppressed sections of the population to
resist and fight back, which in turn generates collective organisation
(such as unions or workplace-based assemblies and councils), solidarity
and direct action -- in other words, collective self-help and the
awareness that the problems of working class people can only be solved
by ourselves, by our own actions and organisations. The 1930s in the USA
is a classic example of this process, with very militant struggles
taking place in very difficult situations (see Howard Zinn's **A
People's History of the United States** or Jeremy Brecher's **Strike!**
for details).

In other words, the "economic structural crisis" gives radicals a lot
potential to get their message across, even if the overall environment
may make success seem difficult at times!

As well as encouraging workplace organisation due to the intensification
of exploitation and authority provoked by the economic
stagnant/depression, the "economic structural crisis" can encourage
other forms of libertarian alternatives. For example, the *"economic
structural crisis"* has resulted in the erosion of the welfare state (at
least for the working class, for the elite state aid is never far away).
This development has potential libertarian possibilities. *"The decline
of the state,"* argues L. Gambone, *"makes necessary a revitalisation of
the notions of direct action and mutual aid. Without Mama State to do it
for us, we must create our own social services through mutual aid
societies."* [**Syndicalism in Myth and Reality**, p. 12] As we argue in
more depth in [section J.5.16](secJ5.html#secj516), such a movement of
mutual aid has a long history in the working class and, as it is under
our control, it cannot be withdrawn from us to enrich and empower the
ruling class as state run systems have been. Thus the decline of state
run social services could, potentially, see the rise of a network of
self-managed, working class alternatives (equally, of course, it could
see the end of all services to the weakest sections of our society --
which possibility comes about depends on what we do in the here and now.
See [section J.5.15](secJ5.html#secj515) for an anarchist analysis of
the welfare state).

**Food Not Bombs!** (FNB) is an excellent example of practical
libertarian alternatives being generated by the economic crisis we are
facing. FNB is a community-based group which helps the homeless through
the direct action of its members. It also involves the homeless in
helping themselves. It serves free food in public places to expose the
plight of the homeless, the callousness of the system and our capacity
to solve social problems through our own actions without government or
capitalism. The constant harassment of FNB by the police, middle classes
and the government illustrates their callousness to the plight of the
poor and the failure of their institutions to build a society which
cares for people more than money and property (and the police and
prisons to protect them). The fact is that in the US many working and
unemployed people have no **feeling** that they are entitled to basic
human needs such as medicine, clothes, shelter, and food. FNB encourages
poor people to make these demands, provides a space in which these
demands can be voiced, and helps to breakdown the wall between hungry
and not-hungry. The repression directed towards FNB by local police
forces and governments also demonstrates the effectiveness of their
activity and the possibility that it may radicalise those who get
involved with the organisation. Charity is obviously one thing, mutual
aid is something else. FNB is a politicised movement from below, based
on solidarity, **not** charity as, in Kropotkin's words, charity *"bears
a character of inspiration from above, and, accordingly, implies a
certain superiority of the giver upon the receiver."* [**Mutual Aid**,
p. 222]

The last example of how economic stagnation can generate libertarian
tendencies can be seen from the fact that, *"[h]istorically, at times of
severe inflation or capital shortages, communities have been forced to
rely on their own resources. During the Great Depression, many cities
printed their own currency; this works to the extent that a community is
able to maintain a viable internal economy which provides the
necessities of life, independent of transactions with the outside."*
[Benello, **Op. Cit.**, p. 150]

These local currencies could be the basis of a mutual bank (see [section
J.5.5](secJ5.html#secj55)), providing interest-free loans to workers to
form co-operatives and so build libertarian alternatives to capitalist
firms, so eliminating the profits of capitalists by allowing workers to
exchange the product of their labour with other workers. Moreover,
*"local exchange systems strength local communities by increasing their
self-reliance, empowering community members, and helping to protect them
from the excesses of the global market."* [Frank Lindenfield,
*"Economics for Anarchists,"* **Social Anarchism**, no. 23, p. 24] In
this way self-managing communes could be created, communes that replace
hierarchical, top-down, government with collective decision making of
community affairs based on directly democratic community assemblies.
These self-governing communities and economies could federate together
to co-operate on a wider scale and so create a counter-power to that of
state and capitalism.

This confederal system of self-managing communities could also protect
jobs as the *"globalisation of capital threatens local industries. A way
has to be found to keep capital at home and so preserve the jobs and the
communities that depend upon them. Protectionism is both undesirable and
unworkable. But worker-ownership or workers' co-operatives are
alternatives."* [Gambone, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 12-13] Local communities
could provide the necessary support structures which could protect
co-operatives from the corrupting effects of working in the capitalist
market (see [section J.5.11](secJ5.html#secj511)). They could also
demand that rather than nationalise or bailout failing companies (or,
for that matter, privatise state services or public works), they should
be turned over (as Proudhon constantly argued) to workers co-operatives
by aiding *"the **Labour Unions** to enter into a temporary possession
of the industrial concerns"*, anarchists would provide *"an effective
means to check the State Nationalisation"* in the period before a social
revolution when *"State phases which we are traversing now seems to be
unavoidable."* [quoted by Ruth Kinna, *"Fields of Vision: Kropotkin and
Revolutionary Change"*, pp. 67-86, **SubStance**, Vol. 36, No. 2, p. 77]
In this way, economic liberty (self-management) could replace capitalism
(wage slavery) and show that anarchism is a practical alternative to the
chaos and authoritarianism of capitalism, even if these examples are
initially fragmentally and limited in nature.

However, these developments should **not** be taken in isolation of
collective struggle in the workplace or community. It is in the class
struggle that the real potential for anarchy is created. The work of
such organisations as **Food Not Bombs!** and the creation of local
currencies and co-operatives are supplementary to the important task of
creating workplace and community organisations that can create effective
resistance to both state and capitalists, resistance that can overthrow
both (see sections [J.5.2](secJ5.html#secj52) and
[J.5.1](secJ5.html#secj51) respectively). *"Volunteer and service credit
systems and alternative currencies by themselves may not be enough to
replace the corporate capitalist system. Nevertheless, they can help
build the economic strength of local currencies, empower local
residents, and mitigate some of the consequences of poverty and
unemployment . . . By the time a majority [of a community are involved
it] will be well on its way to becoming a living embodiment of many
anarchist ideals."* [Lindenfield, **Op. Cit.**, p. 28] And such a
community would be a great aid in any strike or other social struggle
which is going on!

The general economic crisis which we are facing has implications for
social struggle and anarchist activism. It could be the basic of
libertarian alternatives in our workplaces and communities, alternatives
based on direct action, solidarity and self-management. These
alternatives could include workplace and community unionism,
co-operatives, mutual banks and other forms of anarchistic resistance to
capitalism and the state.

Finally, we must stress that we are **not** arguing that working class
people need an economic crisis to force them into struggle. Such
"objectivism" (i.e. the placing of tendencies towards socialism in the
development of capitalism, of objective factors, rather than in the
class struggle, i.e. subjective factors) is best left to orthodox
Marxists and Leninists as it has authoritarian implications. Rather we
are aware that the class struggle, the subjective pressure on
capitalism, is not independent of the conditions within which it takes
place (and helps to create, we must add). Subjective revolt is always
present under capitalism and, in the case of the 1970s, played a role in
creating crisis. Faced with an economic crisis we are indicating what we
can do in response to it and how it could, potentially, generate
libertarian tendencies within society. Economic crisis could, in other
words, provoke social struggle, collective action and generate anarchic
tendencies in society. Equally, it could cause apathy, rejection of
collective struggle and, perhaps, the embracing of **false** "solutions"
such as right-wing populism, Leninism, or Fascism. We cannot predict how
the future will develop, but it is true that if we do nothing then,
obviously, libertarian tendencies will not grow and develop.

J.4.6 What are implications of anti-government and anti-big business feelings?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Public opinion polls show increasing feelings of disappointment and lack
of confidence in governments and big business.

Some of the feelings of disappointment with government can be blamed on
the anti-big-government rhetoric of conservatives and right-wing
populists. Of course the Right would never dream of **really**
dismantling the state, as is evident from the fact that government was
as bureaucratic and expensive under "conservative" administrations. So
this "decentralist" element of right-wing rhetoric is a con (and quickly
jettisoned as required by the capitalist class). The "anti-Government"
rhetoric is combined with the pro-business, pro-private tyranny, racist,
anti-feminist, and homophobic hogwash disseminated by right-wing radio
and TV propagandists and the business-backed media which shows that
capitalism is not **genuinely** anti-authoritarian (nor could it ever
be), as a social system based on liberty must entail.

When a right-wing politician, economist or business "leader" argues that
the government is too big, they are rarely thinking of the same
government functions you are. You may be thinking of subsidies for
tobacco farmers or defence firms; they are thinking about pollution
controls. You may be thinking of reforming welfare for the better; their
idea is to dismantle the welfare state (for working class people).
Moreover, with their support for "family values", "wholesome"
television, bans on abortion and so on, their victory would see an
increased level of government intrusion in many personal spheres as well
as increased state support for the power of the boss over the worker and
the landlord over the tenant.

If you look at what the Right has done and is doing, rather than what it
is saying, you quickly see the ridiculous of claims of right-wing
"libertarianism" (as well as who is really in charge). Obstructing
pollution and health regulations; defunding product safety laws; opening
national parks to logging and mining, or closing them entirely; reducing
taxes for the rich; eliminating the capital gains tax; allowing
companies to fire striking workers; making it easier for big
telecommunications companies to dominate the media; limiting companies'
liability for unsafe products -- the objective here is obviously to help
big business and the wealthy do what they want without government
interference, helping the rich get richer and increasing "freedom" for
private power combined with a state whose sole role is to protect that
"liberty."

Such right-wing tendencies do not have anarchistic elements. The
"anti-government" propaganda of big business is hardly anarchistic. What
anarchists try to do is point out the hypocritical and contradictory
nature of such rhetoric. The arguments against big government are
equally applicable to business. **If** people are capable of making
their own decisions, then why should this capability be denied in the
workplace? As Noam Chomsky points out, while there is a *"leave it
alone"* and *"do your own thing"* current within society, it in fact
*"tells you that the propaganda system is working full-time, because
there is no such ideology in the US. Business, for example, doesn't
believe it. It has always insisted upon a powerful interventionist state
to support its interests -- still does and always has -- back to the
origins of American society. There's nothing individualistic about
corporations. Those are big conglomerate institutions, essentially
totalitarian in character, but hardly individualistic. Within them
you're a cog in a big machine. There are few institutions in human
society that have such strict hierarchy and top-down control as a
business organisation. Nothing there about 'Don't tread on me.' You're
being tread on all the time. The point of the ideology is to try to get
other people, outside of the sectors of co-ordinated power, to fail to
associate and enter into decision-making in the political arena
themselves. The point is to atomise everyone else while leaving powerful
sectors integrated and highly organised and of course dominating
resources."* He goes on to note that there is *"a streak of independence
and individuality in American culture which I think is a very good
thing. This 'Don't tread on me' feeling is in many respects a healthy
one. It's healthy up to the point where it atomises and keeps you from
working together with other people. So it's got its healthy side and its
negative side. It's the negative side that's emphasised naturally in the
propaganda and indoctrination."* [**Keeping the Rabble in Line**, pp.
279-80]

As opinion polls show, most people direct their dislike and distrust of
institutions equally to Big Business, which shows that people are not
stupid. Unfortunately, as Goebbels was well aware, tell a lie often
enough and people start to believe it. Given the funds available to big
business, its influence in the media, its backing of "think-tanks," the
use of Public Relations companies, the support of economic "science,"
its extensive advertising and so on, it says a lot for the common sense
of people that so many see big business for what it is. You simply
cannot fool all the people all of the time!

However, these feelings can easily be turned into cynicism as well as a
hopelessness that things can change for the better and that you cannot
help change society. Or, even worse, they can be twisted into support
for right, authoritarian, populism. The job for anarchists is to combat
this and help point the healthy distrust people have for government and
business towards a real solution to society's problems, namely a
decentralised, self-managed anarchist society.

J.4.7 What about the communications revolution?
-----------------------------------------------

Another important factor working in favour of anarchists is the
existence of a sophisticated global communications network and a high
degree of education and literacy among the populations of the core
industrialised nations. Together these two developments make possible
nearly instantaneous sharing and public dissemination of information by
members of various progressive and radical movements all over the globe
-- a phenomenon that tends to reduce the effectiveness of repression by
central authorities. The electronic-media and personal-computer
revolutions also make it more difficult for elitist groups to maintain
their previous monopolies of knowledge. Copy-left software and text,
user-generated and shared content, file-sharing, all show that
information, and its users, reaches its full potential when it is free.
In short, the advent of the Information Age is potentially extremely
subversive.

The very existence of the Internet provides anarchists with a powerful
argument that decentralised structures can function effectively in a
highly complex world. For the net has no centralised headquarters and is
not subject to regulation by any centralised regulatory agency, yet it
still manages to function effectively. Moreover, the net is also an
effective way of anarchists and other radicals to communicate their
ideas to others, share knowledge, work on common projects and
co-ordinate activities and social struggle. By using the Internet,
radicals can make their ideas accessible to people who otherwise would
not come across anarchist ideas. In addition, and far more important
than anarchists putting their ideas across, the fact is that the net
allows everyone with access to express themselves freely, to communicate
with others and get access (by visiting webpages and joining mailing
lists and newsgroups) and give access (by creating webpages and joining
in with on-line arguments) to new ideas and viewpoints. This is very
anarchistic as it allows people to express themselves and start to
consider new ideas, ideas which may change how they think and act.

Obviously we are aware that the vast majority of people in the world do
not have access to telephones, never mind computers, but computer access
is increasing in many countries, making it available, via work,
libraries, schools, universities, and so on to more and more working
class people.

Of course there is no denying that the implications of improved
communications and information technology are ambiguous, implying Big
Brother as well the ability of progressive and radical movements to
organise. However, the point is only that the information revolution in
combination with the other social developments **could** (but will not
**necessarily**) contribute to a social paradigm shift. Obviously such a
shift will not happen automatically. Indeed, it will not happen at all
unless there is strong resistance to governmental and corporate attempts
to limit public access to information, technology (e.g. encryption
programs), censor peoples' communications and use of electronic media
and track them on-line.

This use of the Internet and computers to spread the anarchist message
is ironic. The rapid improvement in price-performance ratios of
computers, software, and other technology today is often used to
validate the faith in free market capitalism but that requires a
monumental failure of historical memory as not just the Internet but
also the computer represents a spectacular success of public investment.
As late as the 1970s and early 1980s, according to Kenneth Flamm's
**Creating the Computer**, the federal government was paying for 40
percent of all computer-related research and 60 to 75 percent of basic
research. Even such modern-seeming gadgets as video terminals, the light
pen, the drawing tablet, and the mouse evolved from Pentagon-sponsored
research in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s. Even software was not without
state influence, with databases having their root in US Air Force and
Atomic Energy Commission projects, artificial intelligence in military
contracts back in the 1950s and airline reservation systems in 1950s
air-defence systems. More than half of IBM's Research and Development
budget came from government contracts in the 1950s and 1960s.

The motivation was national security, but the result has been the
creation of comparative advantage in information technology for the
United States that private firms have happily exploited and extended.
When the returns were uncertain and difficult to capture, private firms
were unwilling to invest, and government played the decisive role. And
not for want of trying, for key players in the military first tried to
convince businesses and investment bankers that a new and potentially
profitable business opportunity was presenting itself, but they did not
succeed and it was only when the market expanded and the returns were
more definite that the government receded. While the risks and
development costs were socialised, the gains were privatised. All of
which make claims that the market would have done it anyway highly
unlikely.

Looking beyond state aid to the computer industry we discover a
*"do-it-yourself"* (and so self-managed) culture which was essential to
its development. The first personal computer, for example, was invented
by amateurs who wanted their own cheap machines. The existence of a
"gift" economy among these amateurs and hobbyists was a necessary
precondition for the development of PCs. Without this free sharing of
information and knowledge, the development of computers would have been
hindered and so socialistic relations between developers and within the
working environment created the necessary conditions for the computer
revolution. If this community had been marked by commercial relations,
the chances are the necessary breakthroughs and knowledge would have
remained monopolised by a few companies or individuals, so hindering the
industry as a whole.

Encouragingly, this socialistic "gift economy" is still at the heart of
computer/software development and the Internet. For example, the **Free
Software Foundation** has developed the **General Public Licence**
(GPL). GPL, also know as **"copyleft"**, uses copyright to ensure that
software remains free. Copyleft ensures that a piece of software is made
available to everyone to use and modify as they desire. The only
restriction is that any used or modified copyleft material must remain
under copyleft, ensuring that others have the same rights as you did
when you used the original code. It creates a commons which anyone may
add to, but no one may subtract from. Placing software under GPL means
that every contributor is assured that she, and all other uses, will be
able to run, modify and redistribute the code indefinitely. Unlike
commercial software, copyleft code ensures an increasing knowledge base
from which individuals can draw from and, equally as important,
contribute to. In this way everyone benefits as code can be improved by
everyone, unlike commercial code.

Many will think that this essentially anarchistic system would be a
failure. In fact, code developed in this way is far more reliable and
sturdy than commercial software. Linux, for example, is a far superior
operating system than DOS precisely **because** it draws on the
collective experience, skill and knowledge of thousands of developers.
Apache, the most popular web-server, is another freeware product and is
acknowledged as the best available. The same can be said of other key
web-technologies (most obviously PHP) and projects (Wikipedia springs to
mind, although that project while based on co-operative and free
activity is owned by a few people who have ultimate control). While
non-anarchists may be surprised, anarchists are not. Mutual aid and
co-operation are beneficial in the evolution of life, why not in the
evolution of software? For anarchists, this "gift economy" at the heart
of the communications revolution is an important development. It shows
both the superiority of common development as well as the walls built
against innovation and decent products by property systems. We hope that
such an economy will spread increasingly into the "real" world.

Another example of co-operation being aided by new technologies is
Netwar. This refers to the use of the Internet by autonomous groups and
social movements to co-ordinate action to influence and change society
and fight government or business policy. This use of the Internet has
steadily grown over the years, with a Rand corporation researcher, David
Ronfeldt, arguing that this has become an important and powerful force
(Rand is, and has been since its creation in 1948, a private appendage
of the military industrial complex). In other words, activism and
activists' power and influence has been fuelled by the advent of the
information revolution. Through computer and communication networks,
especially via the Internet, grassroots campaigns have flourished, and
the most importantly, government elites have taken notice.

Ronfeldt specialises in issues of national security, especially in the
areas of Latin American and the impact of new informational
technologies. Ronfeldt and another colleague coined the term
**"netwar"** in a Rand document entitled *"Cyberwar is Coming!"*.
Ronfeldt's work became a source of discussion on the Internet in
mid-March 1995 when Pacific News Service correspondent Joel Simon wrote
an article about Ronfeldt's opinions on the influence of netwars on the
political situation in Mexico after the Zapatista uprising. According to
Simon, Ronfeldt holds that the work of social activists on the Internet
has had a large influence -- helping to co-ordinate the large
demonstrations in Mexico City in support of the Zapatistas and the
proliferation of EZLN communiqués across the world via computer
networks. These actions, Ronfeldt argues, have allowed a network of
groups that oppose the Mexican Government to muster an international
response, often within hours of actions by it. In effect, this has
forced the Mexican government to maintain the facade of negotiations
with the EZLN and has on many occasions, actually stopped the army from
just going in to Chiapas and brutally massacring the Zapatistas.

Given that Ronfeldt was an employee of the Rand Corporation his comments
indicate that the U.S. government and its military and intelligence
wings are very interested in what the Left is doing on the Internet.
Given that they would not be interested in this if it were not
effective, we can say that this use of the "Information Super-Highway"
is a positive example of the use of technology in ways un-planned of by
those who initially developed it (let us not forget that the Internet
was originally funded by the U.S. government and military). While the
internet is being hyped as the next big marketplace, it is being
subverted by activists -- an example of anarchistic trends within
society worrying the powers that be.

A good example of this powerful tool is the incredible speed and range
at which information travels the Internet about events concerning Mexico
and the Zapatistas. When Alexander Cockburn wrote an article exposing a
Chase Manhattan Bank memo about Chiapas and the Zapatistas in
**Counterpunch**, only a small number of people read it because it is
only a newsletter with a limited readership. The memo, written by
Riordan Roett, argued that *"the [Mexican] government will need to
eliminate the Zapatistas to demonstrate their effective control of the
national territory and of security policy"*. In other words, if the
Mexican government wants investment from Chase, it would have to crush
the Zapatistas. This information was relatively ineffective when just
confined to print but when it was uploaded to the Internet, it suddenly
reached a very large number of people. These people in turn co-ordinated
protests against the U.S and Mexican governments and especially Chase
Manhattan. Chase was eventually forced to attempt to distance itself
from the Roett memo that it commissioned. Since then net-activism has
grown.

Ronfeldt's research and opinion should be flattering for the Left. He is
basically arguing that the efforts of activists on computers not only
has been very effective (or at least has that potential), but more
importantly, argues that the only way to counter this work is to follow
the lead of social activists. Activists should understand the important
implications of Ronfeldt's work: government elites are not only watching
these actions (big surprise) but are also attempting to work against
them. Thus Netwars and copyleft are good examples of anarchistic trends
within society, using communications technology as a means of
co-ordinating activity across the world in a libertarian fashion for
libertarian goals.
