J.3 What kinds of organisation do anarchists build?
===================================================

Anarchists are well aware of the importance of building organisations.
Organisations allow those within them to multiply their strength and
activity, becoming the means by which an individual can see their ideas,
hopes and dreams realised. This is as true for getting the anarchist
message across as for building a home, running a hospital or creating
some useful product. Anarchists support two types of organisation --
organisations of anarchists and popular organisations which are not made
up exclusively of anarchists such as industrial unions, co-operatives
and community assemblies.

Here we will discuss the kinds, nature and role of the first type of
organisation, namely explicitly anarchist organisations. In addition, we
discuss anarcho-syndicalism, a revolutionary unionism which aims to
create an anarchist society by anarchist tactics, as well as why many
anarchists are not anarcho-syndicalists. The second type of
organisations, popular ones, are discussed in [section J.5](secJ5.html).
Both forms of organisation, however, share the anarchist commitment to
confederalism, decentralisation, self-management and decision making
from the bottom up. In such organisations the membership plays the
decisive role in running them and ensuring that power remains in their
hands. They express the anarchist vision of the power and creative
efficacy people have when they are self-reliant, when they act for
themselves and manage their own lives directly. Only by organising in
this way can we create a new world, a world worthy of human beings and
unique individuals.

Anarchist organisation in all its forms reflects our desire to *"build
the new world in the shell of the old"* and to empower the individual.
We reject the notion that it does not really matter how we organise to
change society. Indeed, nothing could be further from the truth. We are
all the products of the influences and social relationships in our
lives, this is a basic idea of (philosophical) materialism. Thus the way
our organisations are structured has an impact on us. If the
organisation is centralised and hierarchical (no matter how
"democratically" controlled officials or leaders are) then those subject
to it will, as in any hierarchical organisation, see their abilities to
manage their own lives, their creative thought and imagination eroded
under the constant stream of orders from above. This in turn justifies
the pretensions to power of those at the top, as the capacity of
self-management of the rank and file is weakened by authoritarian social
relationships. This means anarchist organisations are structured so that
they allow everyone the maximum potential to participate. Such
participation is the key for a free organisation. As Malatesta argued:

> *"The real being is man, the individual. Society or the collectivity .
> . . if it is not a hollow abstraction, must be made up of individuals.
> And it is in the organism of every individual that all thoughts and
> human actions inevitably have their origin, and from being individual
> they become collective thoughts and acts when they are or become
> accepted by many individuals. Social action, therefore, is neither the
> negation nor the complement of individual initiative, but is the
> resultant of initiatives, thoughts and actions of all individuals who
> make up society."* [**Anarchy**, p. 36]

Anarchist organisations exist to allow this development and expression
of individual initiatives. This empowering of the individual is an
important aspect of creating viable solidarity for sheep cannot express
solidarity, they only follow the shepherd. Therefore, *"to achieve their
ends, anarchist organisations must, in their constitution and operation,
remain in harmony with the principles of anarchism; that is, they must
know how to blend the free action of individuals with the necessity and
the joy of co-operation which serve to develop the awareness and
initiative of their members and a means of education for the environment
in which they operate and of a moral and material preparation for the
future we desire."* [Malatesta, **The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 95]

As such, anarchist organisations reflect the sort of society anarchists
desire. We reject as ridiculous the claim of Leninists that the form of
organisation we build is irrelevant and therefore we must create highly
centralised parties which aim to become the leadership of the working
class. No matter how "democratic" such organisations are, they just
reflect the capitalist division of labour between brain and manual work
and the Liberal ideology of surrendering our ability to govern ourselves
to an elected elite. In other words, they just mirror the very society
we are opposed to and so will soon produce the very problems **within**
so-called anti-capitalist organisations which originally motivated us to
oppose capitalism in the first place (see [section H.5](secH5.html)).
Given this, anarchists regard *"the Marxist party as another statist
form that, if it succeeded in 'seizing power,' would preserve the power
of one human being over another, the authority of the leader over the
led. The Marxist party . . . was a mirror image of the very society it
professed to oppose, an invasion of the camp of revolutionaries by
bourgeois values, methods, and structures."* [**The Spanish
Anarchists**, pp. 179-80] As can be seen from the history of the Russian
Revolution, this was the case with the Bolsheviks soon taking the lead
in undermining workers' self-management, soviet democracy and, finally,
democracy within the ruling party itself (see [section
H.6](secH6.html)).

From an anarchist (i.e. materialist) point of view, this was highly
predictable -- after all, *"facts are before ideas; yes, the ideal, as
Proudhon said, is but a flower whose root lies in the material
conditions of existence."* [Bakunin, **God and the State**, p. 9] So it
is unsurprising that hierarchical parties helped to maintain a
hierarchical society. In the words of the famous Sonvillier Circular:
*"How could one want an egalitarian and free society to issue from an
authoritarian organisation? It is impossible."* [quoted in **Bakunin on
Anarchism**, p. 45]

We must stress here that anarchists are **not** opposed to organisation
and are **not** opposed to organisations of anarchists (i.e.
**political** organisations, although anarchists generally reject the
term "party" due to its statist and hierarchical associations). Murray
Bookchin made it clear when he wrote that the *"real question at issue
here is not organisation versus non-organisation, but rather what
**kind** of organisation"* Anarchist organisations are *"organic
developments from below . . . They are social movements, combing a
creative revolutionary lifestyle with a creative revolutionary theory .
. . As much as is humanly possibly, they try to reflect the liberated
society they seek to achieve"* and *"co-ordination between groups . . .
discipline, planning, and unity in action . . . achieved
**voluntarily**, by means of a self-discipline nourished by conviction
and understanding."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, pp. 138-9]

Ultimately, centralised organisations are undemocratic and, equally as
important, **ineffective.** Hierarchical organisations kill people's
enthusiasm and creativity, where plans and ideas are not adopted because
they are the best but simply because they are what a handful of leaders
**think** are best for everyone else. Really effective organisations are
those which make decisions based frank and open co-operation and debate,
where dissent is **not** stifled and ideas are adopted because of their
merit and not imposed from the top-down by a few party leaders. This is
why anarchists stress federalist organisation. It ensures that
co-ordination flows from below and there is no institutionalised
leadership. By organising in a way that reflects the kind of society we
want, we train ourselves in the skills and decision making processes
required to make a free and classless society work. Means and ends are
united and this ensures that the means used will result in the desired
ends. Simply put, libertarian means must be used if you want libertarian
ends (see [section H.1.6](secH1.html#sech16) for further discussion).

In the sections that follow, we discuss the nature and role of anarchist
organisation. Anarchists would agree with Situationist Guy Debord that a
*"revolutionary organisation must always remember that its objective is
not getting people to listen to speeches by expert leaders, but getting
them to speak for themselves."* We organise their groups accordingly. In
[section J.3.1](secJ3.html#secj31) we discuss the basic building block
of specifically anarchist organisations, the ***"affinity group."***
Sections [J.3.2](secJ3.html#secj32), [J.3.3](secJ3.html#secj33),
[J.3.4](secJ3.html#secj34) and [J.3.5](secJ3.html#secj35), we discuss
the main types of federations of ***affinity groups*** anarchist create
to help spread our message and influence. Then [section
J.3.6](secJ3.html#secj36) highlights the role these organisations play
in our struggles to create an anarchist society. In [section
J.3.7](secJ3.html#secj37), we analyse Bakunin's unfortunate expression
*"Invisible Dictatorship"* in order to show how many Marxists distort
Bakunin's ideas on this matter. Finally, in sections
[J.3.8](secJ3.html#secj38) and [J.3.9](secJ3.html#secj39) we discuss
anarcho-syndicalism and other anarchists attitudes to it.

Anarchist organisations, therefore, aim to enrich social struggle by
their ideas and suggestions but also, far more importantly, enrich the
libertarian idea by practical experience and activity. In other words, a
two way process by which life informs theory and theory aids life. The
means by which this social dynamic is created and developed is the
underlying aim of anarchist organisation and is reflected in its
theoretical role. The power of ideas cannot be under estimated, for *"if
you have an idea you can communicate it to a million people and lose
nothing in the process, and the more the idea is propagated the more it
acquires in power and effectiveness."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 46]
The right idea at the right time, one that reflects the needs of
individuals and of required social change, can have a transforming
effect on society. That is why organisations that anarchists create to
spread their message are so important and why we devote a whole section
to them.

J.3.1 What are affinity groups?
-------------------------------

Affinity groups are the basic organisation which anarchists create to
spread the anarchist idea. The term *"affinity group"* comes from the
Spanish F.A.I. (**Iberian Anarchist Federation**) and refers to the
organisational form devised in their struggles for freedom (from *"grupo
de afinidad"*). At its most basic, it is a (usually small) group of
anarchists who work together to spread their ideas to the wider public,
using propaganda, initiating or working with campaigns and spreading
their ideas **within** popular organisations (such as unions) and
communities. It aims not to be a "leadership" but to give a lead, to act
as a catalyst within popular movements. Unsurprisingly it reflects basic
anarchist ideas:

> *"Autonomous, communal and directly democratic, the group combines
> revolutionary theory with revolutionary lifestyle in its everyday
> behaviour. It creates a free space in which revolutionaries can remake
> themselves individually, and also as social beings."* [Murray
> Bookchin, **Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 144]

The reason for this is simple, for a *"movement that sought to promote a
liberatory revolution had to develop liberatory and revolutionary forms.
This meant . . . that it had to mirror the free society it was trying to
achieve, not the repressive one it was trying to overthrow. If a
movement sought to achieve a world united by solidarity and mutual aid,
it had to be guided by these precepts; if it sought to achieve a
decentralised, stateless, non-authoritarian society, it had to be
structured in accordance with these goals."* [Bookchin, **The Spanish
Anarchists**, p. 180]

The aim of an anarchist organisation is to promote a sense of community,
of confidence in ones own abilities, to enable all to be involved in the
identification, initiation and management of group needs, decisions and
activities. They must ensure that individuals are in a position (both
physically, as part of a group, and mentally, as an individual) to
manage their own lives and take direct action in the pursuit of
individual and communal needs and desires. Anarchist organisation is
about empowering all, to develop "integral" or whole individuals and a
community that encourages individuality (not abstract "individualism")
and solidarity. It is about collective decision making from the bottom
up, that empowers those at the "base" of the structure and only
delegates the work of co-ordinating and implementing the members
decisions (and not the power of making decisions for people). In this
way the initiative and power of the few (government) is replaced by the
initiative and empowerment of all (anarchy). Affinity groups exist to
achieve these aims and are structured to encourage them.

The local affinity group is the means by which anarchists co-ordinate
their activities in a community, workplace, social movement and so on.
Within these groups, anarchists discuss their ideas, politics and hopes,
what they plan to do, organise propaganda work, discuss how they are
going to work within wider organisations like unions, how their
strategies fit into their long term plans and goals and so on. It is the
basic way that anarchists work out their ideas, pull their resources and
get their message across to others. There can be affinity groups for
different interests and activities (for example a workplace affinity
group, a community affinity group, an anarcha-feminist affinity group,
etc., could all exist within the same area, with overlapping members).
Moreover, as well as these more "political" activities, the "affinity
group" also stresses the *"importance of education and the need to live
by Anarchist precepts -- the need . . . to create a counter-society that
could provide the space for people to begin to remake themselves."*
[Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 180] In other words, "affinity groups" aim
to be the *"living germs"* of the new society in **all** aspects, not
purely in a structurally way.

So affinity groups are self-managed, autonomous groupings of anarchists
who unite and work on specific activities and interests. This means that
*"[i]n an anarchist organisation the individual members can express any
opinion and use any tactic which is not in contradiction with accepted
principles and which does not harm the activities of others."* [Errico
Malatesta, **The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 102] Such groups are a key
way for anarchists to co-ordinate their activity and spread their
message of individual freedom and voluntary co-operation. However, the
description of what an "affinity group" is does not explain **why**
anarchists organise in that way. Essentially, these affinity groups are
the means by which anarchists actually intervene in social movements and
struggles in order to win people to the anarchist idea and so help
transform them from struggles **against** injustice into struggles
**for** a free society. We will discuss the role these groups play in
anarchist theory in [section J.3.6](secJ3.html#secj36).

These basic affinity groups are not seen as being enough in themselves.
Most anarchists see the need for local groups to work together with
others in a confederation. Such co-operation aims to pull resources and
expand the options for the individuals and groups who are part of the
federation. As with the basic affinity group, the anarchist federation
is a self-managed organisation:

> *"Full autonomy, full independence and therefore full responsibility
> of individuals and groups; free accord between those who believe it is
> useful to unite in co-operating for a common aim; moral duty to see
> through commitments undertaken and to do nothing that would contradict
> the accepted programme. It is on these bases that the practical
> structures, and the right tools to give life to the organisation
> should be built and designed. Then the groups, the federations of
> groups, the federations of federations, the meetings, the congresses,
> the correspondence committees and so forth. But all this must be done
> freely, in such a way that the thought and initiative of individuals
> is not obstructed, and with the sole view of giving greater effect to
> efforts which, in isolation, would be either impossible or
> ineffective."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 101]

To aid in this process of propaganda, agitation, political discussion
and development, anarchists organise federations of affinity groups.
These take three main forms, **"synthesis"** federations (see [section
J.3.2](secJ3.html#secj32)), ***"Platformist"*** federations (see
[section J.3.3](secJ3.html#secj33) while [section
J.3.4](secJ3.html#secj34) has criticism of this tendency) and ***"class
struggle"*** groups (see [section J.3.5](secJ3.html#secj35)). All the
various types of federation are based on groups of anarchists organising
themselves in a libertarian fashion. This is because anarchists try to
live by the values of the future to the extent that this is possible
under capitalism and try to develop organisations based upon mutual aid,
in which control would be exercised from below upward, not downward from
above. We must also note here that these types of federation are not
mutually exclusive. Synthesis type federations often have "class
struggle" and "Platformist" groups within them (although, as will become
clear, Platformist federations do not have synthesis groups within them)
and most countries have different federations representing the different
perspectives within the movement. Moreover, it should also be noted that
no federation will be a totally "pure" expression of each tendency.
"Synthesis" groups merge into "class struggle" ones, Platformist groups
do not subscribe totally to the Platform and so on. We isolate each
tendency to show its essential features. In real life few, if any,
federations will exactly fit the types we highlight. It would be more
precise to speak of organisations which are descended from a given
tendency, for example the French **Anarchist Federation** is mostly
influenced by the synthesis tradition but it is not, strictly speaking,
100% synthesis. Lastly, we must also note that the term "class struggle"
anarchist group in no way implies that "synthesis" and "Platformist"
groups do not support the class struggle or take part in it, they most
definitely do -- it is simply a technical term to differentiate between
types of organisation!

It must be stressed anarchists do not reduce the complex issue of
political organisation and ideas into **one** organisation but instead
recognise that different threads within anarchism will express
themselves in different political organisations (and even within the
same organisation). A diversity of anarchist groups and federations is a
good sign and expresses the diversity of political and individual
thought to be expected in a movement aiming for a society based upon
freedom. All we aim to do is to paint a broad picture of the
similarities and differences between the various perspectives on
organising in the movement and indicate the role these federations play
in libertarian theory, namely of an aid in the struggle, not a new
leadership seeking power.

J.3.2 What are "synthesis" federations?
---------------------------------------

The "synthesis" federation acquired its name from the work of Voline (a
Russian exile) and leading French anarchist Sebastien Faure in the
1920s. Voline published in 1924 a paper calling for *"the anarchist
synthesis"* and was also the author of the article in Faure's
**Encyclopedie Anarchiste** on the very same topic. Its roots lie in the
Russian revolution and the **Nabat** federation created in the Ukraine
during 1918 whose aim was *"organising all of the life forces of
anarchism; bringing together through a common endeavour all anarchists
seriously desiring of playing an active part in the social revolution
which is defined as a process (of greater or lesser duration) giving
rise to a new form of social existence for the organised masses."* [**No
Gods, No Masters**, vol. 2, p. 117]

The "synthesis" organisation is based on uniting all kinds of anarchists
in one federation as there is, to use the words of the **Nabat**,
*"validity in all anarchist schools of thought. We must consider all
diverse tendencies and accept them."* The synthesis organisation
attempts to get different kinds of anarchists *"joined together on a
number of basic positions and with the awareness of the need for
planned, organised collective effort on the basis of federation."*
[quoted in *"The Reply by Several Russian Anarchists"*, pp. 32-6,
**Constructive Anarchism**, G. P. Maximoff (ed.), p. 32] These basic
positions would be based on a synthesis of the viewpoints of the members
of the organisation, but each tendency would be free to agree their own
ideas due to the federal nature of the organisation.

An example of this synthesis approach is provided by the differing
assertions that anarchism is a theory of classes (as stated by the
Platform, among others), that anarchism is a humanitarian ideal for all
people and that anarchism is purely about individuals (and so
essentially individualist and having nothing to do with humanity or with
a class). The synthesis of these positions would be to *"state that
anarchism contains class elements as well as humanism and individualist
principles . . . Its class element is above all its means of fighting
for liberation; its humanitarian character is its ethical aspect, the
foundation of society; its individualism is the goal of humanity."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 32]

So, as can be seen, the "synthesis" tendency aims to unite all
anarchists (be they individualist, mutualist, syndicalist or communist)
into one common federation. Thus the "synthesis" viewpoint is
"inclusive" and obviously has affinities with the *"anarchism without
adjectives"* approach favoured by many anarchists (see [section
A.3.8](secA3.html#seca38)). However, in practice many "synthesis"
organisations are more restrictive (for example, they could aim to unite
all **social** anarchists) and so there can be a difference between the
general idea of the synthesis and how it is concretely applied.

The basic idea behind the synthesis is that the anarchist movement (in
most countries, at most times, including France in the 1920s and Russia
during the revolution and at this time) is divided into three main
tendencies: communist anarchism, anarcho-syndicalism, and individualist
anarchism. This division can cause severe damage to the movement simply
because of the many (and often redundant) arguments and diatribes on why
"my anarchism is best" can get in the way of working in common in order
to fight our common enemies (state, capitalism and authority). The
"synthesis" federations are defined by agreeing what is the common
denominator of the various tendencies within anarchism and agreeing a
minimum programme based on this for the federation. This would allow a
*"certain ideological and tactical unity among organisations"* within
the "synthesis" federation. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 35] Moreover, as well as
saving time and energy for more important tasks, there are technical and
efficiency reasons for unifying into one organisation, namely allowing
the movement to have access to more resources and being able to
co-ordinate them so as to maximise their use and impact.

The "synthesis" federation, like all anarchist groups, aims to spread
anarchist ideas within society as a whole. They believe that their role
is to *"assist the masses only when they need such assistance . . . the
anarchists are part of the membership in the economic and social mass
organisations [such as trade unions]. They act and build as part of the
whole. An immense field of action is opened to them for ideological
[sic!], social and creative activity without assuming a position of
superiority over the masses. Above all they must fulfil their
ideological and ethical influence in a free and natural manner . . .
[they] offer ideological assistance, but not in the role of leaders."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 33] This, as we shall see in [section
J.3.6](secJ3.html#secj36), is the common anarchist position as regards
the role of an anarchist group.

The great strength of "synthesis" federations, obviously, is that they
allow a wide and diverse range of viewpoints to be expressed within the
organisation which can allow the development of political ideas and
theories by constant discussion and debate. They allow the maximum
amount of resources to be made available to individuals and groups
within the organisation by increasing the number of members. This is why
we find the original promoters of the "synthesis" arguing that *"that
first step toward achieving unity in the anarchist movement which can
lead to serious organisation is collective ideological work on a series
of important problems that seek the clearest possible collective
solution,"* discussing *"concrete questions"* rather than
*"philosophical problems and abstract dissertations"* and *"suggest that
there be a publication for discussion in every country where the
problems in our ideology [sic!] and tactics can be fully discussed,
regardless of how 'acute' or even 'taboo' it may be. The need for such a
printed organ, as well as oral discussion, seems to us to be a 'must'
because it is the practical way to try to achieve 'ideological unity',
'tactical unity', and possibly organisation . . . A full and tolerant
discussion of our problems . . . will create a basis for understanding,
not only among anarchists, but among different conceptions of
anarchism."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 35]

The "synthesis" idea for anarchist organisation was taken up by those
who opposed the Platform (see [next section](secJ3.html#secj33)). For
both Faure and Voline, the basic idea was the same, namely that the
various tendencies in anarchism must co-operate and work in the same
organisation. However, there are differences between Voline's and
Faure's points of view. The latter saw these various tendencies as a
wealth in themselves and advocated that each tendency would gain from
working together in a common organisation. From Voline's point of view,
the emergence of these various tendencies was historically needed to
discover the in-depth implications of anarchism in various settings
(such as the economical, the social and individual life). However, it
was the time to go back to anarchism as a whole, an anarchism
considerably empowered by what each tendency could give it, and in which
tendencies as such should dissolve. Moreover, these tendencies
co-existed in every anarchist at various levels, so all anarchists
should aggregate in an organisation where these tendencies would
disappear (both individually and organisationally, i.e. there would not
be an "anarcho-syndicalist" specific tendency inside the organisation,
and so forth).

The "synthesis" federation would be based on complete autonomy (within
the basic principles of the Federation and Congress decisions, of
course) for groups and individuals, so allowing all the different trends
to work together and express their differences in a common front. The
various groups would be organised in a federal structure, combining to
share resources in the struggle against state, capitalism and other
forms of oppression. This federal structure is organised at the local
level through a "local union" (i.e. the groups in a town or city), at
the regional level (i.e. all groups in, say, Strathclyde are members of
the same regional union) up to the "national" level (i.e. all groups in
Scotland, say) and beyond.

As every group in the federation is autonomous, it can discuss, plan and
initiate an action (such as campaign for a reform, against a social
evil, and so on) without having to wait for others in the federation (or
have to wait for instructions). This means that the local groups can
respond quickly to issues and developments. This does not mean that each
group works in isolation. These initiatives may gain federal support if
local groups see the need. The federation can adopt an issue if it is
raised at a federal conference and other groups agree to co-operate on
that issue. Moreover, each group has the freedom **not** to participate
on a specific issue while leaving others to do so. Thus groups can
concentrate on what they are interested in most.

The programme and policies of the federation would be agreed at regular
delegate meetings and congresses. The "synthesis" federation is managed
at the federal level by "relations committees" made up of people elected
and mandated at the federation congresses. These committees would have a
purely administrative role, spreading information, suggestions and
proposals coming from groups and individuals within the organisation,
looking after the finances of the federation and so on. They do not have
any more rights than any other member of the federation (i.e. they could
not make a proposal as a committee, just as members of their local group
or as individuals). These administrative committees are accountable to
the federation and subject to both mandates and recall.

Most national sections of the **International Anarchist Federation**
(IFA) are good examples of successful federations which are heavily
influenced by "synthesis" ideas (such as the French and Italian
federations). Obviously, though, how effective a "synthesis" federation
is depends upon how tolerant members are of each other and how seriously
they take their responsibilities towards their federations and the
agreements they make.

Of course, there are problems with most forms of organisation, and the
"synthesis" federation is no exception. While diversity can strengthen
an organisation by provoking debate, a too diverse grouping can often
make it difficult to get things done. Platformist and other critics of
the "synthesis" federation argue that it can be turned into a talking
shop and any common programme difficult to agree, never mind apply. For
example, how can mutualists and communists agree on the ends, never mind
the means, their organisation supports? One believes in co-operation
within a (modified) market system and reforming capitalism away, while
the other believes in the abolition of commodity production and money,
seeing revolution as the means of so doing. Ultimately, all they could
do would be to agree to disagree and thus any joint programmes and
activity would be somewhat limited. It could, indeed, be argued that
both Voline and Faure forgot essential points, namely what is this
common denominator between the different kinds of anarchism, how do we
achieve it and what is in it? For without this agreed common position,
many synthesist organisations do end up becoming little more than
talking shops, escaping from any social or organisational perspective.
This seems to have been the fate of many groups in Britain and America
during the 1960s and 1970s, for example.

It is this (potential) disunity that lead the authors of the Platform to
argue that *"[s]uch an organisation having incorporated heterogeneous
theoretical and practical elements, would only be a mechanical assembly
of individuals each having a different conception of all the questions
of the anarchist movement, an assembly which would inevitably
disintegrate on encountering reality."* [**The Organisational Platform
of the Libertarian Communists**, p. 12] The Platform suggested
*"Theoretical and Tactical Unity"* as a means of overcoming this
problem, but that term provoked massive disagreement in anarchist
circles (see [section J.3.4](secJ3.html#secj34)). In reply to the
Platform, supporters of the "synthesis" counter by pointing to the fact
that "Platformist" groups are usually very small, far smaller that
"synthesis" federations (for example, compare the size of the **French
Anarchist Federation** with, say, the Irish **Workers Solidarity
Movement** or the French-language **Alternative Libertaire**). This
means, they argue, that the Platform does not, in fact, lead to a more
effective organisation, regardless of the claims of its supporters.
Moreover, they argue that the requirements for *"Theoretical and
Tactical Unity"* help ensure a small organisation as differences would
express themselves in splits rather than constructive activity. Needless
to say, the discussion continues within the movement on this issue!

What can be said is that this potential problem within "synthesisism"
has been the cause of some organisations failing or becoming little more
than talking shops, with each group doing its own thing and so making
co-ordination pointless as any agreements made would be ignored. Most
supporters of the synthesis would argue that this is not what the theory
aims for and that the problem lies in misunderstanding it rather than in
the theory itself (as can be seen from mainland European, "synthesis"
inspired federations can be **very** successful). Non-supporters are
more critical, with some supporting the "Platform" as a more effective
means of organising to spread anarchist ideas and influence (see the
[next section](secJ3.html#secj33)). Other social anarchists create the
"class struggle" type of federation (this is a common organisational
form in Britain, for example) as discussed in [section
J.3.5](secJ3.html#secj35).

J.3.3 What is the "Platform"?
-----------------------------

The Platform is a current within anarcho-communism which has specific
suggestions on the nature and form which an anarchist federation should
take. Its roots lie in the Russian anarchist movement, a section of
which, in 1926, published **"The Organisational Platform of the
Libertarian Communists"** when in exile from the Bolshevik dictatorship.
The authors of the work included Nestor Makhno, Peter Arshinov and Ida
Mett. At the time it provoked intense debate (and still does in many
anarchist circles) between supporters of the Platform (usually called
"Platformists") and those who oppose it (which includes other
communist-anarchists, anarcho-syndicalists and supporters of the
"synthesis"). We will discuss why many anarchists oppose the Platform in
the [next section](secJ3.html#secj34). Here we discuss what the Platform
argued for.

Like the "synthesis" federation (see [last section](secJ3.html#secj32)),
the Platform was created in response to the experiences of the Russian
Revolution. The authors of the Platform (like Voline and other
supporters of the "synthesis") had participated in that Revolution and
saw all their work, hopes and dreams fail as the Bolshevik state
triumphed and destroyed any chances of socialism by undermining soviet
democracy, workers' self-management of production, trade union democracy
as well as fundamental individual freedoms and rights (see the [section
H.6](secH6.html) for details). Moreover, the authors of the Platform had
been leading activists in the Makhnovist movement in the Ukraine which
had successfully resisted both White and Red armies in the name of
working class self-determination and anarchism (see the appendix ["Why
does the Makhnovist movement show there is an alternative to Bolshevism?
"](append46.html)). Facing the same problems of the Bolshevik
government, the Makhnovists had actively encouraged popular
self-management and organisation, freedom of speech and of association,
and so on, whereas the Bolsheviks had not. Thus they were aware that
anarchist ideas not only worked in practice, but that the claims of
Leninists who maintained that Bolshevism (and the policies it introduced
at the time) was the only "practical" response to the problems facing a
revolution were false.

They wrote the pamphlet in order to examine why the anarchist movement
had failed to build on its successes in gaining influence within the
working class. As can be seen from libertarian participation in the
factory committee movement, where workers organised self-management in
their workplaces and anarchist ideas had proven to be both popular and
practical. While repression by the Bolsheviks did play a part in this
failure, it did not explain everything. Also important, in the eyes of
the Platform authors, was the lack of anarchist organisation **before**
the revolution:

> *"It is very significant that, in spite of the strength and
> incontestably positive character of libertarian ideas, and in spite of
> the facing up to the social revolution, and finally the heroism and
> innumerable sacrifices borne by the anarchists in the struggle for
> anarchist communism, the anarchist movement remains weak despite
> everything, and has appeared, very often, in the history of working
> class struggles as a small event, an episode, and not an important
> factor."* [**Organisational Platform of the Libertarian Communists**,
> p. 11]

This weakness in the movement derived, they argued, from a number of
causes, the main one being *"the absence of organisational principles
and practices"* within the anarchist movement. This resulted in an
anarchist movement *"represented by several local organisations
advocating contradictory theories and practices, having no perspectives
for the future, nor of a continuity in militant work, and habitually
disappearing, hardly leaving the slightest trace behind them."* This
explained the *"contradiction between the positive and incontestable
substance of libertarian ideas, and the miserable state in which the
anarchist movement vegetates."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 11] For anyone
familiar with the anarchist movement in many countries, these words will
still strike home. Thus the Platform still appears to many anarchists a
relevant and important document, even if they are not Platformists.

The author's of the Platform proposed a solution to this problem, namely
the creation of a new type of anarchist organisation. This organisation
would be based upon communist-anarchist ideas exclusively, while
recognising syndicalism as a principal method of struggle. Like most
anarchists, the Platform placed class and class struggle as the centre
of their analysis, recognising that the *"social and political regime of
all states is above all the product of class struggle . . . The
slightest change in the course of the battle of classes, in the relative
locations of the forces of the class struggle, produces continuous
modifications in the fabric and structure of society."* Again, like most
anarchists, the Platform aimed to *"transform the present bourgeois
capitalist society into a society which assures the workers the products
of the labours, their liberty, independence, and social and political
equality"*, one based on a *"workers organisations of production and
consumption, united federatively and self-administering."* The *"birth,
the blossoming, and the realisation of anarchist ideas have their roots
in the life and the struggle of the working masses and are inseparable
bound to their fate."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 14, p. 15, p. 19 and p. 15]
Again, most anarchists (particularly social anarchists) would agree --
anarchist ideas will (and have) wither when isolated from working class
life since only working class people, the vast majority, can create a
free society and anarchist ideas are expressions of working class
experience (remove the experience and the ideas do not develop as they
should).

In order to create such a free society it is necessary, argue the
Platformists, *"to work in two directions: on the one hand towards the
selection and grouping of revolutionary worker and peasant forces on a
libertarian communist theoretical basis (a specifically libertarian
communist organisation); on the other hand, towards regrouping
revolutionary workers and peasants on an economic base of production and
consumption (revolutionary workers and peasants organised around
production [i.e. syndicalism]; workers and free peasants
co-operatives)."* Again, most anarchists would agree with this along
with the argument that *"anarchism should become the leading concept of
revolution . . . The leading position of anarchist ideas in the
revolution suggests an orientation of events after anarchist theory.
However, this theoretical driving force should not be confused with the
political leadership of the statist parties which leads finally to State
Power."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 20 and p. 21]

This *"leadership of ideas"* (as it has come to be known) would aim at
developing and co-ordinating libertarian feelings already existing
within social struggle. *"Although the masses,"* explained the Platform,
*"express themselves profoundly in social movements in terms of
anarchist tendencies and tenets, these . . . do however remain
dispersed, being uncoordinated, and consequently do not lead to the . .
. preserving [of] the anarchist orientation of the social revolution."*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 21] The Platform argued that a specific anarchist
organisation was required to ensure that the libertarian tendencies
initially expressed in any social revolution or movement (for example,
free federation, self-management in mass assemblies, mandating of
delegates, decentralisation, etc.) do not get undermined by statists and
authoritarians who have their own agendas. This would be done by
actively working in mass organisation and winning people to libertarian
ideas and practices by argument (see [section
J.3.6](secJ3.html#secj36)).

However, these principles do not, in themselves, determine a Platformist
organisation. After all, most anarcho-syndicalists and non-Platformist
communist-anarchists would agree with these positions. The main point
which distinguishes the Platform is its position on how an anarchist
organisation should be structured and work. This is sketched in the
*"Organisational Section,"* the shortest and most contentious part of
the whole work. They called this the **General Union of Anarchists** and
where they introduced the concepts of **"Theoretical and Tactical
Unity"** and ***"Collective Responsibility,"*** concepts which are
unique to the Platform. Even today within the anarchist movement these
are contentious ideas so it is worth exploring them in a little more
detail.

By *"Theoretical Unity"* the Platform meant any anarchist organisation
must come to an agreement on the theory upon which it is based. In other
words, that members of the organisation must agree on a certain number
of basic points, such as class struggle, social revolution and
libertarian communism, and so on. An organisation in which half the
members thought that union struggles were important and the other half
that they were a waste of time would not be effective as the membership
would spend all their time arguing with themselves. While most
Platformists admit that everyone will not agree on everything, they
think it is important to reach as much agreement as possible, and to
translate this into action. Once a theoretical position is reached, the
members have to argue it in public (even if they initially opposed it
within the organisation but they do have the right to get the decision
of the organisation changed by internal discussion). Which brings us to
*"Tactical Unity"* by which the Platform meant that the members of an
organisation should struggle together **as an organised force** rather
than as individuals. Once a strategy has been agreed by the Union, all
members would work towards ensuring its success (even if they initially
opposed it). In this way resources and time are concentrated in a common
direction, towards an agreed objective.

Thus *"Theoretical and Tactical Unity"* means an anarchist organisation
that agrees specific ideas and the means of applying them. The
Platform's basic assumption is that there is a link between coherency
and efficiency. By increasing the coherency of the organisation by
making collective decisions and applying them, the Platform argues that
this will increase the influence of anarchist ideas. Without this, they
argue, more organised groups (such as Leninist ones) would be in a
better position to have their arguments heard and listened to than
anarchists would. Anarchists cannot be complacent, and rely on the hope
that the obvious strength and rightness of our ideas will shine through
and win the day. As history shows, this rarely happens and when it does,
the authoritarians are usually in positions of power to crush the
emerging anarchist influence (this was the case in Russia, for example).
Platformists argue that the world we live in is the product of struggles
between competing ideas of how society should be organised and if the
anarchist voice is weak, quiet and disorganised it will not be heard and
other arguments, other perspectives, will win the day.

Which brings us to *"Collective Responsibility,"* which the Platform
defines as *"the entire Union will be responsible for the political and
revolutionary activity of each member; in the same way, each member will
be responsible for the political and revolutionary activity of the
Union."* In short, that each member should support the decisions made by
the organisation and that each member should take part in the process of
collective decision making process. Without this, argue Platformists,
any decisions made will be paper ones as individuals and groups would
ignore the agreements made by the federation (the Platform calls this
*"the tactic of irresponsible individualism"*). [**Op. Cit.**, p. 32]
With *"Collective Responsibility,"* the strength of all the individuals
that make up the group is magnified and collectively applied.

The last principle in the *"Organisational Section"* of the Platform is
*"Federalism,"* which it defined as *"the free agreement of individuals
and organisations to work collectively towards a common objective"* and
which *"reconciles the independence and initiative of individuals and
the organisation with service to the common cause."* However, the
Platform argued that this principle has been *"deformed"* within the
movement to mean the *"right"* to *"manifest one's 'ego,' without
obligation to account for duties as regards the organisation"* one is a
member of. In order to overcome this problem, they stress that *"the
federalist type of anarchist organisation, while recognising each
member's rights to independence, free opinion, individual liberty and
initiative, requires each member to undertake fixed organisation duties,
and demands execution of communal decisions."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 33 and
pp. 33-4]

As part of their solution to the problem of anarchist organisation, the
Platform suggested that each group would have *"its secretariat,
executing and guiding theoretically the political and technical work of
the organisation."* Moreover, the Platform urged the creation of an
*"**executive committee of the Union**"* which would *"be in charge"* of
*"the execution of decisions taken by the Union with which it is
entrusted; the theoretical and organisational orientation of the
activity of isolated organisations consistent with the theoretical
positions and the general tactical lines of the Union; the monitoring of
the general state of the movement; the maintenance of working and
organisational links between all the organisations in the Union; and
with other organisation."* The rights, responsibilities and practical
tasks of the executive committee are fixed by the congress of the Union.
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 34]

This suggestion, unsurprisingly, meet with strong disapproval by most
anarchists, as we will see in the [next section](secJ3.html#secj34), who
argued that this would turn the anarchist movement into a centralised,
hierarchical party similar to the Bolsheviks. Needless to say,
supporters of the Platform reject this argument and point out that the
Platform itself is not written in stone and needs to be discussed fully
and modified as required. In fact, few, if any, Platformist groups, do
have this *"secretariat"* structure (it could, in fact, be argued that
there are no actual "Platformist" groups, rather groups influenced by
the Platform, namely on the issues of *"Theoretical and Tactical Unity"*
and *"Collective Responsibility"*).

Similarly, most modern day Platformists reject the idea of gathering all
anarchists into one organisation. The original Platform seemed to imply
that the **General Union** would be an umbrella organisation, made up of
different groups and individuals. Most Platformists would argue that not
only will there never be one organisation which encompasses everyone,
they do not think it necessary. Instead they envisage the existence of a
number of organisations, each internally unified, each co-operating with
each other where possible, a much more amorphous and fluid entity than a
**General Union of Anarchists**.

As well as the original Platform, most Platformists place the
**Manifesto of Libertarian Communism** by Georges Fontenis and **Towards
a Fresh Revolution** by the *"Friends of Durruti"* as landmark texts in
the Platformist tradition. A few anarcho-syndicalists question this last
claim, arguing that the *"Friends of Durruti"* manifesto has strong
similarities with the CNT's pre-1936 position on revolution and thus is
an anarcho-syndicalist document, going back to the position the CNT
ignored after July 19th, 1936. Alexandre Skirda's book **Facing the
Enemy** contains the key documents on the original Platformists
(including the original draft Platform, supplementary documents
clarifying issues and polemics against critiques). There are numerous
Platformist and Platformist influenced organisations in the world today,
such as the Irish **Workers Solidarity Movement** and Italian
**Federation of Anarchist Communists**.

In the [next section](secJ3.html#secj34) we discuss the objections that
most anarchists have towards the Platform.

J.3.4 Why do many anarchists oppose the "Platform"?
---------------------------------------------------

When the "Platform" was published it provoked a massive amount of debate
and comment, the majority of it critical. Most of famous anarchists
rejected the Platform. Indeed, only Nestor Makhno (who co-authored the
work) supported its proposals, with (among others) Alexander Berkman,
Emma Goldman, Voline, G.P. Maximoff, Luigi Fabbri, Camilo Berneri and
Errico Malatesta rejecting its suggestions on how anarchists should
organise. Some argued that the Platform was trying to *"Bolshevise"*
anarchism (*""They are only one step away from bolshevism."* [*"The
Reply by Several Russian Anarchists"*, pp. 32-6, **Constructive
Anarchism**, G.P. Maximoff (ed.), pp. 36]). Others, such as Malatesta,
suggested that the authors were too impressed by the apparent "success"
of the Bolsheviks in Russia. Since then, it has continued to provoke a
lot of debate in anarchist circles. So why do so many anarchists oppose
the Platform?

While many of the anti-Platformists made points about most parts of the
Platform (both Maximoff and Voline pointed out that while the Platform
denied the need of a *"Transitional Period"* in theory, it accepted it
in practice, for example) the main bone of contention was found in the
*"Organisational Section"* with its call for *"Tactical and Theoretical
Unity,"* *"Collective Responsibility"* and group and executive
*"secretariats"* guiding the organisation. Here most anarchists found
ideas they considered incompatible with libertarian ideas. We will
concentrate on this issue as it is usually considered as the most
important.

Today, in some quarters of the libertarian movement, the Platformists
are often dismissed as "would-be leaders." Yet this was not where
Malatesta and other critics of the Platform took issue. Malatesta and
Maximoff both argued that, to use Maximoff's words, anarchists should
*"go into the masses. . . , work[ing] with them, struggle for their
soul, and attempt to win it **ideologically** [sic!] and give it
guidance."* So the question was *"not the rejection of **leadership,**
but making certain it is **free** and **natural.**"* [**Constructive
Anarchism**, p. 19] Moreover, as Maximoff noted, the "synthesis"
anarchists came to the same conclusion. Thus all sides of the debate
accepted that anarchists should take the lead. The question, as
Malatesta and the others saw it, was not whether to lead, but rather
**how** you should lead - a fairly important distinction.

Malatesta posed two alternatives, either you *"provide leadership by
advice and example leaving people themselves to . . . adopt our methods
and solutions if these are, or seem to be, better than those suggested
and carried out by others"* or you can *"direct by taking over command,
that is by becoming a government."* He asked the Platformists: *"In
which manner do you wish to direct?"* While he thought, from his
knowledge of Makhno and his work, that the answer would be the first
option, he was *"assailed by doubt that [Makhno] would also like to see,
within the general movement, a central body that would, in an
authoritarian manner, dictate the theoretical and practical programme
for the revolution."* This was because of the *"Executive Committee"* in
the Platform which would *"give ideological and organisational direction
to the association."* [**The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 108 and p. 110]

Maximoff made the same point, arguing that the Platform implied that
anarchists in the unions are responsible to the anarchist federation,
**not** to the union assemblies that elected them. As he put it,
according to the Platform anarchists *"are to join the Trades Unions
with ready-made recipes and are to carry out their plans, if necessary,
against the will of the Unions themselves."* This was just one example
of a general problem, namely that the Platform *"places its Party on the
same height as the Bolsheviks do, i.e., it places the interests of the
Party above the interests of the masses since the Party has the monopoly
of understanding these interests."* [**Constructive Anarchism**, p. 19
and p. 18] This flowed from the Platform arguing that anarchists must
*"enter into revolutionary trade unions as an organised force,
responsible to accomplish work in the union before the general anarchist
organisation and orientated by the latter."* However, Maximoff's
argument may be considered harsh as the Platform also argued that
anarchism *"aspires neither to political power nor dictatorship"* and so
they would hardly be urging the opposite principles within the trade
union movement. [**The Organisational Platform of the Libertarian
Communists**, p. 25 and p. 21] If we take the Platform's comments within
a context informed by the *"leadership of ideas"* concept (see [section
J.3.6](secJ3.html#secj36)) then what they meant was simply that the
anarchist group would convince the union members of the validity of
their ideas by argument which was something Maximoff did not disagree
with. In short, the disagreement becomes one of unclear (or bad) use of
language by the Platform's authors.

Despite many efforts and many letters on the subject (in particular
between Malatesta and Makhno) the question of "leadership" could not be
clarified to either side's satisfaction, in part because there was an
additional issue in dispute. This was the related issue of
organisational principles (which in themselves make up the defining part
of the original Platform). Malatesta argued that this did not conform
with anarchist methods and principles, and so could not *"help bring
about the triumph of anarchism."* [**The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 97]
This was because of two main reasons, the first being the issue of the
Platform's "secretariats" and "executive committee" and the issue of
"Collective Responsibility." We will take each in turn.

With an structure based round "secretariats" and "executive committees"
the *"will of the [General] Union [of Anarchists] can only mean the will
of the majority, expressed through congresses which nominate and control
the **Executive Committee** and decide on all important issues.
Naturally, the congresses would consist of representatives elected by
the majority of member groups . . . So, in the best of cases, the
decisions would be taken by a majority of a majority, and this could
easily, especially when the opposing opinions are more than two,
represent only a minority."* This, Malatesta argued, *"comes down to a
pure majority system, to pure parliamentarianism"* and so non-anarchist
in nature. [**Op. Cit.**, p. 100]

As long as a Platformist federation is based on *"secretariats"* and
*"executive committees"* directing the activity and development of the
organisation, this critique is valid. In such a system, as these bodies
control the organisation and members are expected to follow their
decisions (due to *"theoretical and tactical unity"* and *"collective
responsibility"*) they are, in effect, the government of the
association. While this government may be elected and accountable, it is
still a government simply because these bodies have executive power. As
Maximoff argued, individual initiative in the Platform *"has a special
character . . . Each organisation (i.e. association of members with the
right to individual initiative) has its secretariat which . . .
**directs** the ideological, political and technical activities of the
organisation . . . In what, then, consists the self-reliant activities
of the rank-and-file members? Apparently in one thing: initiative to
obey the secretariat and carry out its directives."* [**Op. Cit.**, p.
18] This seems to be the logical conclusion of the structure suggested
by the Platform. *"The spirit,"* argued Malatesta, *"the tendency
remains authoritarian and the educational effect would remain
anti-anarchist."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 98]

Malatesta, in contrast, argued that an anarchist organisation must be
based on the *"[f]ull autonomy, full independence and therefore the full
responsibility of individuals and groups"* with all organisational work
done *"freely, in such a way that the thought and initiative of
individuals is not obstructed."* The individual members of such an
organisation *"express any opinion and use any tactic which is not in
contradiction with accepted principles and which does not harm the
activities of others."* Moreover, the administrative bodies such
organisations nominate would *"have no executive powers, have no
directive powers"* leaving it up to the groups and their federal
meetings to decide their own fates. The congresses of such organisations
would be *"free from any kind of authoritarianism, because they do not
lay down the law; they do not impose their own resolutions on others . .
. and do not become binding and enforceable except on those who accept
them."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 101, p. 102 and p. 101] Such an organisation
does not exclude collective decisions and self-assumed obligations,
rather it is based upon them.

Most groups inspired by the Platform, however, seem to reject this
aspect of its organisational suggestions. Instead of "secretariats" and
"executive committees" they have regular conferences and meetings to
reach collective decisions on issues and practice unity that way. Thus
the **really** important issue is of *"theoretical and tactical unity"*
and *"collective responsibility,"* rather than ithe structure suggested
by the Platform. Indeed, this issue was the main topic in Makhno's
letter to Malatesta, for example, and so we would be justified in saying
that this is the key issue dividing "Platformists" from other
anarchists.

So in what way did Malatesta disagree with this concept? As we mentioned
in the [last section](secJ3.html#secj33), the Platform defined the idea
of "Collective Responsibility" as *"the entire Union will be responsible
for the political and revolutionary activity of each member; in the same
way, each member will be responsible for the political and revolutionary
activity of the Union."* To which Malatesta replied:

> *"But if the Union is responsible for what each member does, how can
> it leave to its members and to the various groups the freedom to apply
> the common programme in the way they think best? How can one be
> responsible for an action if it does not have the means to prevent it?
> Therefore, the Union and in its name the Executive Committee, would
> need to monitor the action of the individual member and order them
> what to do and what not to do; and since disapproval after the event
> cannot put right a previously accepted responsibility, no-one would be
> able to do anything at all before having obtained the go-ahead, the
> permission of the committee. And, on the other hand, can an individual
> accept responsibility for the actions of a collectivity before knowing
> what it will do and if he cannot prevent it doing what he disapproves
> of?"* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 99]

In other words, the term *"collective responsibility"* (if taken
literally) implies a highly inefficient and somewhat authoritarian mode
of organisation. Before any action could be undertaken, the organisation
would have to be consulted and this would crush individual, group and
local initiative. The organisation would respond slowly to developing
situations, if at all, and this response would not be informed by first
hand knowledge and experience. Moreover, this form of organisation
implies a surrendering of individual judgement, as members would have to
*"submit to the decisions of the majority before they have even heard
what those might be."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, 101] In the end, all a
member could do would be to leave the organisation if they disagree with
a tactic or position and could not bring themselves to further it by
their actions.

This structure also suggests that the Platform's commitment to
federalism is in words only. As most anarchists critical of the Platform
argued, while its authors affirm federalist principles they, in fact,
*"outline a perfectly centralised organisation with an Executive
Committee that has responsibility to give ideological and organisational
direction to the different anarchist organisations, which in turn will
direct the professional organisations of the workers."* [*"The Reply by
Several Russian Anarchists"*, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 35-6]

Thus it is likely that "Collective Responsibility" taken to its logical
conclusion would actually **hinder** anarchist work by being too
bureaucratic and slow. However, let us assume that by applying
collective responsibility as well as tactical and theoretical unity,
anarchist resources and time will be more efficiently utilised. What is
the point of being "efficient" if the collective decision reached is
wrong or is inapplicable to many areas? Rather than local groups
applying their knowledge of local conditions and developing theories and
policies that reflect these conditions (and co-operating from the bottom
up), they may be forced to apply inappropriate policies due to the
"Unity" of the Platformist organisation. It is true that Makhno argued
that the *"activities of local organisations can be adapted, as far as
possible, to suit local conditions"* but only if they are *"consonant
with the pattern of the overall organisational practice of the Union of
anarchists covering the whole country."* [**The Struggle Against the
State and Other Essays**, p. 62] Which still begs the question on the
nature of the Platform's unity (however, it does suggest that the
Platform's position may be less extreme than might be implied by the
text, as we will discuss). That is why anarchists have traditionally
supported federalism and free agreement within their organisations, to
take into account the real needs of localities.

If we do not take the Platform's definition of "Collective
Responsibility" literally or to its logical extreme (as Makhno's
comments suggest) then the differences between Platformists and
non-Platformists may not be that far. As Malatesta pointed out in his
reply to Makhno's letter:

> "I accept and support the view that anyone who associates and
> co-operates with others for a common purpose must feel the need to
> co-ordinate his [or her] actions with those of his [or her] fellow
> members and do nothing that harms the work of others . . . and respect
> the agreements that have been made . . . [Moreover] I maintain that
> those who do not feel and do not practice that duty should be thrown
> out of the association.
>
> "Perhaps, speaking of collective responsibility, you mean precisely
> that accord and solidarity that must exist among members of an
> association. And if that is so, your expression amounts . . . to an
> incorrect use of language, but basically it would only be an
> unimportant question of wording and agreement would soon be reached."
> [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 107-8]

This, indeed, seems to be the way that most Platformist organisations do
operate. They have agreed broad theoretical and tactical positions on
various subjects (such as, for example, the nature of trade unions and
how anarchists relate to them) while leaving it to local groups to act
within these guidelines. Moreover, the local groups do not have to
report to the organisation before embarking on an activity. In other
words, most Platformist groups do not take the Platform literally and so
many differences are, to a large degree, a question of wording. As two
supporters of the Platform note:

> *"The Platform doesn't go into detail about how collective
> responsibility works in practice. There are issues it leaves untouched
> such as the question of people who oppose the majority view. We would
> argue that obviously people who oppose the view of the majority have a
> right to express their own views, however in doing so they must make
> clear that they don't represent the view of the organisation. If a
> group of people within the organisation oppose the majority decision
> they have the right to organise and distribute information so that
> their arguments can be heard within the organisation as a whole. Part
> of our anarchism is the belief that debate and disagreement, freedom
> and openness strengthens both the individual and the group to which
> she or he belongs."* [Aileen O'Carroll and Alan MacSimoin, *"The
> Platform"*, pp. 29-31, **Red and Black Revolution**, no. 4, p. 30]

While many anarchists are critical of Platformist groups for being too
centralised for their liking, it is the case that the Platform has
influenced many anarchist organisations, even non-Platformist ones (this
can be seen in the "class struggle" groups discussed in the [next
section](secJ3.html#secj35)). This influence has been both ways, with
the criticism the original Platform was subjected to having had an
effect on how Platformist groups have developed. This, of course, does
not imply that there is little or no difference between Platformists and
other anarchists. Platformist groups tend to stress "collective
responsibility" and "theoretical and tactical unity" more than others,
which has caused problems when Platformists have worked within
"synthesis" organisations (as was the case in France, for example, which
resulted in much bad-feeling between Platformists and others).

**Constructive Anarchism** by the leading Russian anarcho-syndicalist
G.P. Maximoff gathers all the relevant documents in one place. As well
as Maximoff's critique of the Platform, it includes the "synthesis"
reply, Malatesta's review and subssequent exchange of letters between
him and Makhno. **The Anarchist Revolution** also contains Malatesta's
article and the exchange of letters between him and Makhno.

J.3.5 Are there other kinds of anarchist federation?
----------------------------------------------------

Yes. Another type of anarchist federation is what we term the *"class
struggle"* group. Many local anarchist groups in Britain, for example,
organise in this fashion. They use the term "class struggle" to indicate
that their anarchism is based on collective working class resistance as
opposed to reforming capitalism via lifestyle changes and the support
of, say, co-operatives (many "class struggle" anarchists do these
things, of course, but they are aware that they cannot create an
anarchist society by so doing). We follow this use of the term here. And
just to stress the point again, our use of "class struggle" to describe
this type of anarchist group does not imply that "synthesis" or
"Platformist" do not support the class struggle. They do!

This kind of group is half-way between the "synthesis" and the
"Platform." The "class struggle" group agrees with the "synthesis" in so
far as it is important to have a diverse viewpoints within a federation
and that it would be a mistake to try to impose a common-line on
different groups in different circumstances as the Platform does.
However, like the "Platform," the class struggle group recognises that
there is little point in creating a forced union between totally
different strands of anarchism. Thus the "class struggle" group rejects
the idea that individualist or mutualist anarchists should be part of
the same organisation as anarchist communists or syndicalists or that
anarcho-pacifists should join forces with non-pacifists. Thus the "class
struggle" group acknowledges that an organisation which contains
viewpoints which are dramatically opposed can lead to pointless debates
and paralysis of action due to the impossibilities of overcoming those
differences.

Instead, the "class struggle" group agrees a common set of ***"aims and
principles"*** which are the basic terms of agreement within the
federation. If an individual or group does not agree with this statement
then they cannot join. If they are members and try to change this
statement and cannot get the others to agree its modification, then they
are morally bound to leave the organisation. In other words, there is a
framework within which individuals and groups apply their own ideas and
their interpretation of agreed policies. It means that individuals in a
group and the groups within a federation have something to base their
local activity on, something which has been agreed collectively. There
would be a common thread to activities and a guide to action
(particularly in situations were a group or federation meeting cannot be
called). In this way individual initiative and co-operation can be
reconciled, without hindering either. In addition, the ***"aims and
principles"*** shows potential members where the anarchist group was
coming from.

In this way the "class struggle" group solves one of the key problems
with the "synthesis" grouping, namely that any such basic statement of
political ideas would be hard to agree and be so watered down as to be
almost useless (for example, a federation combining individualist and
communist anarchists would find it impossible to agree on such things as
the necessity for revolution, communal ownership, and so on). By clearly
stating its ideas, the "class struggle" group ensures a common basis for
activity and discussion.

Such a federation, like all anarchist groups, would be based upon
regular assemblies locally and in frequent regional, national, etc.,
conferences to continually re-evaluate policies, tactics, strategies and
goals. In addition, such meetings prevent power from collecting in the
higher administration committees created to co-ordinate activity. The
regular conferences aim to create federation policies on specific topics
and agree common strategies. Such policies, once agreed, are morally
binding on the membership, who can review and revise them as required at
a later stage but cannot take action which would hinder their
application (they do not have to apply them, if they consider them as a
big mistake).

For example, minorities in such a federation can pursue their own
policies as long as they clearly state that theirs is a minority
position and does not contradict the federation's aims and principles.
In this way the anarchist federation combines united action and dissent,
for no general policy will be applicable in all circumstances and it is
better for minorities to ignore policies which they know will make even
greater problems in their area. As long as their actions and policies do
not contradict the federation's basic political ideas, then diversity is
an essential means for ensuring that the best tactic and ideas are be
identified.

J.3.6 What role do these groups play in anarchist theory?
---------------------------------------------------------

The aim of anarchist groups and federations is to spread libertarian
ideas within society and within social movements. They aim to convince
people of the validity of anarchist ideas and analysis, of the need for
a libertarian transformation of society and of themselves by working
with others as equals. Such groups are convinced that (to use Murray
Bookchin's words) *"anarcho-communism cannot remain a mere mood or
tendency, wafting in the air like a cultural ambience. It must be
organised -- indeed **well-organised** -- if it is effectively
articulate and spread this new sensibility; it must have a coherent
theory and extensive literature; it must be capable of duelling with the
authoritarian movements that try to denature the intuitive libertarian
impulses of our time and channel social unrest into hierarchical forms
of organisation."* [*"Looking Back at Spain,"* pp. 53-96, Dimitrios I.
Roussopoulos (ed.), **The Radical Papers**, p. 90]

These groups and federations play a key role in anarchist theory. This
is because anarchists are well aware that there are different levels of
knowledge and consciousness in society. While people learn through
struggle and their own experiences, different people develop at
different speeds, that each individual is unique and is subject to
different influences. As one pamphlet by the British **Anarchist
Federation** puts it, the *"experiences of working class life constantly
lead to the development of ideas and actions which question the
established order . . . At the same time, different sections of the
working class reach different degrees of consciousness."* [**The Role of
the Revolutionary Organisation**, p. 13] This can easily be seen from
any group of individuals of the same class or even community. Some are
anarchists, others Marxists, some social democrats/labourites, others
conservatives, others liberals, most "apolitical," some support trade
unions, others are against and so on.

Because we are aware that we are one tendency among many, anarchists
organise as anarchists to influence social struggle. Only when
anarchists ideas are accepted by the vast majority will an anarchist
society be possible. We wish, in other words, to win the most widespread
understanding and influence for anarchist ideas and methods in the
working class and in society, primarily because we believe that these
alone will ensure a successful revolutionary transformation of society.
Hence Malatesta:

> *"anarchists, convinced of the validity of our programme, must strive
> to acquire overwhelming influence in order to draw the movement
> towards the realisation of our ideals. But such influence must be won
> by doing more and better than others, and will be useful if won in
> that way . . . we must deepen, develop and propagate our ideas and
> co-ordinate our forces in a common action. We must act within the
> labour movement to prevent it being limited to and corrupted by the
> exclusive pursuit of small improvements compatible with the capitalist
> system . . . We must work with . . . [all the] masses to awaken the
> spirit of revolt and the desire for a free and happy life. We must
> initiate and support all movements that tend to weaken the forces of
> the State and of capitalism and to raise the mental level and material
> conditions of the workers."* [**The Anarchist Revolution**, p. 109]

Anarchist organisation exists to help the process by which people come
to anarchist conclusions. It aims to make explicit the feelings and
thoughts that people have (such as, wage slavery is hell, that the state
exists to oppress people and so on) by exposing as wrong common
justifications for existing society and social relationships by a
process of debate and providing a vision of something better. In other
words, anarchist organisations seek to explain and clarify what is
happening in society and show why anarchism is the only real solution to
social problems. As part of this, we also have combat wrong ideas such
as Liberalism, Social Democracy, Leninism, right-wing popularism and so
on, indicating why these proposed solutions are false. In addition, an
anarchist organisation must also be a 'collective memory' for the
oppressed, keeping alive and developing the traditions of the labour and
radical movements as well as anarchism so that new generations of
libertarians have a body of experience to build upon and use in their
struggles.

Anarchist organisations see themselves in the role of aiders, **not**
leaders. As Voline argued, the minority which is politically aware
*"should intervene. But, in every place and under all circumstances, . .
. [they] should freely participate in the common work, **as true
collaborators, not as dictators.** It is necessary that they especially
create an example, and employ themselves . . . without dominating,
subjugating, or oppressing anyone . . . Accordingly to the libertarian
thesis, it is the labouring masses themselves, who, by means of the
various class organisations, factory committees, industrial and
agricultural unions, co-operatives, et cetera, federated . . . should
apply themselves everywhere, to solving the problems of waging the
Revolution . . . As for the 'elite' [i.e. the politically aware], their
role, according to the libertarians, is to **help** the masses,
enlighten them, teach them, give them necessary advice, impel them to
take initiative, provide them with an example, and support them in their
action -- **but not to direct them governmentally.**"* [**The Unknown
Revolution**, pp. 177-8]

This role is usually called providing a ***"leadership of ideas"***.
Anarchists stress the difference of this concept with authoritarian
notions of "leadership" such as Leninist ones. While both anarchist and
Leninist organisations exist to overcome the problem of "uneven
development" within the working class, the aims, role and structure of
these groups could not be more different (as discussed in [section
H.5](secH5.html), anarchists reject the assumptions and practice of
vanguardism as incompatible with genuine socialism).

Anarchist groups are needed for, no matter how much people change
through struggle, it is not enough in itself (if it were, we would be
living in an anarchist society now!). So anarchists stress, as well as
self-organisation, self-liberation and self-education through struggle
developing libertarian socialist thought, the need for anarchist groups
to work within popular organisations and in the mass of the population
in general. These groups would play an important role in helping to
clarify the ideas of those in struggle and undermining the internal and
external barriers against these ideas.

The first of these are what Emma Goldman termed the *"internal
tyrants,"* the *"ethical and social conventions"* of existing,
hierarchical society which accustom people to authoritarian social
relationships, injustice, lack of freedom and so on. [**Red Emma
Speaks**, pp. 164-5] External barriers are what Chomsky terms *"the
Manufacture of Consent,"* the process by which the population at large
are influenced to accept the status quo and the dominant elites
viewpoint via the education system and media. It is this "manufacture of
consent" which helps explain why, relatively speaking, there are so few
anarchists even though we argue that anarchism is the natural product of
working class life. While, objectively, the experiences of life drives
working class people to resist domination and oppression, they enter
that struggle with a history behind them, a history of education in
capitalist schools, of consuming capitalist media, and so on.

This means that while social struggle is radicalising, it also has to
combat years of pro-state and pro-capitalist influences. So even if an
anarchist consciousness springs from the real conditions of working
class life, because we live in a class society there are numerous
counter-tendencies that **inhibit** the development of that
consciousness (such as religion, current morality, the media,
pro-business and pro-state propaganda, state and business repression and
so on). This explains the differences in political opinion within the
working class, as people develop at different speeds and are subject to
different influences and experiences. However, the numerous internal and
external barriers to the development of anarchist opinions created our
*"internal tyrants"* and by the process of *"manufacturing consent"* can
be, and are, weaken by rational discussion as well as social struggle
and self-activity. Indeed, until such time as we have *"learned to defy
them all [the internal tyrants], to stand firmly on [our] own ground and
to insist upon [our] own unrestricted freedom"* we can never be free or
successfully combat the "manufacture of consent." [Goldman, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 140] And this is where the anarchist group can play a part,
for there is an important role to be played by those who have been
through this process already, namely to aid those going through it.

Of course the activity of an anarchist group does not occur in a vacuum.
In periods of low class struggle, where there is little collective
action, anarchist ideas will seem utopian and so dismissed by most. In
these situations, only a few will become anarchists simply because the
experiences of working people do not bred confidence that an alternative
to the current system is possible. In addition, if anarchist groups are
small, many who are looking for an alternative may join other groups
which are more visible and express a libertarian sounding rhetoric (such
as Leninist groups, who often talk about workers' control, workers'
councils and so on while meaning something distinctly different from
what anarchists mean by these terms). However, as the class struggle
increases and people become more inclined to take collective action,
they can become empowered and radicalised by their own activity and be
more open to anarchist ideas and the possibility of changing society. In
these situations, anarchist groups grow and the influence in anarchist
ideas increases. This explains why anarchist ideas are not as widespread
as they could be. It also indicates another important role for the
anarchist group, namely to provide an environment and space where those
drawn to anarchist ideas can meet and share experiences and ideas during
periods of reaction.

The role of the anarchist group, therefore, is **not** to import a
foreign ideology into the working class, but rather to help develop and
clarify the ideas of those working class people who are moving towards
anarchism and so aid those undergoing that development. They would aid
this development by providing propaganda which exposes the current
social system (and the rationales for it) as bankrupt as well as
encouraging resistance to oppression and exploitation. The former, for
Bakunin, allowed the *"bringing [of] a more just general expression, a
new and more congenial form to the existent instincts of the proletariat
. . . [which] can sometimes facilitate and precipitate development . . .
[and] give them an awareness of what they have, of what they feel, of
what they already instinctively desire, but never can it give to them
what they don't have."* The latter *"is the most popular, the most
potent, and the most irresistible form of propaganda"* and *"awake[s] in
the masses all the social-revolutionary instincts which reside deeply in
the heart of every worker"* so allowing instinct to become transformed
into *"reflected socialist thought."* [quoted by Richard B. Saltman,
**The Social and Political Thought of Michael Bakunin**, p. 107, p. 108
and p. 141]

To quote the UK **Anarchist Federation**, again *"the [libertarian]
organisation is not just a propaganda group: above all it must actively
work in all the grassroots organisations of the working class such as
rank and file [trade union] groups, tenants associations, squatters and
unemployed groups as well as women's, black and gay groups."* It
*"respects the independence of working class movements and (unlike]
others) does not try to subordinate them to the revolutionary
organisation. This does not mean that it does not seek to spread its
ideas in these movements."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 15 and p. 16] Such an
organisation is not vanguardist in the Leninist sense as it recognises
that socialist politics derive from working class experience, rather
than bourgeois intellectuals (as Lenin and Karl Kautsky argued), and
that it does not aim to dominate popular movements but rather work
within them as equals.

So while we recognise that "advanced" sections do exist within the
working class and that anarchists are one such section, we also
recognise that **central** characteristic of anarchism is that its
politics are derived from the concrete experience of fighting capitalism
and statism directly -- that is, from the realities of working class
life. This means that anarchists must also learn from working class
people in struggle. If we recognise that anarchist ideas are the product
of working class experience and self-activity and that these constantly
change and develop in light of new experiences and struggles then
anarchist theory **must be open to change by learning from
non-anarchists.** Not to recognise this fact is to open the door to
vanguardism and dogma. Because of this fact, anarchists argue that the
relationship between anarchists and non-anarchists must be an
egalitarian one, based on mutual interaction and the recognition that no
one is infallible or have all the answers -- including anarchists! With
this in mind, while we recognise the presence of "advanced" groups
within the working class (which obviously reflects the uneven
development within it), anarchists aim to minimise such unevenness by
the way anarchist organisations intervene in social struggle,
intervention based on involving **all** in the decision making process
(as we discuss below).

Thus the general aim of anarchist groups is to spread ideas -- such as
general anarchist analysis of society and current events, libertarian
forms of organisation, direct action and solidarity and so forth -- and
win people over to anarchism (i.e. to "make" anarchists). This involves
both propaganda and participating as equals in social struggle and
popular organisation. Anarchists do not think that changing leaders is a
solution to the problem of (bad) leadership. Rather, it is a question of
making leaders redundant by empowering all. As Malatesta argued, we *"do
not want to **emancipate** the people; we want the people to
**emancipate themselves.**"* Thus anarchists *"advocate and practise
direct action, decentralisation, autonomy and individual initiative;
they should make special efforts to help members [of popular
organisations] learn to participate directly in the life of the
organisation and to dispense with leaders and full-time functionaries."*
[**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 90 and p. 125]

This means that anarchists reject the idea that anarchist groups and
federations must become the "leaders" of organisations. Rather, we
desire anarchist ideas to be commonplace in society and in popular
organisations, so that leadership by people from positions of power is
replaced by the *"natural influence"* (to use Bakunin's term) of
activists within the rank and file on the decisions made **by** the rank
and file. While we will discuss Bakunin's ideas in more detail in
[section J.3.7](secJ3.html#secj37), the concept of *"natural influence"*
can be gathered from this comment of Francisco Ascaso (friend of Durruti
and an influential anarchist militant in the CNT and FAI in his own
right):

> *"There is not a single militant who as a 'FAIista' intervenes in
> union meetings. I work, therefore I am an exploited person. I pay my
> dues to the workers' union and when I intervene at union meetings I do
> it as someone who is exploited, and with the right which is granted me
> by the card in my possession, as do the other militants, whether they
> belong to the FAI or not."* [quoted by Abel Paz, **Durruti: The People
> Armed**, p. 137]

This shows the nature of the "leadership of ideas." Rather than be
elected to a position of power or responsibility, the anarchist presents
their ideas at mass meetings and argues his or her case. This means
obviously implies a two-way learning process, as the anarchist learns
from the experiences of others and the others come in contact with
anarchist ideas. Moreover, it is an egalitarian relationship, based upon
discussion between equals rather than urging people to place someone
into power above them. It ensures that everyone in the organisation
participants in making, understands and agrees with the decisions
reached. This obviously helps the political development of all involved
(including, we must stress, the anarchists). As Durruti argued: *"the
man [or woman] who alienates his will, can never be free to express
himself and follow his own ideas at a union meeting if he feel dominated
by the feeblest orator . . . As long as a man doesn't think for himself
and doesn't assume his own responsibilities, there will be no complete
liberation of human beings."* [quoted by Paz, **Op. Cit.**, p. 184]

Because of our support for the "leadership of ideas", anarchists think
that all popular organisations must be open, fully self-managed and free
from authoritarianism. Only in this way can ideas and discussion play an
important role in the life of the organisation. Since anarchists *"do
not believe in the good that comes from above and imposed by force"* and
*"want the new way of life to emerge from the body of the people and
advance as they advance. It matters to us therefore that all interests
and opinions find their expression in a conscious organisation and
should influence communal life in proportion to their importance."*
[Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 90] Bakunin's words with regards the first
International Workers Association indicate this clearly:

> *"It must be a people's movement, organised from the bottom up by the
> free, spontaneous action of the masses. There must be no secret
> governmentalism, the masses must be informed of everything . . . All
> the affairs of the International must be thoroughly and openly
> discussed without evasions and circumlocutions."* [**Bakunin on
> Anarchism**, p. 408]

Given this, anarchists reject the idea of turning the organs created in
the class struggle and revolutionary process into hierarchical
structures. By turning them from organs of self-management into organs
for nominating "leaders," the constructive tasks and political
development of the revolution will be aborted before they really begin.
The active participation of all will become reduced to the picking of
new masters and the revolution will falter. For this reason, anarchists
*"differ from the Bolshevik type of party in their belief that genuine
revolutionaries must function **within the framework of the forms
created by the revolution,** not within forms created by the party."*
This means that *"an organisation is needed to propagate ideas
systematically -- and not ideas alone, but **ideas which promote the
concept of self-management.**"* In other words, there *"is a need for a
revolutionary organisation -- but its function must always be kept
clearly in mind. Its first task is propaganda . . . In a revolutionary
situation, the revolutionary organisation presents the most advanced
demands: it is prepared at every turn of events to formulate -- in the
most concrete fashion -- the immediate task that should be performed to
advance the revolutionary process. It provides the boldest elements in
action and in the decision-making organs of the revolution."* [Murray
Bookchin, **Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 140] What it does **not** do
is to supplant those organs or decision-making process by creating
institutionalised, hierarchical leadership structures.

Equally as important as **how** anarchists intervene in social struggles
and popular organisations and the organisation of those struggles and
organisations, there is the question of the nature of that intervention.
We would like to quote the following by the British libertarian
socialist group **Solidarity** as it sums up the underlying nature of
anarchist action and the importance of a libertarian perspective on
social struggle and change and how politically aware minorities work
within them:

> *"**Meaningful action,** for revolutionaries, is whatever increases
> the confidence, the autonomy, the initiative, the participation, the
> solidarity, the egalitarian tendencies and the self-activity of the
> masses and whatever assists in their demystification. **Sterile and
> harmful action** is whatever reinforces the passivity of the masses,
> their apathy, their cynicism, their differentiation through hierarchy,
> their alienation, their reliance on others to do things for them and
> the degree to which they can therefore be manipulated by others --
> even by those allegedly acting on their behalf."* [Maurice Brinton,
> **For Workers' Power**, p. 154]

Part of this "meaningful action" involves encouraging people to ***"act
for yourselves"*** (to use Kropotkin's words). As we noted in [section
A.2.7](secA2.html#seca27), anarchism is based on **self**-liberation and
self-activity is key aspect of this. Hence Malatesta's argument:

> *"Our task is that of 'pushing' the people to demand and to seize all
> the freedom they can and to make themselves responsible for providing
> their own needs without waiting for orders from any kind of authority.
> Our task is that of demonstrating the uselessness and harmfulness of
> government, provoking and encouraging by propaganda and action, all
> kinds of individual and collective activities.*

> *"It is in fact a question of education for freedom, of making people
> who are accustomed to obedience and passivity consciously aware of
> their real power and capabilities. One must encourage people to do
> things for themselves."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 178-9]

This "pushing" people to "do it themselves" is another key role for any
anarchist organisation. The encouragement of direct action is just as
important as anarchist propaganda and popular participation within
social struggle and popular organisations.

As such social struggle developments, the possibility of revolution
becomes closer and closer. While we discuss anarchists ideas on social
revolution in [section J.7](secJ7.html), we must note here that the role
of the anarchist organisation does not change. As Bookchin argued,
anarchists *"seek to persuade the factory committees, assemblies"* and
other organisations created by people in struggle *"to make themselves
into **genuine organs of popular self-management**, not to dominate
them, manipulate them, or hitch them to an all-knowing political
party."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 140] In this way, by encouraging
self-management in struggle, anarchist lay the foundations of a
self-managed society.

J.3.7 Doesn't Bakunin's *"Invisible Dictatorship"* prove that anarchists are secret authoritarians?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No. While Bakunin did use the term *"invisible dictatorship"*, it does
not prove that Bakunin or anarchists are secret authoritarians. The
claim otherwise, often made by Leninists and other Marxists, expresses a
distinct, even wilful, misunderstanding of Bakunin's ideas on the role
revolutionaries should play in popular movements.

Marxists quote Bakunin's terms *"invisible dictatorship"* and
*"collective dictatorship"* out of context, using it to "prove" that
anarchists are secret authoritarians, seeking dictatorship over the
masses. More widely, the question of Bakunin and his "invisible
dictatorship" finds its way into sympathetic accounts of anarchist
ideas. For example, Peter Marshall writes that it is *"not difficult to
conclude that Bakunin's invisible dictatorship would be even more
tyrannical than a . . . Marxist one"* and that it expressed a *"profound
authoritarian and dissimulating streak in his life and work."*
[**Demanding the Impossible**, p. 287] So, the question of setting the
record straight about this aspect of Bakunin's theory is of more
importance than just correcting a few Leninists. In addition, to do so
will help clarify the concept of *"leadership of ideas"* we discussed in
the [last section](secJ3.html#secj36). For both these reasons, this
section, while initially appearing somewhat redundant and of interest
only to academics, is of a far wider interest.

Anarchists have two responses to claims that Bakunin (and, by
implication, all anarchists) seek an *"invisible"* dictatorship and so
are not true libertarians. Firstly, and this is the point we will
concentrate upon in this section, Bakunin's expression is taken out of
context and when placed within context it takes on a radically different
meaning than that implied by critics of anarchism. Secondly, even **if**
the expression means what the critics claim it does, it does not refute
anarchism as a political theory. This is because anarchists are **not**
Bakuninists (or Proudhonists or Kropotkinites or any other person-ist).
We recognise other anarchists for what they are, human beings who said
lots of important and useful things but, like any other human being,
made mistakes and often do not live up to all of their ideas. For
anarchists, it is a question of extracting the useful parts from their
works and rejecting the useless (as well as the downright nonsense!).
Just because Bakunin said something, it does not make it right! This
common-sense approach to politics seems to be lost on Marxists. Indeed,
if we take the logic of these Marxists to its conclusion, we must reject
everything Rousseau wrote (he was sexist), Marx and Engels (their
comments against Slavs spring to mind, along with numerous other racist
comments) and so on. But, of course, this never happens to non-anarchist
thinkers when Marxists write their articles and books.

However, to return to our main argument, that of the importance of
context. Significantly, whenever Bakunin uses the term "invisible" or
"collective" dictatorship he also explicitly states his opposition to
government power and **in particular** the idea that anarchists should
seize it. For example, a Leninist quotes the following passage from *"a
Bakuninist document"* to show *"the dictatorial ambitions of Bakunin"*
and that the *"principle of anti-democracy was to leave Bakunin
unchallenged at the apex of power"*: *"It is necessary that in the midst
of popular anarchy, which will constitute the very life and energy of
the revolution, unity of thought and revolutionary action should find an
organ. This organ must be the secret and world-wide association of the
international brethren."* [Derek Howl, *"The legacy of Hal Draper"*, pp.
137-49, **International Socialist**, no. 52, p. 147]

However, in the sentence **immediately before** those quoted, Bakunin
stated that *"[t]his organisation rules out any idea of dictatorship and
custodial control."* Strange that this part of the document was not
quoted! Nor is Bakunin quoted when he wrote, in the same document, that
*"[w]e are the natural enemies of those revolutionaries -- future
dictators, regimentors and custodians of revolution -- who . . . [want]
to create new revolutionary States just as centralist and despotic as
those we already know."* Not mentioned either is Bakunin's opinion that
the *"revolution everywhere must be created by the people, and supreme
control must always belong to the people organised into a free
federation of agricultural and industrial associations . . . organised
from the bottom upwards by means of revolutionary delegations . . .
[who] will set out to administer public services, not to rule over
peoples."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 172, p. 169 and
p. 172] Selective quoting is only convincing to those ignorant of the
subject.

Similarly, when we look at the situations where Bakunin uses the terms
*"invisible"* or *"collective"* dictatorship (usually in letters to
comrades) we find the same thing -- the explicit denial **in these same
letters** that Bakunin thought the revolutionary association should take
governmental power. For example, in a letter to Albert Richard (a fellow
member of the *"Alliance of Social Democracy"*) Bakunin stated that
*"[t]here is only one power and one dictatorship whose organisation is
salutary and feasible: it is that collective, invisible dictatorship of
those who are allied in the name of our principle."* He then immediately
adds that *"this dictatorship will be all the more salutary and
effective for not being dressed up in any official power or extrinsic
character."* Earlier in the letter he argued that anarchists must be
*"like invisible pilots in the thick of the popular tempest. . .
steer[ing] it [the revolution] not by any open power but by the
collective dictatorship of all the allies -- a dictatorship without
insignia, titles or official rights, and all the stronger for having
none of the paraphernalia of power."* Explicitly opposing *"Committees
of Public Safety and official, overt dictatorship"* he explains his idea
of a revolution based on *"workers hav[ing] joined into associations . .
. armed and organised by streets and **quartiers**, the federative
commune."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 181, p. 180 and p. 179] Hardly what would
be expected from a would-be dictator. As Sam Dolgoff suggested:

> *"an organisation exercising no overt authority, without a state,
> without official status, without the machinery of institutionalised
> power to enforce its policies, cannot be defined as a dictatorship . .
> . Moreover, if it is borne in mind that this passage is part of a
> letter repudiating in the strongest terms the State and the
> authoritarian statism of the 'Robespierres, the Dantons, and the
> Saint-Justs of the revolution,' it is reasonable to conclude that
> Bakunin used the word 'dictatorship' to denote preponderant influence
> or guidance exercised largely by example . . . In line with this
> conclusion, Bakunin used the words 'invisible' and 'collective' to
> denote the underground movement exerting this influence in an
> organised manner."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 182]

This analysis is confirmed by other passages from Bakunin's letters. In
a letter to the Nihilist Sergi Nechaev (within which Bakunin indicates
exactly how far apart politically they were -- which is important as,
from Marx onwards, many of Bakunin's opponents quote Nechaev's pamphlets
as if they were "Bakuninist," when in fact they were not) we find him
arguing that:

> *"These [revolutionary] groups would not seek anything for themselves,
> neither privilege nor honour nor power . . . [but] would be in a
> position to direct popular movements . . . and lead the people towards
> the most complete realisation of the social-economic ideal and the
> organisation of the fullest popular freedom. This is what I call **the
> collective dictatorship** of a secret organisation.*

> *"The dictatorship . . . does not reward any of the members that
> comprise the groups, or the groups themselves, with any profit or
> honour or official power. It does not threaten the freedom of the
> people, because, lacking any official character, it does not take the
> place of State control over the people, and because its whole aim . .
> . consists of the fullest realisation of the liberty of the people.*

> *"This sort of dictatorship is not in the least contrary to the free
> development and the self-development of the people, nor its
> organisation from the bottom upward . . . for it influences the people
> exclusively through the natural, personal influence of its members,
> who have not the slightest power, . . . and . . . try . . . to direct
> the spontaneous revolutionary movement of the people towards . . . the
> organisation of popular liberty . . . This secret dictatorship would
> in the first place, and at the present time, carry out a broadly based
> popular propaganda . . . and by the power of this propaganda and also
> by **organisation among the people themselves** join together separate
> popular forces into a mighty strength capable of demolishing the
> State."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, pp. 193-4]

The key aspect of this is the notion of *"natural"* influence. In a
letter to a Spanish member of the Alliance we find Bakunin arguing that
it *"will promote the Revolution only through the **natural but never
official influence** of all members of the Alliance."* [**Bakunin on
Anarchism**, p. 387] This term was also used in his public writings,
with Bakunin arguing that the *"very freedom of every individual results
from th[e] great number of material, intellectual, and moral influences
which every individual around him and which society . . . continually
exercise on him"* and that *"everything alive . . . intervene[s] . . .
in the life of others . . . [so] we hardly wish to abolish the effect of
any individual's or any group of individuals' natural influence upon the
masses."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 140 and p. 141]

Thus *"natural influence"* simply means the effect of communicating
which others, discussing your ideas with them and winning them over to
your position, nothing more. This is hardly authoritarian, and so
Bakunin contrasts this *"natural"* influence with *"official"*
influence, which replaced the process of mutual interaction between
equals with a fixed hierarchy of command and thereby induced the
*"transformation of natural influence, and, as such, the perfectly
legitimate influence over man, into a right."* [quoted by Richard B.
Saltman, **The Social and Political Thought of Michael Bakunin**, p. 46]

As an example of this difference, consider the case of a union militant
(as will become clear, this is the sort of example Bakunin had in mind).
As long as they are part of the rank-and-file, arguing their case at
union meetings or being delegated to carry out the decisions of these
assemblies then their influence is *"natural."* However, if this
militant is elected into a position with executive power in the union
(i.e. becomes a full-time union official, for example, rather than a
shop-steward) then their influence becomes *"official"* and so,
potentially, corrupting for both the militant and the rank-and-file who
are subject to the rule of the official.

Indeed, this notion of *"natural"* influence was also termed
*"invisible"* by Bakunin: *"It is only necessary that one worker in ten
join the [International Working-Men's] Association **earnestly** and
**with full understanding of the cause** for the nine-tenths remaining
outside its organisation nevertheless to be influenced invisibly by
it."* [**The Basic Bakunin**, p. 139] So, as can be seen, the terms
*"invisible"* and *"collective"* dictatorship used by Bakunin in his
letters is strongly related to the term *"natural influence"* used in
his public works and seems to be used simply to indicate the effects of
an organised political group on the masses. To see this, it is
worthwhile to quote Bakunin at length about the nature of this
*"invisible"* influence:

> *"It may be objected that this . . . influence on the popular masses
> suggests the establishment of a system of authority and a new
> government . . . Such a belief would be a serious blunder. The
> organised effect of the International on the masses . . . is nothing
> but the entirely natural organisation -- neither official nor clothed
> in any authority or political force whatsoever -- of the effect of a
> rather numerous group of individuals who are inspired by the same
> thought and headed toward the same goal, first of all on the opinion
> of the masses and only then, by the intermediary of this opinion
> (restated by the International's propaganda), on their will and their
> deeds. But the governments . . . impose themselves violently on the
> masses, who are forced to obey them and to execute their decrees . . .
> The International's influence will never be anything but one of
> opinion and the International will never be anything but the
> organisation of the natural effect of individuals on the masses."*
> [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 139-40]

Therefore, from both the fuller context provided by the works and
letters selectively quoted by Marxists **and** his other writings, we
find that rather than being a secret authoritarian, Bakunin was, in
fact, trying to express how anarchists could *"naturally influence"* the
masses and their revolution:

> *"We are the most pronounced enemies of every sort of **official
> power** . . . We are the enemies of any sort of publicly declared
> dictatorship, we are social revolutionary anarchists . . . if we are
> anarchists, by what right do we want to influence the people, and what
> methods will we use? Denouncing all power, with what sort of power, or
> rather by what sort of force, shall we direct a people's revolution?
> **By a force that is invisible . . . that is not imposed on anyone . .
> . [and] deprived of all official rights and significance.**"*
> [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, pp. 191-2]

Continually opposing *"official"* power, authority and influence,
Bakunin used the term *"invisible, collective dictatorship"* to describe
the *"natural influence"* of organised anarchists on mass movements.
Rather than express a desire to become a dictator, it in fact expresses
the awareness that there is an "uneven" political development within the
working class, an unevenness that can only be undermined by discussion
within the mass assemblies of popular organisations. Any attempt to
by-pass this "unevenness" by seizing or being elected to positions of
power (i.e. by *"official influence"*) would be doomed to failure and
result in dictatorship by a party -- *"triumph of the Jacobins or the
Blanquists [or the Bolsheviks, we must add] would be the death of the
Revolution."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 169]

So rather than seek power, the anarchists would seek **influence** based
on the soundness of their ideas, what anarchists today term the
*"leadership of ideas"* in other words. Thus the anarchist federation
*"unleashes their [the peoples] will and gives wider opportunity for
their self-determination and their social-economic organisation, which
should be created by them alone from the bottom upwards . . . The
[revolutionary] organisation . . . [must] not in any circumstances . . .
ever be their master . . . What is to be the chief aim and pursue of
this organisation? **To help the people towards self-determination on
the lines of the most complete equality and fullest human freedom in
every direction, without the least interference from any sort of
domination . . . that is without any sort of government control.**"*
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 191]

This analysis can be seen from Bakunin's discussion on union bureaucracy
and how anarchists should combat it. Taking the Geneva section of the
IWMA, Bakunin notes that the construction workers' section *"simply left
all decision-making to their committees . . . In this manner power
gravitated to the committees, and by a species of fiction characteristic
of all governments the committees substituted their own will and their
own ideas for that of the membership."* To combat this bureaucracy, the
union *"sections could only defend their rights and their autonomy in
only one way: the workers called general membership meetings. Nothing
arouses the antipathy of the committees more than these popular
assemblies . . . In these great meetings of the sections, the items on
the agenda was amply discussed and the most progressive opinion
prevailed."* Given that Bakunin considered *"the federative Alliance of
all the workers' associations"* would *"constitute the Commune"* by
means of delegates with *"always responsible, and revocable mandates"*,
we can easily see that the role of the anarchist federation would be to
intervene in general assemblies of these associations and ensure,
through debate, that the most progressive opinion prevailed. [**Bakunin
on Anarchism**, p. 246, p. 247 and p. 153]

Having shown that the role of Bakunin's revolutionary organisations is
drastically different than that suggested by the selective quotations of
Marxists, we need to address two more issues. One, the so-called
hierarchical nature of Bakunin's organisations and, two, their secret
nature. Taking the issue of hierarchy first, we can do no better than
quote Richard B. Saltman's summary of the internal organisation of these
groups:

> *"The association's 'single will,' Bakunin wrote, would be determined
> by 'laws' that every member 'helped to create,' or at a minimum
> 'equally approved' by 'mutual agreement.' This 'definite set of rules'
> was to be 'frequently renewed' in plenary sessions wherein each member
> had the 'duty to try and make his view prevail,' but then he must
> accept fully the decision of the majority. Thus the revolutionary
> association's 'rigorously conceived and prescribed plan,' implemented
> under the 'strictest discipline,' was in reality to be 'nothing more
> or less than the expression and direct outcome of the reciprocal
> commitment contracted by each of the members towards the others.'"*
> [**Op. Cit.**, p. 115]

While many anarchists would not totally agree with this set-up (although
we think that most supporters of the "Platform" would) all would agree
that it is **not** hierarchical. If anything, it appears quite
democratic in nature. Moreover, comments in Bakunin's letters to other
Alliance members support the argument that his revolutionary
associations were more democratic in nature than Marxists suggest. In a
letter to a Spanish comrade we find him suggesting that *"all [Alliance]
groups. . . should. . . from now on accept new members not by majority
vote, but unanimously."* [

Op. Cit., p. 386] In a letter to Italian members of the IWMA he argued
that in Geneva the Alliance did not resort to *"secret plots and
intrigues."* Rather:

> *"Everything was done in broad daylight, openly, for everyone to see .
> . . The Alliance had regular weekly open meetings and everyone was
> urged to participate in the discussions . . . The old procedure where
> members sat and passively listened to speakers talking down to them
> from their pedestal was discarded.*

> *"It was established that all meetings be conducted by informal
> round-table conversational discussions in which everybody felt free to
> participate: not to be talked **at**, but to exchange views."* [**Op.
> Cit.**, pp. 405-6]

Moreover, we find Bakunin being out-voted within the Alliance, hardly
what we would expect if they **were** top-down dictatorships run by him
as Marxists claim. The historian T.R. Ravindranathan indicates that
after the Alliance was founded *"Bakunin wanted the Alliance to become a
branch of the International [Worker's Association] and at the same time
preserve it as a secret society. The Italian and some French members
wanted the Alliance to be totally independent of the IWA and objected to
Bakunin's secrecy. Bakunin's view prevailed on the first question as he
succeeded in convincing the majority of the harmful effects of a rivalry
between the Alliance and the International. On the question of secrecy,
he gave way to his opponents."* [**Bakunin and the Italians**, p. 83]

Moreover, if Bakunin **did** seek to create a centralised, hierarchical
organisation, as Marxists claim, he did not do a good job. We find him
complaining that the Madrid Alliance was breaking up (*"The news of the
dissolution of the Alliance in Spain saddened Bakunin. he intensified
his letter-writing to Alliance members whom he trusted . . . He tried to
get the Spaniards to reverse their decision"* [Juan Gomez Casa,
**Anarchist Organisation**, pp. 37-8]). While the "Bakuninist" Spanish
and Swiss sections of the IWMA sent delegates to its infamous Hague
congress, the "Bakuninist" Italian section did not. Of course, Marxists
could argue that these facts show Bakunin's cunning nature, but the more
obvious explanation is that Bakunin did not create a hierarchical
organisation with himself at the top.

The evidence suggests that the Alliance *"was not a compulsory or
authoritarian body."* In Spain, it *"acted independently and was
prompted by purely local situations. The copious correspondence between
Bakunin and his friends . . . was at all times motivated by the idea of
offering advice, persuading, and clarifying. It was never written in a
spirit of command, because that was not his style, nor would it have
been accepted as such by his associates."* Moreover, there *"is no trace
or shadow or hierarchical organisation in a letter from Bakunin to Mora
. . . On the contrary, Bakunin advises 'direct' relations between
Spanish and Italian Comrades."* The Spanish comrades also wrote a
pamphlet which *"ridiculed the fable of orders from abroad."* [Casa,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 25 and p. 40] This is confirmed by George R. Esenwein
who argues that *"[w]hile it is true that Bakunin's direct intervention
during the early days of the International's development in Spain had
assured the pre-dominance of his influence in the various federations
and sections"* of the organisation, *"it cannot be said that he
manipulated it or otherwise used the Spanish Alliance as a tool for his
own subversive designs."* Thus, *"though the Alliance did exist in
Spain, the society did not bear any resemblance to the nefarious
organisation that the Marxists depicted."* [**Anarchist Ideology and the
Working Class Movement in Spain**, p. 42] Indeed, as Max Nettlau points
out, those Spaniards who did break with the Alliance were persuaded of
its *"hierarchical organisation . . . not by their own direct
observation, but by what they had been told about the conduct of the
organisation"* in other countries. [quoted by Casa, **Op. Cit.**, pp.
39-40]. In addition, if Bakunin **did** run the Alliance under his own
personal dictatorship we would expect it to change or dissolve upon his
death. However, *"the Spanish Alliance survived Bakunin, who died in
1876, yet with few exceptions it continued to function in much the same
way it had during Bakunin's lifetime."* [Esenwein, **Op. Cit.**, p. 43]

Moving on to the second issue, the question of why Bakunin favoured
secret organisation. At the time many states where despotic monarchies,
with little or no civil rights. As he argued, *"nothing but a secret
society would want to take this [arousing a revolution] on, for the
interests of the government and of the government classes would be
bitterly opposed to it."* [**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p.
188] For survival, Bakunin considered secrecy an essential. As Juan
Gomez Casas noted: *"In view of the difficulties of that period, Bakunin
believed that secret groups of convinced and absolutely trustworthy men
were safer and more effective. They would be able to place themselves at
the head of developments at critical moments, but only to inspire and to
clarify the issues."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 22] Even Marxists, faced with
dictatorial states, have organised in secret and as George R. Esenwein
points out, the *"claim that Bakunin's organisation scheme was not the
product of a 'hard-headed realism' cannot be supported in the light of
the experiences of the Spanish Alliancists. It is beyond doubt that
their adherence to Bakunin's program greatly contributed to the FRE's
[Spanish section of the First International] ability to flourish during
the early part of the 1870s and to survive the harsh circumstances of
repression in the period 1874-1881."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 224f] So
Bakunin's personal experiences in Tsarist Russia and other illiberal
states shaped his ideas on how revolutionaries should organise (and let
us not forget that he had been imprisoned in the Peter and Paul prison
for his activities).

This is not to suggest that all of Bakunin's ideas on the role and
nature of anarchist groups are accepted by anarchists today. Most
anarchists would reject Bakunin's arguments for secrecy, for example
(particularly as secrecy cannot help but generate an atmosphere of
deceit and, potentially, manipulation). Anarchists remember that
anarchism did not spring fully formed and complete from Bakunin's (or
any other individual's) head. Rather it was developed over time and by
many individuals, inspired by many different experiences and movements.
As such, anarchists recognise that Bakunin was inconsistent in some
ways, as would be expected from a theorist breaking new ground, and this
applies to his ideas on how anarchist groups should work within and the
role they should play in popular movements. Most of his ideas are valid,
once we place them into context, some are not. Anarchists embrace the
valid ones and voice their opposition to the others.

In summary, any apparent contradiction between the "public" and
"private" Bakunin disappears once we place his comments into context
within both the letters he wrote and his overall political theory. As
Brian Morris argues, those who argue that Bakunin was in favour of
despotism only come to *"these conclusions by an incredible distortion
of the substance of what Bakunin was trying to convey in his letters to
Richard and Nechaev"* and *"[o]nly the most jaundiced scholar, or one
blinded by extreme antipathy towards Bakunin or anarchism, could
interpret these words as indicating that Bakunin conception of a secret
society implied a revolutionary dictatorship in the Jacobin sense, still
less a 'despotism'"* [**Bakunin: The Philosophy of Freedom**, p. 144 and
p. 149]

J.3.8 What is anarcho-syndicalism?
----------------------------------

Anarcho-syndicalism (as mentioned in [section A.3.2](secA3.html#seca32))
is a form of anarchism which applies itself (primarily) to creating
industrial unions organised in an anarchist manner, using anarchist
tactics (such as direct action) to create a free society. To quote *"The
Principles of Revolutionary Syndicalism"* of the **International Workers
Association**:

> *"Revolutionary Syndicalism is that movement of the working classes
> founded on the basis of class war, which strives for the union of
> manual and intellectual workers in economic fighting organisations, in
> order to prepare for and realise in practice their liberation from the
> yoke of wage-slavery and state oppression. Its goal is the
> reorganisation of social life on the basis of free communism through
> the collective revolutionary action of the working classes themselves.
> It takes the view that only the economic organisations of the
> proletariat are appropriate for the realisation of this task and turns
> therefore to the workers in their capacity as producers and generators
> of social value, in opposition to the modern political labour parties,
> which for constructive economic purpose do not come into
> consideration."* [quoted by Wayne Thorpe, **"The Workers
> Themselves"**, p. 322]

The word *"syndicalism"* is an English rendering of the French for
*"revolutionary trade unionism"* (*"syndicalisme revolutionarie"*). In
the 1890s many anarchists in France started to work within the trade
union movement, radicalising it from within. As the ideas of autonomy,
direct action, the general strike and political independence of unions
which where associated with the French **Confederation Generale du
Travail** (CGT, or General Confederation of Labour) spread across the
world (partly through anarchist contacts, partly through word of mouth
by non-anarchists who were impressed by the militancy of the CGT), the
word "syndicalism" was used to describe movements inspired by the
example of the CGT. Thus "syndicalism," "revolutionary syndicalism" and
"anarcho-syndicalism" all basically mean "revolutionary unionism" (the
term "industrial unionism" used by the IWW essentially means the same
thing).

The main difference is between revolutionary syndicalism and
anarcho-syndicalism, with anarcho-syndicalism arguing that revolutionary
syndicalism concentrates too much on the workplace and, obviously,
stressing the anarchist roots and nature of syndicalism more than the
former. In addition, anarcho-syndicalism is often considered compatible
with supporting a specific anarchist organisation to complement the work
of the revolutionary unions. Revolutionary syndicalism, in contrast,
argues that the syndicalist unions are sufficient in themselves to
create libertarian socialism and rejects anarchist groups along with
political parties. However, the dividing line can be unclear and, just
to complicate things even more, **some** syndicalists support political
parties and are not anarchists (there have been a few Marxist
syndicalists, for example) but we will ignore these in our discussion.
We will use the term syndicalism to describe what each branch has in
common.

The syndicalist union is a self-managed industrial union (see [section
J.5.2](secJ5.html#secj52)) which is committed to **direct action** and
refuses links with political parties, even labour or "socialist" ones. A
key idea of syndicalism is that of union autonomy -- the idea that the
workers' organisation is capable of changing society by its own efforts,
that it must control its own fate and not be controlled by any party or
other outside group (including anarchist federations). This is sometimes
termed **"workerism"** (from the French **"ouverierisme"**), i.e.
workers' control of the class struggle and their own organisations.
Rather than being a cross-class organisation like the political party,
the union is a **class** organisation and is so uniquely capable of
representing working class aspirations, interests and hopes. *"The
**syndicat**,"* Emile Pouget wrote, *"groups together those who work
against those who live by human exploitation: it brings together
interests and not opinions."* [quoted by Jeremy Jennings, **Syndicalism
in France**, pp. 30-1] There is, then, *"no place in it for anybody who
was not a worker. Professional middle class intellectuals who provided
both the leadership and the ideas of the socialist political movement,
were therefore at a discount. As a consequence the syndicalist movement
was, and saw itself as, a purely working class form of socialism."*
Syndicalism *"appears as the great heroic movement of the proletariat,
the first movement which took seriously"* the argument *"that the
emancipation of the working class must be the task of labour unaided by
middle class intellectuals or by politicians and aimed to establish a
genuinely working class socialism and culture, free of all bourgeois
taints. For the syndicalists, the workers were to be everything, the
rest, nothing."* [Geoffrey Ostergaard, **The Tradition of Workers'
Control**, p. 38]

Therefore syndicalism is *"consciously anti-parliamentary and
anti-political. It focuses not only on the realities of power but also
on the key problem of achieving its disintegration. Real power in
syndicalist doctrine is economic power. The way to dissolve economic
power is to make every worker powerful, thereby eliminating power as a
social privilege. Syndicalism thus ruptures all the ties between the
workers and the state. It opposes political action, political parties,
and any participant in political elections. Indeed it refuses to operate
in the framework of the established order and the state.* It *"turns to
direct action -- strikes, sabotage, obstruction, and above all, the
revolutionary general strike. Direct action not only perpetuates the
militancy of the workers and keeps alive the spirit of revolt, but
awakens in them a greater sense of individual initiative. By continual
pressure, direct action tests the strength of the capitalist system at
all times and presumably in its most important arena -- the factory,
where ruled and ruler seem to confront each other most directly."*
[Murray Bookchin, **The Spanish Anarchists**, p. 121]

This does not mean that syndicalism is "apolitical" in the sense of
ignoring totally all political issues. This is a Marxist myth.
Syndicalists follow other anarchists by being opposed to all forms of
authoritarian/capitalist politics but do take a keen interest in
"political" questions as they relate to the interests of working people.
Thus they do not "ignore" the state, or the role of the state. Indeed,
syndicalists (like all libertarians) are well aware that the state
exists to protect capitalist property and power and that we need to
combat it as well as fight for economic improvements. In short,
syndicalism is deeply political in the widest sense of the word, aiming
for a radical change in political, economic and social conditions and
institutions. Moreover, it is political in the narrower sense of being
aware of political issues and aiming for political reforms along with
economic ones. It is only "apolitical" when it comes to supporting
political parties and using bourgeois political institutions, a position
which is "political" in the wider sense of course! This is obviously
identical to the usual anarchist position (see [section
J.2.10](secJ2.html#secj210)).

Which indicates an importance difference between syndicalism and trade
unionism. Syndicalism aims at changing society rather than just working
within it. Thus syndicalism is revolutionary while trade unionism is
reformist. For syndicalists the union *"has a double aim: with tireless
persistence, it must pursue betterment of the working class's current
conditions. But, without letting themselves become obsessed with this
passing concern, the workers should take care to make possible and
imminent the essential act of comprehensive emancipation: the
expropriation of capital."* Thus syndicalism aims to win reforms by
direct action and by this struggle bring the possibilities of a
revolution, via the general strike, closer. Indeed any *"desired
improvement is to be wrested directly from the capitalist"* and *"must
always represent a reduction in capitalist privileges and be a partial
expropriation."* [Emile Pouget, **No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 2, p. 71
and p. 73] Thus Emma Goldman:

> *"Of course Syndicalism, like the old trade unions, fights for
> immediate gains, but it is not stupid enough to pretend that labour
> can expect humane conditions from inhumane economic arrangements in
> society. Thus it merely wrests from the enemy what it can force him to
> yield; on the whole, however, Syndicalism aims at, and concentrates
> its energies upon, the complete overthrow of the wage system.*

> *"Syndicalism goes further: it aims to liberate labour from every
> institution that has not for its object the free development of
> production for the benefit of all humanity. In short, the ultimate
> purpose of Syndicalism is to reconstruct society from its present
> centralised, authoritative and brutal state to one based upon the
> free, federated grouping of the workers along lines of economic and
> social liberty.*

> *"With this object in view, Syndicalism works in two directions:
> first, by undermining the existing institutions; secondly, by
> developing and educating the workers and cultivating their spirit of
> solidarity, to prepare them for a full, free life, when capitalism
> shall have been abolished.*

> *"Syndicalism is, in essence, the economic expression of Anarchism."*
> [**Red Emma Speaks**, p. 91]

Which, in turn, explains why syndicalist unions are structured in such
an obviously libertarian way. It reflects the importance of empowering
every worker by creating a union which is decentralised and
self-managed, a union which every member plays a key role in determining
its policy and activities. Participation ensures that the union becomes
a *"school for the will"* (to use Pouget's expression) and allows
working people to learn how to govern themselves and so do without the
state. After the revolution, the union can easily be transformed into
the body by which production is organised. The aim of the union is
workers' self-management of production and distribution after the
revolution, a self-management which the union is based upon in the here
and now. The syndicalist union is seen as *"the germ of the Socialist
economy of the future, the elementary school of Socialism in general"*
and we need to *"plant these germs while there is yet time and bring
them to the strongest possible development, so as to make the task of
the coming social revolution easier and to insure its permanence."*
[Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, p. 59]

Thus, as can be seen, syndicalism differs from trade unionism in its
structure, its methods and its aims. Its structure, method and aims are
distinctly anarchist. Little wonder leading syndicalist theorist Fernand
Pelloutier argued that the trade union, *"governing itself along
anarchic lines,"* must become *"a practical schooling in anarchism."*
[**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 2, p. 55 and p. 57] In addition, most
anarcho-syndicalists support community organisations and struggle
alongside the more traditional industry based approach usually
associated within syndicalism. While we have concentrated on the
industrial side here (simply because this is a key aspect of
syndicalism) we must stress that syndicalism can and does lend itself to
community struggles. It is a myth that anarcho-syndicalism ignores
community struggles and organisation, as can be seen from the history of
the Spanish CNT for example (see [section J.5.1](secJ5.html#secj51)).

It must be stressed that a syndicalist union is open to all workers
regardless of their political opinions (or lack of them). The union
exists to defend workers' interests as workers and is organised in an
anarchist manner to ensure that their interests are fully expressed.
This means that an syndicalist organisation is different from an
organisation of syndicalists. What makes the union syndicalist is its
structure, aims and methods. Obviously things can change (that is true
of any organisation which has a democratic structure) but that is a test
revolutionary and anarcho-syndicalists welcome and do not shirk from. As
the union is self-managed from below up, its militancy and political
content is determined by its membership. As Pouget put it, the union
*"offers employers a degree of resistance in geometric proportion with
the resistance put up by its members."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 71] That is
why syndicalists ensure that power rests in the members of the union.

Syndicalists have two main approaches to building revolutionary unions
-- **"dual unionism"** and **"boring from within."** The former approach
involves creating new, syndicalist, unions, in opposition to the
existing trade unions. This approach was historically and is currently
the favoured way of building syndicalist unions (American, Italian,
Spanish, Swedish and numerous other syndicalists built their own union
federations in the heyday of syndicalism between 1900 and 1920). "Boring
from within" simply means working within the existing trade unions in
order to reform them and make them syndicalist. This approach was
favoured by French and British syndicalists, plus a few American ones.
However, these two approaches are not totally in opposition. Many of the
dual unions were created by syndicalists who had first worked within the
existing trade unions. Once they got sick of the bureaucratic union
machinery and of trying to reform it, they split from the reformist
unions and formed new, revolutionary, ones. Similarly, dual unionists
will happily support trade unionists in struggle and often be "two
carders" (i.e. members of both the trade union and the syndicalist one).
See [section J.5.3](secJ5.html#secj53) for more on anarchist
perspectives on existing trades unions.

Syndicalists no matter what tactics they prefer, favour autonomous
workplace organisations, controlled from below. Both tend to favour
syndicalists forming networks of militants to spread
anarchist/syndicalist ideas within the workplace. Indeed, such a network
(usually called *"Industrial Networks"* -- see [section
J.5.4](secJ5.html#secj54) for more details) would be an initial stage
and essential means for creating syndicalist unions. These groups would
encourage syndicalist tactics and rank and file organisation during
struggles and so create the potential for building syndicalist unions as
libertarian ideas spread and are seen to work.

Syndicalists think that such an organisation is essential for the
successful creation of an anarchist society as it builds the new world
in the shell of the old, making a sizeable majority of the population
aware of anarchism and the benefits of anarchist forms of organisation
and struggle. Moreover, they argue that those who reject syndicalism
*"because it believes in a permanent organisation of workers"* and urge
*"workers to organise 'spontaneously' at the very moment of revolution"*
promote a *"con-trick, designed to leave 'the revolutionary movement,'
so called, in the hands of an educated class . . . [or] so-called
'revolutionary party' . . . [which] means that the workers are only
expected to come in the fray when there's any fighting to be done, and
in normal times leave theorising to the specialists or students."*
[Albert Meltzer, **Anarchism: Arguments for and Against**, pp. 82-3] A
self-managed society can only be created by self-managed means, and as
only the practice of self-management can ensure its success, the need
for libertarian popular organisations is essential. Syndicalism is seen
as the key way working people can prepare themselves for revolution and
learn to direct their own lives. In this way syndicalism creates a true
politics of the people, one that does not create a parasitic class of
politicians and bureaucrats (*"We wish to emancipate ourselves, to free
ourselves"*, Pelloutier wrote, *"but we do not wish to carry out a
revolution, to risk our skin, to put Pierre the socialist in the place
of Paul the radical"* [quoted by Jeremy Jennings, **Syndicalism in
France**, p. 17]).

This does not mean that syndicalists do not support organisations
spontaneously created by workers' in struggle (such as workers'
councils, factory committees and so on). Far from it. Syndicalists have
played important roles in these kinds of organisation (as can be seen
from the Russian Revolution, the factory occupations in Italy in 1920,
the British Shop Steward movement and so on). This is because
syndicalism acts as a catalyst to militant labour struggles and serves
to counteract class-collaborationist tendencies by union bureaucrats and
"socialist" politicians. Part of this activity must involve encouraging
self-managed organisations where none exist and so syndicalists support
and encourage all such spontaneous movements, hoping that they turn into
the basis of a syndicalist union movement or a successful revolution.
Moreover, most anarcho-syndicalists recognise that it is unlikely that
every worker, nor even the majority, will be in syndicalist unions
before a revolutionary period starts. This means **new** organisations,
created spontaneously by workers in struggle, would have to be the
framework of social struggle and the post-capitalist society rather than
the syndicalist union as such. All the syndicalist union can do is
provide a practical example of how to organise in a libertarian way
within capitalism and statism and support spontaneously created
organisations.

It should be noted that while the term "syndicalism" dates from the
1890s in France, the ideas associated with these names have a longer
history. Anarcho-syndicalist ideas have developed independently in many
different countries and times. Indeed, anyone familiar with Bakunin's
work will quickly see that much of his ideas prefigure what was latter
to become known by these terms. Similarly, we find that the American
**International Working People's Association** organised by anarchists
in the 1880s *"anticipated by some twenty years the doctrine of
anarcho-syndicalism"* and *"[m]ore than merely resembling the 'Chicago
Idea' [of the **IWPA**], the IWW's principles of industrial unionism
resulted from the conscious efforts of anarchists . . . who continued to
affirm . . . the principles which the Chicago anarchists gave their
lives defending."* [Salvatore Salerno, **Red November, Black November**,
p. 51 and p. 79] See [section H.2.8](secH2.html#sech28) for a discussion
of why Marxist claims that syndicalism and anarchism are unrelated are
obviously false.

(We must stress that we are **not** arguing that Bakunin "invented"
syndicalism. Far from it. Rather, we are arguing that Bakunin expressed
ideas already developed in working class circles and became, if you
like, the "spokesperson" for these libertarian tendencies in the labour
movement as well as helping to clarifying these ideas in many ways. As
Emma Goldman argued, the *"feature which distinguishes Syndicalism from
most philosophies is that it represents the revolutionary philosophy of
labour conceived and born in the actual struggle and experience of
workers themselves -- not in universities, colleges, libraries, or in
the brain of some scientists."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 88-9] This applies
equally to Bakunin and the first International).

Given this, we must also point out here that while syndicalism has
anarchist roots, not all syndicalists are anarchists. A few Marxists
have been syndicalists, particularly in the USA where the followers of
Daniel De Leon supported Industrial Unionism and helped form the
**Industrial Workers of the World**. The Irish socialist James Connelly
was also a Marxist-syndicalist, as was Big Bill Haywood who was a leader
of the IWW and a leading member of the US Socialist Party.
Marxist-syndicalists are generally in favour of more centralisation
within syndicalist unions (the IWW was by far the most centralised
syndicalist union) and often argue that a political party is required to
complement the work of the union. Needless to say, anarcho-syndicalists
disagree, arguing that centralisation kills the spirit of revolt and
weakens a unions real strength and that political parties are both
ineffective when compared to militant unionism and a constant source of
corruption. [Rocker, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 55-60] So not all syndicalists
are anarchists, leading those anarchists who are syndicalists often use
the term "anarcho-syndicalism" to indicate that they are both anarchists
and syndicalists as well as to stress the libertarian roots and
syndicalism. In addition, not all anarchists are syndicalists. We
discuss the reasons for this in the [next section](secJ3.html#secj39).

For more information on anarcho-syndicalist ideas, Rudolf Rocker's
**Anarcho-Syndicalism** is still the classic introduction to the
subject. The collection of articles by British syndicalist Tom Brown
entitled **Syndicalism** is also worth reading. Daniel Guerin's **No
Gods, No Masters** contains articles by leading French syndicalist
thinkers.

J.3.9 Why are many anarchists not anarcho-syndicalists?
-------------------------------------------------------

Before discussing why many anarchists are not anarcho-syndicalists, we
must clarify a few points first. Let us be clear, non-syndicalist
anarchists usually support the ideas of workplace organisation and
struggle, of direct action, of solidarity and so on. Thus most
non-syndicalist anarchists do not disagree with anarcho-syndicalists on
these issues. Indeed, many even support the creation of syndicalist
unions. Thus many anarcho-communists like Alexander Berkman, Errico
Malatesta and Emma Goldman supported anarcho-syndicalist organisations
and even, like Malatesta, helped form such revolutionary union
federations (namely, the FORA in Argentina) and urged anarchists to take
a leading role in organising unions. So when we use the term
"non-syndicalist anarchist" we are not suggesting that these anarchists
reject all aspects of anarcho-syndicalism. Rather, they are critical of
certain aspects of anarcho-syndicalist ideas while supporting the rest.

In the past, a few communist-anarchists **did** oppose the struggle for
improvements within capitalism as "reformist." However, these were few
and far between and with the rise of anarcho-syndicalism in the 1890s,
the vast majority of communist-anarchists recognised that only by
encouraging the struggle for reforms would people take them seriously as
this showed the benefits of anarchist tactics and organisation in
practice so ensuring anarchist ideas grow in influence. Thus syndicalism
was a healthy response to the rise of "abstract revolutionarism" that
infected the anarchist movement during the 1880s, particularly in France
and Italy. Thus communist-anarchists agree with syndicalists on the
importance of struggling for and winning reforms and improvements within
capitalism by direct action and solidarity.

Similarly, anarchists like Malatesta also recognised the importance of
mass organisations like unions. As he argued, *"to encourage popular
organisations of all kinds is the logical consequence of our basic ideas
. . . An authoritarian party, which aims at capturing power to impose
its ideas, has an interest in the people remaining an amorphous mass,
unable to act for themselves and therefore easily dominated . . . But we
anarchists do not want to **emancipate** the people; we want the people
to **emancipate themselves** . . . we want the new way of life to emerge
from the body of the people and correspond to the state of their
development and advance as they advance."* [**Errico Malatesta: His Life
and Ideas**, p. 90] This can only occur when there are popular
organisations, like trade unions, within which people can express
themselves, come to common agreements and act. Moreover, these
organisations must be autonomous, self-governing, be libertarian in
nature **and** be independent of all parties and organisations
(including anarchist ones). The similarity with anarcho-syndicalist
ideas is striking.

So why, if this is the case, are many anarchists not
anarcho-syndicalists? There are two main reasons for this. First, there
is the question of whether unions are, by their nature, revolutionary
organisations. Second, whether syndicalist unions are sufficient to
create anarchy by themselves. We will discuss each in turn.

As can be seen from any country, the vast majority of unions are deeply
reformist and bureaucratic in nature. They are centralised, with power
resting at the top in the hands of officials. This suggests that in
themselves unions are not revolutionary. As Malatesta argued, this is to
be expected for *"all movements founded on material and immediate
interests (and a mass working class movement cannot be founded on
anything else), if the ferment, the drive and the unremitting efforts of
men [and women] of ideas struggling and making sacrifices for an ideal
future are lacking, tend to adapt themselves to circumstances, foster a
conservative spirit, and fear of change in those who manage to improve
their conditions, and often end up by creating new privileged classes
and serving to support and consolidate the system one would want to
destroy."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 113-4]

If we look at the **role** of the union within capitalist society we see
that in order for it to work, it must offer a reason for the boss to
recognise and negotiate with it. This means that the union must be able
to offer the boss something in return for any reforms it gets, namely
labour discipline. In return for an improvement in wages or conditions,
the union must be able to get workers to agree to submit to the
contracts the union signs with their boss. In other words, they must be
able to control their members -- stop them fighting the boss -- if they
are to have anything with which to bargain with. This results in the
union becoming a third force in industry, with interests separate than
the workers which it claims to represent. The role of unionism as a
seller of labour power means that it often has to make compromises,
compromises it has to make its members agree to. This necessities a
tendency for power to be taken from the rank and file of the unions and
centralised in the hands of officials at the top of the organisation.
This ensures that *"the workers organisation becomes what it must
perforce be in a capitalist society -- a means not of refusing to
recognise and overthrowing the bosses, but simply for hedging round and
limiting the bosses' power."* [Errico Malatesta, **The Anarchist
Revolution**, p. 29]

Anarcho-syndicalists are aware of this problem. That is why their unions
are decentralised, self-managed and organised from the bottom up in a
federal manner. As Durruti argued:

> *"No anarchists in the union committees unless at the ground level. In
> these committees, in case of conflict with the boss, the militant is
> forced to compromise to arrive at an agreement. The contracts and
> activities which come from being in this position, push the militant
> towards bureaucracy. Conscious of this risk, we do not wish to run it.
> Our role is to analyse from the bottom the different dangers which can
> beset a union organisation like ours. No militant should prolong his
> job in committees, beyond the time allotted to him. No permanent and
> indispensable people."* [quoted by Abel Paz, **Durruti: The People
> Armed**, p. 183]

However, structure is rarely enough in itself to undermine the
bureaucratic tendencies created by the role of unions in the capitalist
economy. While such libertarian structures can slow down the tendency
towards bureaucracy, non-syndicalist anarchists argue that they cannot
stop it. They point to the example of the French CGT which had become
reformist by 1914 (the majority of other syndicalist unions were crushed
by fascism or communism before they had a chance to develop fully). Even
the Spanish CNT (by far the most successful anarcho-syndicalist union)
suffered from the problem of reformism, causing the anarchists in the
union to organise the FAI in 1927 to combat it (which it did, very
successfully). According to Jose Peirats, the *"participation of the
anarchist group in the mass movement CNT helped to ensure that CNT's
revolutionary nature."* This indicates the validity of Malatesta's
arguments concerning the need for anarchists to remain distinct of the
unions organisationally while working within them -- just as Peirat's
comment that *"[b]linkered by participation in union committees, the FAI
became incapable of a wider vision"* indicates the validity of
Malatesta's warnings against anarchists taking positions of
responsibility in unions! [**Anarchists in the Spanish Revolution**, p.
241 and pp. 239-40]

Moreover, even the structure of syndicalist unions can cause problems:
*"In modelling themselves structurally on the bourgeois economy, the
syndicalist unions tended to become the organisational counterparts of
the very centralised apparatus they professed to oppose. By pleading the
need to deal effectively with the tightly knit bourgeoisie and state
machinery, reformist leaders in syndicalist unions often had little
difficulty in shifting organisational control from the bottom to the
top."* [Murray Bookchin, **The Spanish Anarchists**, p. 123]

In addition, as the syndicalist unions grow in size and influence their
initial radicalism is usually watered-down. This is because, *"since the
unions must remain open to all those who desire to win from the masters
better conditions of life, whatever their opinions may be . . ., they
are naturally led to moderate their aspirations, first so that they
should not frighten away those they wish to have with them, and because,
in proportion as numbers increase, those with ideas who have initiated
the movement remain buried in a majority that is only occupied with the
petty interests of the moment."* [Errico Malatesta, **Anarchism and
Syndicalism**, p. 150] Which, ironically given that increased
self-management is seen as a way of reducing tendencies towards
bureaucracy, means that syndicalist unions have a tendency towards
reformism simply because the majority of their members will be
non-revolutionary if the union grows in size in non-revolutionary times
(as can be seen from the development of the Swedish syndicalist union
the SAC).

So, if the union's militant strategy succeeds in winning reforms, more
and more workers will join it. This influx of non-libertarians must, in
a self-managed organisation, exert a de-radicalising influence on the
unions politics and activities in non-revolutionary times. The
syndicalist would argue that the process of struggling for reforms
combined with the educational effects of participation and
self-management will reduce this influence and, of course, they are
right. However, non-syndicalist anarchists would counter this by arguing
that the libertarian influences generated by struggle and participation
would be strengthened by the work of anarchist groups and, without this
work, the de-radicalising influences would outweigh the libertarian
ones. In addition, the success of a syndicalist union must be partly
determined by the general level of class struggle. In periods of great
struggle, the membership will be more radical than in quiet periods and
it is quiet periods which cause the most difficulties for syndicalist
unions. With a moderate membership the revolutionary aims and tactics of
the union will also become moderate. As one academic writer on French
syndicalism put it, syndicalism *"was always based on workers acting in
the economic arena to better their conditions, build class
consciousness, and prepare for revolution. The need to survive and build
a working-class movement had always forced syndicalists to adapt
themselves to the exigencies of the moment."* [Barbara Mitchell,
*"French Syndicalism: An Experiment in Practical Anarchism"*, pp. 25-41,
**Revolutionary Syndicalism**, Marcel van der Linden and Wayne Thorpe
(eds.), p. 25]

As can be seen from the history of many syndicalist unions (and,
obviously, mainstream unions too) this seems to be the case -- the
libertarian tendencies are outweighed by the de-radicalising ones. This
can also be seen from the issue of collective bargaining:

> *"The problem of collective bargaining foreshadowed the difficulty of
> maintaining syndicalist principles in developed capitalist societies.
> Many organisations within the international syndicalist movement
> initially repudiated collective agreements with employers on the
> grounds that by a collaborative sharing of responsibility for work
> discipline, such agreements would expand bureaucratisation within the
> unions, undermine revolutionary spirit, and restrict the freedom of
> action that workers were always to maintain against the class enemy.
> From an early date, however, sometimes after a period of suspicion and
> resistance, many workers gave up this position. In the early decades
> of the century it became clear that to maintain or gain a mass
> membership, syndicalist unions had to accept collective bargaining."*
> [Marcel van der Linden and Wayne Thorpe, **Op. Cit.**, p. 19]

Thus, for most anarchists, *"the Trade Unions are, by their very nature
reformist and never revolutionary. The revolutionary spirit must be
introduced, developed and maintained by the constant actions of
revolutionaries who work from within their ranks as well as from
outside, but it cannot be the normal, natural definition of the Trade
Unions function."* [Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**,
p. 117]

This does not mean that anarchists should not work within labour
organisations. Nor does it mean rejecting anarcho-syndicalist unions as
an anarchist tactic. Far from it. Rather it is a case of recognising
these organisations for what they are, reformist organisations which are
not an end in themselves but one (albeit, important) means of preparing
the way for the achievement of anarchism. Neither does it mean that
anarchists should not try to make labour organisations as anarchistic as
possible or have anarchist objectives. Working within the labour
movement (at the rank and file level, of course) is essential to gain
influence for anarchist ideas, just as is working with unorganised
workers. But this does not mean that the unions are revolutionary by
their very nature, as syndicalism implies. As history shows, and as
syndicalists themselves are aware, the vast majority of unions are
reformist. Non-syndicalist anarchists argue there is a reason for that
and syndicalist unions are not immune to these tendencies just because
they call themselves revolutionary. Due to these tendencies,
non-syndicalist anarchists stress the need to organise as anarchists
first and foremost in order to influence the class struggle and
encourage the creation of autonomous workplace and community
organisations to fight that struggle. Rather than fuse the anarchist and
working class movement, non-syndicalist anarchists stress the importance
of anarchists organising as anarchists to influence the working class
movement.

All this does not mean that purely anarchist organisations or individual
anarchists cannot become reformist. Of course they can (just look at the
Spanish FAI which along with the CNT co-operated with the state during
the Spanish Revolution). However, unlike syndicalist unions, the
anarchist organisation is not pushed towards reformism due to its role
within society. That is an important difference -- the institutional
factors are not present for the anarchist federation as they are for the
syndicalist union federation.

The second reason why many anarchists are not anarcho-syndicalists is
the question of whether syndicalist unions are sufficient in themselves
to create anarchy. Pierre Monatte, a French syndicalist, argued that
*"Syndicalism, as the [CGT's] Congress of Amiens proclaimed in 1906, is
sufficient unto itself"* as *"the working class, having at last attained
majority, means to be self-sufficient and to rely on no-one else for its
emancipation."* [**The Anarchist Reader**, p. 219]

This idea of self-sufficiency means that the anarchist and the
syndicalist movement must be fused into one, with syndicalism taking the
role of both anarchist group and labour union. Thus a key difference
between anarcho-syndicalists and other anarchists is over the question
of the need for a specifically anarchist organisation. While most
anarchists are sympathetic to anarcho-syndicalism, few totally subscribe
to anarcho-syndicalist ideas in their pure form. This is because, in its
pure form, syndicalism rejects the idea of anarchist groups and instead
considers the union as **the** focal point of social struggle and
anarchist activism. However, an anarcho-syndicalist may support a
specific anarchist federation to work within the union and outside.

So anarchists critical of anarcho-syndicalism are also active in the
labour movement, working with the rank and file while keeping their own
identity as anarchists and organising as anarchists. Thus Malatesta:
*"In the past I deplored that the comrades isolated themselves from the
working-class movement. Today I deplore that many of us, falling into
the contrary extreme, let themselves be swallowed up in the same
movement."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 225] In the eyes of other anarchists
anarcho-syndicalism in its "pure" (revolutionary syndicalist) form makes
the error of confusing the anarchist and union movement and so ensures
that the resulting movement can do neither work well: *"Every fusion or
confusion between the anarchist movement and the trade union movement
ends, either in rendering the later unable to carry out its specific
task or by weakening, distorting, or extinguishing the anarchist
spirit."* [Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 123]

Most anarchists agree with Malatesta when he argued that *"anarchists
must not want the Trade Unions to be anarchist, but they must act within
their ranks in favour of anarchist aims, as individuals, as groups and
as federations of groups. . . [I]n the situation as it is, and
recognising that the social development of one's workmates is what it
is, the anarchist groups should not expect the workers' organisation to
act as if they were anarchist, but should make every effort to induce
them to approximate as much as possible to the anarchist method."*
[**Op. Cit.**, pp. 124-5] Given that it appears to be the case that
labour unions **are** by nature reformist, they cannot be expected to be
enough in themselves when creating a free society. Hence the need for
anarchists to organise **as anarchists** as well as alongside their
fellow workers as workers in order to spread anarchist ideas on tactics
and aims. This activity within existing unions does not necessarily mean
attempting to "reform" the union in a libertarian manner (although some
anarchists would support this approach). Rather it means working with
the rank and file of the unions and trying to create autonomous
workplace organisations, independent of the trade union bureaucracy and
organised in a libertarian way.

This involves creating anarchist organisations separate from but which
(in part) work within the labour movement for anarchist ends. Let us not
forget that the syndicalist organisation is the union, it organises all
workers regardless of their politics. A "union" which just let
anarchists join would not be a union, it would be an anarchist group
organised in the workplace. As anarcho-syndicalists themselves are
aware, an anarcho-syndicalist union is not the same as a union of
anarcho-syndicalists. How can we expect an organisation made up of
non-anarchists be totally anarchist? Due to this, tendencies always
appeared within syndicalist unions that were reformist and because of
this most anarchists, including many anarcho-syndicalists we must note,
argue that there is a need for anarchists to work within the rank and
file of the unions to spread their anarchist ideals and aims, and this
implies anarchist organisations separate from the labour movement, even
if that movement is based on syndicalist unions.

As Bakunin argued, the anarchist organisation *"is the necessary
complement to the International [i.e. the union federation]. But the
International and the Alliance [the anarchist federation], while having
the same ultimate aims, perform different functions. The International
endeavours to unify the working masses . . . regardless of nationality
or religious and political beliefs, into one compact body: the Alliance,
on the other hand, tries to give these masses a really revolutionary
direction."* This did not mean that the Alliance was imposing a foreign
theory onto the members of the unions, because the *"programs of one and
the other . . . differ only in the degree of their revolutionary
development . . . The program of the Alliance represents the fullest
unfolding of the International."* [**Bakunin on Anarchism**, p. 157] Nor
did it imply that anarchists think that unions and other forms of
popular organisations should be controlled by anarchists. Far from it!
Anarchists are the strongest supporters of the autonomy of all popular
organisations. As we indicated in [section J.3.6](secJ3.html#secj36),
anarchists desire to influence popular organisations by the strength of
our ideas within the rank and file and **not** by imposing our ideas on
them.

In addition to these major points of disagreement, there are minor ones
as well. For example, many anarchists dislike the emphasis syndicalists
place on the workplace and see *"in syndicalism a shift in focus from
the commune to the trade union, from all of the oppressed to the
industrial proletariat alone, from the streets to the factories, and, in
emphasis at least, from insurrection to the general strike."* [Bookchin,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 123] However, most anarcho-syndicalists are well aware
that life exists outside the workplace and so this disagreement is
largely one of emphasis. Similarly, many anarchists disagreed with the
early syndicalist argument that a general strike was enough to create a
revolution. They argued, with Malatesta in the forefront, that while a
general strike would be *"an excellent means for starting the social
revolution"* it would be wrong to think that it made *"armed
insurrection unnecessary"* since the *"first to die of hunger during a
general strike would not be the bourgeois, who dispose of all the
stores, but the workers."* In order for this **not** to occur, the
workers would need to *"take over production"* which are protected by
the police and armed forces and this meant *"insurrection."* [Malatesta,
**The Anarchist Reader**, pp. 223-4] Again, however, most modern
syndicalists accept this to be the case and see the *"expropriatory
general strike,"* in the words of French syndicalist Pierre Besnard, as
*"clearly **insurrectional.**"* [quoted by Vernon Richards, **Errico
Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 288] We mention this purely to
counter Leninist claims that syndicalists subscribe to the same ones
they did in the 1890s.

Despite our criticisms we should recognise that the difference between
anarchists and anarcho-syndicalists are slight and (often) just a case
of emphasis. Most anarchists support anarcho-syndicalist unions where
they exist and often take a key role in creating and organising them.
Similarly, many self-proclaimed anarcho-syndicalists also support
specific organisations of anarchists to work within and outwith the
syndicalist union. Syndicalist unions, where they exist, are far more
progressive than any other union. Not only are they democratic unions
and create an atmosphere where anarchist ideas are listened to with
respect but they also organise and fight in a way that breaks down the
divisions into leaders and led, doers and watchers. On its own this is
very good but not good enough. For non-syndicalist anarchists, the
missing element is an organisation winning support for anarchist ideas
and tactics both within revolutionary unions and everywhere else working
class people come together.

For a further information on the anarchist criticism of syndicalism, we
can suggest no better source than the writings of Errico Malatesta. The
books **Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas** and **The Anarchist
Revolution** contain Malatesta's viewpoints on anarchism, syndicalism
and how anarchists should work within the labour movement. **The
Anarchist Reader** contains the famous debate between the syndicalist
Pierre Monatte and Malatesta at the International Anarchist conference
in Amsterdam in 1907.
