J.1 ¿Están los anarquistas involucrados en luchas sociales?
===========================================================

Sí. El anarquismo, por encima de todo, es un movimiento que apunta no sólo a
analizar el mundo sino a cambiarlo. Por lo tanto los anarquistas apuntan a
participar en y fomentar las luchas sociales. Éstas incluyen los paros, marchas,
protestas, manifestaciones, boicots, okupaciones y más. Tales actividades
muestran que ***"el espíritu de la revuelta"*** está vivo y sano, que la gente
está pensando y actuando por sí misma y en contra de lo que las autoridades
desean que hagan. Esto, a los ojos de los anarquistas, juega un rol clave
ayudando a crear las semillas de la anarquía dentro del capitalismo.

Los anarquistas consideran que las tendencias socialistas se desarrollan dentro
de la sociedad cuando las personas ven los beneficios de la cooperación y
particularmente cuando se desarrolla la ayuda mutua dentro de las luchas contra
la autoridad, la opresión y la explotación. El anarquismo, como argumentaba
Kropotkin, *"se originaba en las luchas cotidianas."* [**Environment and
Revolution**, p.58] Por lo tanto, los anarquistas no ubican la anarquía de modo
abstracto contra el capitalismo sino que la ven como una tendencia dentro y contra el
sistema – una tendencia creada por la lucha y que puede ser desarrollada hasta tal
grado que pueda **reemplazar** las estructuras dominantes y las relaciones sociales
con otras nuevas, más liberadoras y más humanas. Esta perspectiva indica por qué
los anarquistas están involucrados en las luchas sociales - son una expresión de
estas tendencias dentro pero en contra del capitalismo, al que en algún momento
instancia puede reemplazar.

Sin embargo, hay otra razón por la cual los anarquistas están involucrados en
las luchas sociales - principalmente el hecho de que somos parte de los oprimidos y,
como otra gente oprimida, luchamos por nuestra libertad y por mejorar nuestra vida
aquí y ahora. No es en un mañana distante que queremos ver el fin de la opresión,
la explotación y la jerarquía. Es hoy, en nuestra propia vida, que los
anarquistas queremos ganar nuestra libertad, o como mínimo, mejorar nuestra
situación, reducir la opresión, la dominación y la explotación así como
incrementar la libertad individual ya que *"cada golpe dado a la institución
de la propiedad privada y al gobierno, cada exaltación de la conciencia humana,
cada disrrupción de las condiciones presentes, cada mentira desenmascarada,
cada parte de la actividad humana removida del control de las autoridades,
cada incremento del espíritu de solidaridad y de la iniciativa es un paso hacia
el Anarquismo."* [Errico Malatesta, **Towards Anarchism**, p. 75] Somos
conscientes de que a menudo fallamos en eso, pero el proceso mismo de lucha
puede ayudar a crear más aspectos libertarios en la sociedad:

> *"Cualquiera sean los resultados prácticos de la pelea por triunfos
> inmediatos, el mayor valor radica en la lucha misma. Porque así los
> trabajadores [y otras secciones oprimidas de la sociedad] aprenden que los
> intereses de los patrones son opuestos a los suyos y que no pueden mejorar
> sus condiciones, y mucho menos emanciparse por sí mismos, excepto uniéndose y
> volviéndose más fuertes que los patrones. Si triunfan y obtienen lo que
> demandaban, estarán mejor: ganarán más, trabajarán menos horas y tendrán más
> tiempo y energía para destinar a los asuntos que les interesan, e
> inmediatamente tendrán mayores demandas y mayores necesidades. Si no
> triunfan serán llevados al estudio de las razones de su fracaso y reconocerán la
> necesidad de una unidad más estrecha y una mayor actividad y, al final,
> entenderán que para hacer la victoria segura y definitiva, es necesario
> destruir al capitalismo. La causa revolucionaria, la causa de elevación
> moral y la emancipación de los trabajadores [y otras secciones oprimidas de
> la sociedad] deben beneficiarse por el hecho de que los trabajadores [y otras
> personas oprimidas] se unan y luchen por sus intereses."* [Malatesta, **Errico
> Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 191]

Por lo tanto, *"nosotros como anarquistas y trabajadores debemos incitar y
alentar"* a los trabajadores y a otros sectores oprimidos *"a luchar, y unirnos
en sus luchas"*. [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 190] Esto es por tres
razones. Primero, la lucha ayuda a generar ideas libertarias y movimientos que
podrían ayudar a las sociedades existentes a ser más anarquistas y menos
opresivas. Segundo, la lucha crea gente, movimientos y organizaciones que son
de naturaleza libertaria y que, potencialmente, pueden reemplazar al
capitalismo con una sociedad más humana. Tercero, porque los anarquistas son
parte de los oprimidos y por lo tanto tienen interés en tomar parte en y mostrar
solidaridad con las luchas y movimientos que pueden mejorar nuestras vidas aquí
y ahora (*"un daño a uno es un daño a todos"*).

Como veremos en la [sección J.2](secJ2.html) los anarquistas fomentan la acción directa
dentro de las luchas sociales tanto com discuten las ideas y teorías
anarquistas. Sin embargo, lo que es importante notar aquí es que la lucha social es
un signo de que las personas están pensando y actuando por sí mismas y
trabajando juntas para cambiar las cosas. Howard Zinn está en lo correcto:

> *"la desobediencia civil (...) **no** es nuestro problema. Nuestro problema
> es la **obediencia** civil. Nuestro problema es que un número de personas
> alrededor del mundo haya obedecido los dictados de los líderes de sus
> gobiernos y hayan ido a la guerra, y millones han sido asesinados debido a
> esta obediencia (...) Nuestro problema es que la gente es obediente alrededor
> de todo el mundo teniendo delante la pobreza, el hambre, la estupidez, la
> guerra y la crueldad. Nuestro problema es que las personas son obedientes
> mientras las cárceles están llenas de ladrones de poca monta, mientras los
> grandes ladrones conducen el país. Ese es nuestro problema."* [Howard Zinn,
> **Failure to Quit**, p. 45]

Therefore, social struggle is an important thing for anarchists and we
take part in it as much as we can. Moreover, anarchists do more than
just take part. We are fighting to get rid of the system that causes the
problems which people fight against. We explain anarchism to those who
are involved in struggle with us and seek to show the relevance of
anarchism to people's everyday lives through such struggles and the
popular organisations which they create. By so doing we try to
popularise the ideas and methods of anarchism, namely solidarity,
self-management and direct action.

Anarchists do not engage in abstract propaganda (become an anarchist,
wait for the revolution -- if we did that, in Malatesta's words, *"that
day would never come."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 195]). We know that our ideas
will only win a hearing and respect when we can show both their
relevance to people's lives in the here and now and show that an
anarchist world is both possible and desirable. In other words, social
struggle is the "school" of anarchism, the means by which people become
anarchists and anarchist ideas are applied in action. Hence the
importance of social struggle and anarchist participation within it.

Before discussing issues related to social struggle, it is important to
point out here that anarchists are interested in struggles against all
forms of oppression and do not limit ourselves to purely economic
issues. The hierarchical and exploitative nature of the capitalist
economy is only part of the story -- other forms of oppression are
needed in order to keep it going (not to mention those associated with
the state) and have resulted from its workings (in addition to those
inherited from previous hierarchical and class systems). Domination,
exploitation, hierarchy and oppression do not remain in the workplace.
They infest our homes, our friendships and our communities. They need to
be fought everywhere, not just in work.

Therefore, anarchists are convinced that human life and the struggle
against oppression cannot be reduced to mere money and, indeed, the
*"proclivity for economic reductionism is now actually obscurantist. It
not only shares in the bourgeois tendency to render material egotism and
class interest the centrepieces of history it also denigrates all
attempts to transcend this image of humanity as a mere economic being .
. . by depicting them as mere 'marginalia' at best, as 'well-intentioned
middle-class ideology' at worse, or sneeringly, as 'diversionary,'
'utopian,' and 'unrealistic' . . . Capitalism, to be sure, did not
create the 'economy' or 'class interest,' but it subverted all human
traits -- be they speculative thought, love, community, friendship, art,
or self-governance -- with the authority of economic calculation and the
rule of quantity. Its 'bottom line' is the balance sheet's sum and its
basic vocabulary consists of simple numbers."* [Murray Bookchin, **The
Modern Crisis**, pp. 125-126]

In other words, issues such as freedom, justice, individual dignity,
quality of life and so on cannot be reduced to the categories of
capitalist economics. Anarchists think that any radical movement which
does so fails to understand the nature of the system it is fighting
against (indeed, economic reductionism plays into the hands of
capitalist ideology). So, when anarchists take part in and encourage
social struggle they do not aim to restrict or reduce them to economic
issues (however important these are). The anarchist knows that the
individual has more interests than just material ones and we consider it
essential to take into account the needs of the emotions, mind and
spirit just as much as those of the belly:

> *"The class struggle does not centre around material exploitation
> alone but also around spiritual exploitation. In addition, entirely
> new issues emerge: coercive attitudes, the quality of work, ecology
> (or stated in more general terms, psychological and environmental
> oppression) . . . Terms like 'classes' and 'class struggle,' conceived
> of almost entirely as economic categories and relations, are too
> one-sided to express the **universalisation** of the struggle. Use
> these limited expressions if you like (the target is still a ruling
> class and a class society), but this terminology, with its traditional
> connotations, does not reflect the sweep and the multi-dimensional
> nature of the struggle . . . [and] fail to encompass the cultural and
> spiritual revolt that is taking place along with the economic
> struggle."* [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, pp. 151-2]

For anarchists, exploitation and class rule are just part of a wider
system of domination and hierarchy. Material gains, therefore, can never
completely make-up for oppressive social relationships. As the anarchist
character created by anarchist science-fiction writer Ursula Le Guin put
it, capitalists *"think if people have enough things they will be
content to live in prison."* [**The Dispossessed**, p. 120] Anarchists
disagree -- and the experience of social revolt in the "affluent" 1960s
proves their case.

This is unsurprising for, ultimately, the *"antagonism [between classes]
is spiritual rather than material. There will never be a sincere
understanding between bosses and workers. . . because the bosses above
all want to remain bosses and secure always more power at the expense of
the workers, as well as by competition with other bosses, whereas the
workers have had their fill of bosses and don't want any more."*
[Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 79]

J.1.1 Why are social struggles important?
-----------------------------------------

Social struggle is an expression of the class struggle, namely the
struggle of working class people **against** their exploitation,
oppression and alienation and **for** their liberty from capitalist and
state. It is what happens when one group of people have hierarchical
power over another: where there is oppression, there is resistance and
where there is resistance to authority you will see anarchy in action.
For this reason anarchists are in favour of, and are involved within,
social struggles. Ultimately they are a sign of individuals asserting
their autonomy and disgust at an unfair system. As Howard Zinn stresses:

> *"Both the source and the solution of our civil liberties problems are
> in the situations of every day: where we live, where we work, where we
> go to school, where we spend most of our hours. Our actual freedom is
> not determined by the Constitution or by [the Supreme] Court, but by
> the power the policeman has over us in the street or that of the local
> judge behind him; by the authority of our employers [if we are
> working]; by the power of teachers, principals, university president,
> and boards of trustees if we are students; by the welfare bureaucracy
> if we are poor [or unemployed]; by prison guards if we are in jail; by
> landlords if we are tenants; by the medical profession or hospital
> administration if we are physically or mentally ill.*

> *"Freedom and justice are local things, at hand, immediate. They are
> determined by power and money, whose authority over our daily lives is
> much less ambiguous than decisions of the Supreme Court. Whatever
> claim we . . . can make to liberty on the national level . . . on the
> local level we live at different times in different feudal fiefdoms
> where our subordination is clear."* [**Failure to Quit**, pp. 53-4]

These realities of wealth and power will remain unshaken unless
counter-forces appear on the very ground our liberty is restricted -- on
the street, in workplaces, at home, at school, in hospitals and so on.
For the *"only limit to the oppression of government is the power with
which people show themselves capable of opposing it."* [Malatesta,
**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 196]

Social struggles for improvements are also important indications of the
spirit of revolt and of people supporting each other in the continual
assertion of their (and our) freedom. They show people standing up for
what they consider right and just, building alternative organisations,
creating their own solutions to their problems - and are a slap in the
face of all the paternal authorities which dare govern us. Hence their
importance to anarchists and all people interested in extending freedom.

In addition, social struggle helps break people from their hierarchical
conditioning. Anarchists view people not as fixed objects to be
classified and labelled, but as human beings engaged in making their own
lives. We live, love, think, feel, hope, dream, and can change
ourselves, our environment and social relationships. Social struggle is
the way this is done collectively. Such struggle promotes attributes
within people which are crushed by hierarchy (attributes such as
imagination, organisational skills, self-assertion, self-management,
critical thought, self-confidence and so on) as people come up against
practical problems in their struggles and have to solve them themselves.
This builds self-confidence and an awareness of individual and
collective power. By seeing that their boss, the state and so on are
against them they begin to realise that they live in a class ridden,
hierarchical society that depends upon their submission to work. As
such, social struggle is a politicising experience.

Struggle allows those involved to develop their abilities for self-rule
through practice and so begins the process by which individuals assert
their ability to control their own lives and to participate in social
life directly. These are all key elements of anarchism and are required
for an anarchist society to work (*"Self-management of the struggle
comes first, then comes self-management of work and society"* [Alfredo
Bonnano, *"Self-Management"*, pp. 35-37, **Anarchy: A Journal of Desire
Armed**, no. 48, p. 35]). So self-activity is a key factor in
self-liberation, self-education and the creating of anarchists. In a
nutshell, people learn in struggle:

> *"In our opinion all action which is directed toward the destruction
> of economic and political oppression, which serves to raise the moral
> and intellectual level of the people; which gives them an awareness of
> their individual rights and their power, and persuades them themselves
> to act on their own behalf . . . brings us closer to our ends and is
> therefore a good thing. On the other hand all activity which tends to
> preserve the present state of affairs, that tends to sacrifice man
> against his will for the triumph of a principle, is bad because it is
> a denial of our ends.* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 69]

A confident working class is an essential factor in making successful
and libertarian improvements within the current system and, ultimately,
in making a revolution. Without that self-confidence people tend to just
follow "leaders" and we end up changing rulers rather than changing
society. So part of our job as anarchists is to encourage people to
fight for whatever small reforms are possible at present, to improve
our/their conditions, to give people confidence in their ability to
start taking control of their lives, and to point out that there is a
limit to whatever (sometimes temporary) gains capitalism will or can
concede. Hence the need for a revolutionary change.

Only this can ensure that anarchist ideas are the most popular ones for
if we think a movement is, all things considered, a positive or
progressive one then we should not abstain but should seek to popularise
anarchist ideas and strategies within it. In this way we create
***"schools of anarchy"*** within the current system and lay the
foundations of something better. Revolutionary tendencies and movements,
in other words, must create the organisations that contain, in embryo,
the society of the future (see [section H.1.6](secH1.html#sech16)).
These organisations, in turn, further the progress of radical change by
providing social spaces for the transformation of individuals (via the
use of direct action, practising self-management and solidarity, and so
on). Therefore, social struggle aids the creation of a free society by
accustoming people to govern themselves within self-managed
organisations and empowering the (officially) disempowered via the use
of direct action and mutual aid.

Hence the importance of social (or class) struggle for anarchists
(which, we may add, goes on all the time and is a two-sided affair).
Social struggle is the means of breaking the normality of capitalist and
statist life, a means of developing the awareness for social change and
the means of making life better under the current system. The moment
that people refuse to bow to authority, its days are numbered. Social
struggle indicates that some of the oppressed see that by using their
power of disobedience they can challenge, perhaps eventually end,
hierarchical power.

Ultimately, anarchy is not just something you believe in, it is not a
cool label you affix to yourself, it is something you do. You
participate. If you stop doing it, anarchy crumbles. Social struggle is
the means by which we ensure that anarchy becomes stronger and grows.

J.1.2 Are anarchists against reforms?
-------------------------------------

No, we are not. While most anarchists are against reformism (namely the
notion that we can somehow reform capitalism and the state away) we are
most definitely in favour of reforms (i.e. improvements in the here and
now). Anarchists are radicals; as such, we seek the root causes of
societal problems. Reformists seek to ameliorate the symptoms of
societal problems, while anarchists focus on the causes.

This does not mean, however, that we ignore struggles for reforms in the
here and now. The claim that anarchists are against such improvements
are often put forth by opponents of anarchism in an effort to paint us
as irrelevant extremists with no practical outlet for our ideas beyond
abstract calls for revolution. This is not true. Libertarians are well
aware that we can act to make our lives better while, at the same time,
seeking to remove the root causes of the problems we face. (see, for
example, Emma Goldman's account of her recognition of how false it was
deny the need for short-term reforms in favour of revolution. [**Living
My Life**, vol. 1, p. 52]). In the words of the revolutionary
syndicalist Emile Pouget:

> *"Trade union endeavour has a double aim: with tireless persistence,
> it must pursue betterment of the working class's current conditions.
> But, without letting themselves become obsessed with this passing
> concern, the workers should take care to make possible and imminent
> the essential act of comprehensive emancipation: the expropriation of
> capital.*

> *"At present, trade union action is designed to win partial and
> gradual improvements which, far from constituting a goal, can only be
> considered as a means of stepping up demands and wresting further
> improvements from capitalism . . .*

> *"This question of partial improvements served as the pretext for
> attempts to sow discord in the trades associations. Politicians . . .
> have tried to . . . stir up ill-feeling and to split the unions into
> two camps, by categorising workers as reformists and as
> revolutionaries. The better to discredit the latter, they have dubbed
> them 'the advocates of all or nothing' and they have falsely
> represented them as supposed adversaries of improvements achievable
> right now.*

> *"The most that can be said about this nonsense is that it is witless.
> There is not a worker . . . who, on grounds of principle or for
> reasons of tactics, would insist upon working ten hours for an
> employer instead of eight hours, while earning six francs instead of
> seven . . .*

> *"What appears to afford some credence to such chicanery is the fact
> that the unions, cured by the cruel lessons of experience from all
> hope in government intervention, are justifiably mistrustful of it.
> They know that the State, whose function is to act as capital's
> gendarme, is, by its very nature, inclined to tip the scales in favour
> of the employer side. So, whenever a reform is brought about by legal
> avenues, they do not fall upon it with the relish of a frog devouring
> the red rag that conceals the hook, they greet it with all due
> caution, especially as this reform is made effective only if the
> workers are organised to insist forcefully upon its implementation.*

> *"The trade unions are even more wary of gifts from the government
> because they have often found these to be poison gifts . . . Wanting
> real improvements . . . instead of waiting until the government is
> generous enough to bestow them, they wrest them in open battle,
> through direct action.*

> *"If, as sometimes is the case, the improvement they seek is subject
> to the law, the trade unions strive to obtain it through outside
> pressure brought to bear upon the authorities and not by trying to
> return specially mandated deputies to Parliament, a puerile pursuit
> that might drag on for centuries before there was a majority in favour
> of the yearned-for reform.*

> *"When the desired improvement is to be wrestled directly from the
> capitalist, the trades associations resort to vigorous pressure to
> convey their wishes. Their methods may well vary, although the direct
> action principle underlies them all . . .*

> *"But, whatever the improvement won, it must always represent a
> reduction in capitalist privileges and be a partial expropriation. So
> . . . the fine distinction between 'reformist' and 'revolutionary'
> evaporates and one is led to the conclusion that the only really
> reformist workers are the revolutionary syndicalists."* [**No Gods, No
> Masters**, vol. 2, pp. 71-3]

Pouget was referring to revolutionary unions but his argument can be
generalised to all social movements.

By seeking improvements from below by direct action, solidarity and the
organisation of those who directly suffer the injustice, anarchists can
make reforms more substantial, effective and long lasting than "reforms"
made from above by reformists. By recognising that the effectiveness of
a reform is dependent on the power of the oppressed to resist those who
would dominate them, anarchists seek change from the bottom-up and so
make reforms real rather than just words gathering dust in the law
books.

For example, a reformist sees poverty and looks at ways to lessen the
destructive and debilitating effects of it: this produced things like
the minimum wage, affirmative action, the projects in the USA and
similar reforms in other countries. An anarchist looks at poverty and
says, "what causes this?" and attacks that source of poverty, rather
than the symptoms. While reformists may succeed in the short run with
their institutional panaceas, the festering problems remain untreated,
dooming reform to eventual costly, inevitable failure -- measured in
human lives, no less. Like a quack that treats the symptoms of a disease
without getting rid of what causes it, all the reformist can promise is
short-term improvements for a condition that never goes away and may
ultimately kill the sufferer. The anarchist, like a real doctor,
investigates the causes of the illness and treats them while fighting
the symptoms.

Therefore, anarchists are of the opinion that *"[w]hile preaching
against every kind of government, and demanding complete freedom, we
must support all struggles for partial freedom, because we are convinced
that one learns through struggle, and that once one begins to enjoy a
little freedom one ends by wanting it all. We must always be with the
people . . . [and] get them to understand . . . [what] they may demand
should be obtained by their own efforts and that they should despise and
detest whoever is part of, or aspires to, government."* [Malatesta,
**Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas** p. 195]

So, anarchists are not opposed to struggles for reforms and improvements
in the here and now. Indeed, few anarchists think that an anarchist
society will occur without a long period of anarchist activity
encouraging and working within social struggle against injustice. Thus
Malatesta's words:

> *"the subject is not whether we accomplish Anarchism today, tomorrow
> or within ten centuries, but that we walk towards Anarchism today,
> tomorrow and always."* [**Towards Anarchism**, p. 75]

So, when fighting for improvements anarchists do so in an anarchist way,
one that encourages self-management, direct action and the creation of
libertarian solutions and alternatives to both capitalism and the state.

J.1.3 Why are anarchists against reformism?
-------------------------------------------

Firstly, it must be pointed out that the struggle for reforms within
capitalism is **not** the same as reformism. Reformism is the idea that
reforms within capitalism are enough in themselves and attempts to
change the system are impossible (and not desirable). As such all
anarchists are against this form of reformism -- we think that the
system can be (and should be) changed and until that happens any
reforms, no matter how essential, will not get to the root of social
problems.

In addition, particularly in the old social democratic labour movement,
reformism also meant the belief that social reforms could be used to
**transform** capitalism into socialism. In this sense, only
Individualist anarchists and Mutualists can be considered reformist as
they think their system of mutual banking can reform capitalism into a
free system. However, in contrast to Social Democracy, such anarchists
think that such reforms cannot come about via government action, but
only by people creating their own alternatives and solutions by their
own actions:

> *"But experience testifies and philosophy demonstrates, contrary to
> that prejudice, that any revolution, to be effective, must be
> spontaneous and emanate, not from the heads of the authorities but
> from the bowels of the people: that government is reactionary rather
> than revolutionary: that it could not have any expertise in
> revolutions, given that society, to which that secret is alone
> revealed, does not show itself through legislative decree but rather
> through the spontaneity of its manifestations: that, ultimately, the
> only connection between government and labour is that labour, in
> organising itself, has the abrogation of government as its mission."*
> [Proudhon, **No Gods, No Master**, vol. 1, p. 52]

So, anarchists oppose reformism because it takes the steam out of
revolutionary movements by providing easy, decidedly short-term
"solutions" to deep social problems. In this way, reformists can present
the public with they've done and say "look, all is better now. The
system worked." Trouble is that over time, the problems will only
continue to grow because the reforms did not tackle them in the first
place. To use Alexander Berkman's excellent analogy:

> *"If you should carry out [the reformers'] ideas in your personal
> life, you would not have a rotten tooth that aches pulled out all at
> once. You would have it pulled out a little to-day, some more next
> week, for several months or years, and by then you would be ready to
> pull it out altogether, so it should not hurt so much. That is the
> logic of the reformer. Don't be 'too hasty,' don't pull a bad tooth
> out all at once."* [**What is Anarchism?**, p. 64]

Rather than seek to change the root cause of the problems (namely in a
hierarchical, oppressive and exploitative system), reformists try to
make the symptoms better. In the words of Berkman again:

> *"Suppose a pipe burst in your house. You can put a bucket under the
> break to catch the escaping water. You can keep on putting buckets
> there, but as long as you do not mend the broken pipe, the leakage
> will continue, no matter how much you may swear about it . . . until
> you repair the broken social pipe."* [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 67-8]

What reformism fails to do is fix the underlying root causes of the real
problems society faces. Therefore, reformists try to pass laws which
reduce the level of pollution rather than work to end a system in which
it makes economic sense to pollute. Or they pass laws to improve working
conditions and safety while failing to get rid of the wage slavery which
creates the bosses whose interests are served by them ignoring those
laws and regulations. The list is endless. Ultimately, reformism fails
because reformists *"believe in good faith that it is possible to
eliminate the existing social evils by recognising and respecting, in
practice if not in theory, the basic political and economic institutions
which are the cause of, as well as the prop that supports these evils."*
[Malatesta, **Errico Malatesta: His Life and Ideas**, p. 82]

Revolutionaries, in contrast to reformists, fight both symptoms **and**
the root causes. They recognise that as long as the cause of the evil
remains, any attempts to fight the symptoms, however necessary, will
never get to the root of the problem. There is no doubt that we have to
fight the symptoms, however revolutionaries recognise that this struggle
is not an end in itself and should be considered purely as a means of
increasing working class strength and social power within society until
such time as capitalism and the state (i.e. the root causes of most
problems) can be abolished.

Reformists also tend to objectify the people whom they are "helping":
they envision them as helpless, formless masses who need the wisdom and
guidance of the "best and the brightest" to lead them to the Promised
Land. Reformists mean well, but this is altruism borne of ignorance,
which is destructive over the long run. Freedom cannot be given and so
any attempt to impose reforms from above cannot help but ensure that
people are treated as children, incapable of making their own decisions
and, ultimately, dependent on bureaucrats to govern them. This can be
seen from public housing. As Colin Ward argues, the *"whole tragedy of
publicly provided non-profit housing for rent and the evolution of this
form of tenure in Britain is that the local authorities have simply
taken over, though less flexibly, the role of the landlord, together
with all the dependency and resentment that it engenders."* [**Housing:
An Anarchist Approach**, p. 184] This feature of reformism was skilfully
used by the right-wing to undermine publicly supported housing and other
aspects of the welfare state. The reformist social-democrats reaped what
they had sown.

Reformism often amounts to little more than an altruistic contempt for
the masses, who are considered as little more than victims who need to
be provided for by state. The idea that we may have our own visions of
what we want is ignored and replaced by the vision of the reformists who
enact legislation **for** us and make "reforms" from the top-down.
Little wonder such reforms can be counter-productive -- they cannot
grasp the complexity of life and the needs of those subject to them.
Reformists effectively say, *"don't do anything, we'll do it for you."*
You can see why anarchists would loathe this sentiment; anarchists are
the consummate do-it-yourselfers, and there's nothing reformists hate
more than people who can take care of themselves, who will not let them
"help" them.

Reformists may mean well, but they do not grasp the larger picture -- by
focusing exclusively on narrow aspects of a problem, they choose to
believe that is the whole problem. In this wilfully narrow examination
of pressing social ills, reformists are, more often than not,
counter-productive. The disaster of the urban rebuilding projects in the
United States (and similar projects in Britain which moved inter-city
working class communities into edge of town developments during the
1950s and 1960s) are an example of reformism at work: upset at the
growing slums, reformists supported projects that destroyed the ghettos
and built brand-new housing for working class people to live in. They
looked nice (initially), but they did nothing to address the problem of
poverty and indeed created more problems by breaking up communities and
neighbourhoods.

Logically, it makes no sense. Why dance around a problem when you can
attack it directly? Reformists dilute social movements, softening and
weakening them over time. The AFL-CIO labour unions in the USA, like the
ones in Western Europe, killed the labour movement by narrowing and
channelling labour activity and taking power from the workers
themselves, where it belongs, and placing it the hands of a bureaucracy.
The British Labour Party, after over 100 years of reformist practice,
has done little more than manage capitalism, seen most of its reforms
undermined by right-wing governments (and by the following Labour
governments!) and the creation of a leadership of the party (in the
shape of New Labour) which was in most ways as right-wing as the
Conservative Party (if not more so, as shown once they were in power).
Bakunin would not have been surprised.

Also, it is funny to hear left-wing "revolutionaries" and "radicals" put
forward the reformist line that the capitalist state can help working
people (indeed be used to abolish itself!). Despite the fact that
leftists blame the state and capitalism for most of the problems we
face, they usually turn to the **capitalist** state to remedy the
situation, not by leaving people alone, but by becoming more involved in
people's lives. They support government housing, government jobs,
welfare, government-funded and regulated child care, government-funded
drug "treatment," and other government-centred programmes and
activities. If a capitalist (and racist/sexist/authoritarian) government
is the problem, how can it be depended upon to change things to the
benefit of working class people or other oppressed sections of the
population? Surely any reforms passed by the state will not solve the
problem? As Malatesta suggested:

> *"Governments and the privileged classes are naturally always guided
> by instincts of self-preservation, of consolidation and the
> development of their powers and privileges; and when they consent to
> reforms it is either because they consider that they will serve their
> ends or because they do not feel strong enough to resist, and give in,
> fearing what might otherwise be a worse alternative."* [**Op. Cit.**,
> p. 81]

Therefore, reforms gained by direct action are of a different quality
and nature than those passed by reformist politicians -- these latter
will only serve the interests of the ruling class as they do not
threaten their privileges while the former have the potential for real
change.

This is not to say that Anarchists oppose **all** state-based reforms
nor that we join with the right in seeking to destroy them (or, for that
matter, with "left" politicians in seeking to "reform" them, i.e.,
reduce them). Without a popular social movement creating alternatives to
state welfare, so-called "reform" by the state almost always means
attacks on the most vulnerable elements in society in the interests of
capital. As anarchists are against both state and capitalism, we can
oppose such reforms without contradiction while, at the same time,
arguing that welfare for the rich should be abolished long before
welfare for the many is even thought about. See [section
J.5.15](secJ5.html#secj515) for more discussion on the welfare state and
anarchist perspectives on it.

Instead of encouraging working class people to organise themselves and
create their own alternatives and solutions to their problem (which can
supplement, and ultimately replace, whatever welfare state activity
which is actually useful), reformists and other radicals urge people to
get the state to act for them. However, the state is not the community
and so whatever the state does for people you can be sure it will be in
**its** interests, not theirs. As Kropotkin put it:

> *"We maintain that the State organisation, having been the force to
> which the minorities resorted for establishing and organising their
> power over the masses, cannot be the force which will serve to destroy
> these privileges . . . the economic and political liberation of man
> will have to create new forms for its expression in life, instead of
> those established by the State.*

> *"Consequently, the chief aim of Anarchism is to awaken those
> constructive powers of the labouring masses of the people which at all
> great moments of history came forward to accomplish the necessary
> changes . . .*

> *"This is also why the Anarchists refuse to accept the functions of
> legislators or servants of the State. We know that the social
> revolution will not be accomplished by means of **laws.** Laws only
> **follow** the accomplished facts . . . a law remains a dead letter so
> long as there are not on the spot the living forces required for
> making of the **tendencies** expressed in the law an accomplished
> **fact**.*

> *"On the other hand . . . the Anarchists have always advised taking an
> active part in those workers' organisations which carry on the
> **direct** struggle of Labour against Capital and its protector, --
> the State.*

> *"Such a struggle . . . better than any other indirect means, permits
> the worker to obtain some temporary improvements in the present
> conditions of work [and life in general], while it opens his [or her]
> eyes to the evil that is done by Capitalism and the State that
> supports it, and wakes up his [or her] thoughts concerning the
> possibility of organising consumption, production, and exchange
> without the intervention of the capitalist and the State."*
> [**Environment and Evolution**, pp. 82-3]

Therefore, while seeking reforms, anarchists are against reformism and
reformists. Reforms are not seen as an end in themselves but rather a
means of changing society from the bottom-up and a step in that
direction:

> *"Each step towards economic freedom, each victory won over Capitalism
> will be at the same time a step towards political liberty -- towards
> liberation from the yoke of the State . . . And each step towards
> taking from the State any one of its powers and attributes will be
> helping the masses to win a victory over Capitalism."* [Kropotkin,
> **Op. Cit.**, p. 95]

However, no matter what, anarchists *"will never recognise the
institutions; we will take or win all possible reforms with the same
spirit that one tears occupied territory from the enemy's grasp in order
to keep advancing, and we will always remain enemies of every
government."* Therefore, it is *"not true to say"* that anarchists *"are
systematically opposed to improvements, to reforms. They oppose the
reformists on the one hand because their methods are less effective for
securing reforms from government and employers, who only give in through
fear, and because very often the reforms they prefer are those which not
only bring doubtful immediate benefits, but also serve to consolidate
the existing regime and to give the workers a vested interest in its
continued existence."* [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 81 and p. 83]

Only working class people, by our own actions and organisations, getting
the state and capital out of the way can produce an improvement in our
lives, indeed it is the only thing that will lead to **real** changes
for the better. Encouraging people to rely on themselves instead of the
state or capital can lead to self-sufficient, independent, and,
hopefully, more rebellious people. Working class people, despite having
fewer options in a number of areas in our lives, due both to hierarchy
and restrictive laws, still are capable of making choices about our
actions, organising our own lives and are responsible for the
consequences of our decisions. We are also more than able to determine
what is and is not a good reform to existing institutions and do not
need politicians informing us what is in our best interests
(particularly when it is the right seeking to abolish those parts of the
state not geared purely to defending property). To think otherwise is to
infantilise us, to consider us less fully human than other people and
reproduce the classic capitalist vision of working class people as means
of production, to be used, abused, and discarded as required. Such
thinking lays the basis for paternalistic interventions in our lives by
the state, ensuring our continued dependence and inequality -- and the
continued existence of capitalism and the state. Ultimately, there are
two options:

> *"The oppressed either ask for and welcome improvements as a benefit
> graciously conceded, recognise the legitimacy of the power which is
> over them, and so do more harm than good by helping to slow down, or
> divert . . . the processes of emancipation. Or instead they demand and
> impose improvements by their action, and welcome them as partial
> victories over the class enemy, using them as a spur to greater
> achievements, and thus a valid help and a preparation to the total
> overthrow of privilege, that is, for the revolution."* [Malatesta,
> **Op. Cit.**, p. 81]

Reformism encourages the first attitude within people and so ensures the
impoverishment of the human spirit. Anarchism encourages the second
attitude and so ensures the enrichment of humanity and the possibility
of meaningful change. Why think that ordinary people cannot arrange
their lives for themselves as well as Government people can arrange it
not for themselves but for others?

J.1.4 What attitude do anarchists take to "single-issue" campaigns?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Firstly, we must note that anarchists do take part in "single-issue"
campaigns, but do not nourish false hopes in them. This section explains
what anarchists think of such campaigns.

A "single-issue" campaign are usually run by a pressure group which
concentrates on tackling issues one at a time. For example, C.N.D. (The
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament) is a classic example of "single-issue"
campaigning with the aim of getting rid of nuclear weapons as the be-all
and end-all of its activity. For anarchists, however, single-issue
campaigning can be seen as a source of false hopes. The possibilities of
changing one aspect of a totally inter-related system and the belief
that pressure groups can compete fairly with transnational corporations,
the military and so forth, in their influence over decision making
bodies can both be seen to be optimistic at best.

In addition, many "single-issue" campaigns desire to be "apolitical",
concentrating purely on the one issue which unites the campaign and so
refuse to analyse or discuss wider issues and the root causes of the
issue in question (almost always, the system we live under). This means
that they end up accepting the system which causes the problems they are
fighting against. At best, any changes achieved by the campaign must be
acceptable to the establishment or be so watered down in content that no
practical long-term good is done. This can be seen from the green
movement, where groups like **Greenpeace** and **Friends of the Earth**
accept the status quo as a given and limit themselves to working within
it. This often leads to them tailoring their "solutions" to be
"practical" within a fundamentally anti-ecological political and
economic system, so slowing down (at best) ecological disruption.

For anarchists these problems all stem from the fact that social
problems cannot be solved as single issues. As Larry Law argued:

> *"single issue politics . . . deals with the issue or problem in
> isolation. When one problem is separated from all other problems, a
> solution really is impossible. The more campaigning on an issue there
> is, the narrower its perspectives become . . . As the perspective of
> each issue narrows, the contradictions turn into absurdities . . .
> What single issue politics does is attend to 'symptoms' but does not
> attack the 'disease' itself. It presents such issues as nuclear war,
> racial and sexual discrimination, poverty, starvation, pornography,
> etc., as if they were aberrations or faults in the system. In reality
> such problems are the inevitable consequence of a social order based
> on exploitation and hierarchical power . . . single issue campaigns
> lay their appeal for relief at the feet of the very system which
> oppresses them. By petitioning they acknowledge the right of those in
> power to exercise that power as they choose."* [**Bigger Cages, Longer
> Chains**, pp. 17-20].

Single issue politics often prolong the struggle for a free society by
fostering illusions that it is just parts of the capitalist system which
are wrong, not the whole of it, and that those at the top of the system
can, and will, act in our interests. While such campaigns can do some
good, practical, work and increase knowledge and education about social
problems, they are limited by their very nature and can not lead to
extensive improvements in the here and now, never mind a free society.

Therefore, anarchists often support and work within single-issue
campaigns, trying to get them to use effective methods of activity (such
as direct action), work in an anarchistic manner (i.e. from the bottom
up) and to try to "politicise" them into questioning the whole of the
system. However, anarchists do not let themselves be limited to such
activity as a social revolution or movement is not a group of
single-issue campaigns but a mass movement which understands the
inter-related nature of social problems and so the need to change every
aspect of life.

J.1.5 Why do anarchists try to generalise social struggles?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Basically, we do it in order to encourage and promote solidarity. This
is **the** key to winning struggles in the here and now as well as
creating the class consciousness necessary to create an anarchist
society. At its most simple, generalising different struggles means
increasing the chances of winning them. Take, for example, when one
trade or one workplace goes on strike while the others continue to work:

> *"Consider yourself how foolish and inefficient is the present form of
> labour organisation in which one trade or craft may be on strike while
> the other branches of the same industry continue to work. Is it not
> ridiculous that when the street car workers of New York, for instance,
> quit work, the employees of the subway, the cab and omnibus drivers
> remain on the job? . . . It is clear, then, that you compel compliance
> [from your bosses] only when you are determined, when your union is
> strong, when you are well organised, when you are united in such a
> manner that the boss cannot run his factory against your will. But the
> employer is usually some big . . . company that has mills or mines in
> various places. . . If it cannot operate . . . in Pennsylvania because
> of a strike, it will try to make good its losses by continuing . . .
> and increasing production [elsewhere] . . . In that way the company .
> . . breaks the strike."* [Alexander Berkman, **What is Anarchism?**,
> pp. 199-200]

By organising all workers in one union (after all they all have the same
boss) it increases the power of each trade considerably. It may be easy
for a boss to replace a few workers, but a whole workforce would be far
more difficult. By organising all workers in the same industry, the
power of each workplace is correspondingly increased. Extending this
example to outside the workplace, its clear that by mutual support
between different groups increases the chances of each group winning its
fight. As the I.W.W. put it: ***"An injury to one is an injury to
all."*** By generalising struggles, by practising mutual aid we can
ensure that when we are fighting for our rights and against injustice we
will not be isolated and alone. If we don't support each other, groups
will be picked off one by one. and if we go into struggle, there will be
no one there to support us and we are more likely to be defeated.

Therefore, from an anarchist point of view, the best thing about
generalising struggles is that as well as increasing the likilihood of
success (*"Solidarity is Strength"*) it leads to an increased spirit of
solidarity, responsibility and class consciousness. This is because by
working together and showing solidarity those involved get to understand
their common interests and that the struggle is not against **this**
injustice or **that** boss but against **all** injustice and **all**
bosses.

This sense of increased social awareness and solidarity can be seen from
the experience of the C.N.T in Spain during the 1930s. The C.N.T.
organised all workers in a given area into one big union. Each workplace
was a union branch and were joined together in a local area
confederation. The result was that the territorial basis of the unions
brought all the workers from one area together and fomented **class**
solidarity over and before industry-loyalties and interests. This can
also be seen from the experiences of the syndicalist unions in Italy and
France as well. The structure of such local federations also situates
the workplace in the community where it really belongs.

Also, by uniting struggles together, we can see that there are really no
"single issues" -- that all various different problems are inter-linked.
For example, ecological problems are not just that, but have a political
and economic basis and that economic and social domination and
exploitation spills into the environment. Inter-linking struggles means
that they can be seen to be related to other struggles against
capitalist exploitation and oppression and so encourage solidarity and
mutual aid. What goes on in the environment, for instance, is directly
related to questions of domination and inequality within human society,
that pollution is often directly related to companies cutting corners to
survive in the market or increase profits. Similarly, struggles against
sexism or racism can be seen as part of a wider struggle against
hierarchy, exploitation and oppression in all their forms. As such,
uniting struggles has an important educational effect above and beyond
the benefits in terms of winning struggles.

Murray Bookchin presents a concrete example of this process of linking
issues and widening the struggle:

> "Assume there is a struggle by welfare mothers to increase their
> allotments . . . Without losing sight of the concrete issues that
> initially motivated the struggle, revolutionaries would try to
> catalyse an order of relationships between the mothers entirely
> different from [existing ones] . . . They would try to foster a deep
> sense of community, a rounded human relationship that would transform
> the very subjectivity of the people involved . . . Personal
> relationships would be intimate, not merely issue-orientated. People
> would get to **know** each other, to **confront** each other; they
> would **explore** each other with a view of achieving the most
> complete, unalienated relationships. Women would discuss sexism, as
> well as their welfare allotments, child-rearing as well as harassment
> by landlords, their dreams and hopes as human beings as well as the
> cost of living.
>
> "From this intimacy there would grow, hopefully, a supportive system
> of kinship, mutual aid, sympathy and solidarity in daily life. The
> women might collaborate to establish a rotating system of baby sitters
> and child-care attendants, the co-operative buying of good food at
> greatly reduced prices, the common cooking and partaking of meals, the
> mutual learning of survival skills and the new social ideas, the
> fostering of creative talents, and many other shared experiences.
> Every aspect of life that could be explored and changed would be one
> part of the kind of relationships . . .
>
> "The struggle for increased allotments would expand beyond the welfare
> system to the schools, the hospitals, the police, the physical,
> cultural, aesthetic and recreational resources of the neighbourhood,
> the stores, the houses, the doctors and lawyers in the area, and so on
> -- into the very ecology of the district.
>
> "What I have said on this issue could be applied to every issue --
> unemployment, bad housing, racism, work conditions -- in which an
> insidious assimilation of bourgeois modes of functioning is masked as
> 'realism' and 'actuality.' The new order of relationships that could
> be developed from a welfare struggle . . . [can ensure that the]
> future penetrates the present; it recasts the way people 'organise'
> and the goals for which they strive." [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**,
> pp. 153-4]

As the anarchist slogan puts it: ***"Resistance is Fertile."*** Planting
the seed of autonomy, direct action and self-liberation can result,
potentially, in the blossoming of free individuals due to the nature of
struggle itself (see [section A.2.7](secA2.html#seca27)) Therefore, the
generalisation of social struggle is not only a key way of winning a
specific fight, it can (and should) also spread into different aspects
of life and society and play a key part in developing free individuals
who reject hierarchy in all aspects of their life.

Social problems are not isolated from each other and so struggles
against them cannot be. The nature of struggle is such that once people
start questioning one aspect of society, the questioning of the rest
soon follows. So, anarchists seek to generalise struggles for these
three reasons -- firstly, to ensure the solidarity required to win;
secondly, to combat the many social problems we face as **people** and
to show how they are inter-related; and, thirdly, to encourage the
transformation of those involved into unique individuals in touch with
their humanity, a humanity eroded by hierarchical society and
domination.
