J.6 What methods of child rearing do anarchists advocate?
=========================================================

Anarchists have long been aware of the importance of child rearing and
education. We are aware that child rearing should aim to develop *"a
well-rounded individuality"* and not *"a patient work slave,
professional automaton, tax-paying citizen, or righteous moralist."* In
this section of the FAQ we will discuss anarchist approaches to child
rearing bearing in mind *"that it is through the channel of the child
that the development of the mature man [or woman] must go, and that the
present ideas of . . . educating or training . . . are such as to stifle
the natural growth of the child."* [Emma Goldman, **Red Emma Speaks**,
p. 131 and p. 130]

If one accepts the thesis that the authoritarian family is the breeding
ground for both individual psychological problems and political
reaction, it follows that anarchists should try to develop ways of
raising children that will not psychologically cripple them but instead
enable them to accept freedom and responsibility while developing
natural self-regulation. We will refer to children raised in such a way
as ***"free children."***

Work in this field is still in its infancy (no pun intended). Wilhelm
Reich was the main pioneer in this field (an excellent, short
introduction to his ideas can be found in Maurice Brinton's **The
Irrational in Politics**). In **Children of the Future**, Reich made
numerous suggestions, based on his research and clinical experience, for
parents, psychologists, and educators striving to develop libertarian
methods of child rearing (although he did not use the term
"libertarian").

In this and the following sections we will summarise Reich's main ideas
as well as those of other libertarian psychologists and educators who
have been influenced by him, such as A.S. Neill and Alexander Lowen. We
will examine the theoretical principles involved in raising free
children and will illustrate their practical application with concrete
examples. Finally, we will examine the anarchist approach to the
problems of adolescence.

Such an approach to child rearing is based upon the insight that
children *"do not constitute anyone's property: they are neither the
property of the parents nor even of society. They belong only to their
own future freedom."* [Michael Bakunin, **The Political Philosophy of
Bakunin**, p. 327] As such, what happens to a child when they are
growing up **shapes** the person they become and the society they live
in. The key question for people interested in freedom is whether *"the
child [is] to be considered as an individuality, or as an object to be
moulded according to the whims and fancies of those about it?"* [Emma
Goldman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 130] Libertarian child rearing is the means by
which the individuality of the child is respected and developed.

This is in stark contrast to standard capitalist claim that children are
the **property** of their parents. If we accept that children **are**
the property of their parents then we are implicitly stating that a
child's formative years are spent in slavery, hardly a relationship
which will promote the individuality and freedom of the child or the
wider society. Little wonder that most anarchists reject such
assertions. Instead we argue that the *"rights of the parents shall be
confined to loving their children and exercising over them . . .
authority [that] does not run counter to their morality, their mental
development, or their future freedom."* Being someone's property (i.e.
slave) runs counter to all these and *"it follows that society, the
whole future of which depends upon adequate education and upbringing of
children . . . has not only the right but also the duty to watch over
them."* Hence child rearing should be **part** of society, a communal
process by which children learn what it means to be an individual by
being respected as one by others: *"real freedom -- that is, the full
awareness and the realisation thereof in every individual, pre-eminently
based upon a feeling of one's dignity and upon the genuine respect for
someone else's freedom and dignity, i.e. upon justice -- such freedom
can develop in children only through the rational development of their
minds, character and will."* [Bakunin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 327]

We wish to re-iterate again that a great deal of work remains to be done
in this field. Therefore our comments should be regarded merely as
tentative bases for further reflection and research by those involved
with raising and educating children. There is, and cannot be, any "rule
book" for raising free children, because to follow an inflexible rule
book is to ignore the fact that each child and their environment is
unique and therefore demands unique responses from their parents. Hence
the principles of libertarian child rearing to which we will refer
should not be thought of as rules, but rather, as experimental
hypotheses to be tested by parents within their own situation by
applying their intelligence and deriving their own individual
conclusions.

Bringing up children must be like education, and based on similar
principles, namely *"upon the free growth and development of the innate
forces and tendencies of the child. In this way alone can we hope for
the free individual and eventually also for a free community, which
shall make interference and coercion of human growth impossible."*
[Goldman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 139] Indeed, child rearing and education
**cannot** be separated as life itself is an education and so must share
the same principles and be viewed as a process of *"development and
exploration, rather than as one of repressing a child's instincts and
inculcating obedience and discipline."* [Martha A. Ackelsberg, **Free
Women of Spain**, p. 166]

Moreover, the role of parental example is very important to raising free
children. Children often learn by mimicking their parents -- children do
what their parents do, not as they say. If their mother and father lie
to each other, scream, fight and so on, then the child will probably do
so as well. Children's behaviour does not come out thin air, they are a
product of the environment they are brought up in. Children can only be
encouraged by example, not by threats and commands. So how parents act
can be an obstacle to the development of a free child. Parents must do
more than just **say** the right things, but also act as anarchists in
order to produce free children.

The sad fact is that most modern people have lost the ability to raise
free children, and regaining this ability will be a long process of
trial and error as well as **parent** education in which it is to be
hoped that each succeeding generation will learn from the failures and
successes of their predecessors and so improve. In the best-case
scenario, over the course of a few generations the number of progressive
parents will continue to grow and raise ever freer children, who in turn
will become even more progressive parents themselves, thus gradually
changing mass psychology in a libertarian direction. Such changes
**can** come about very fast, as can be seen from various communes all
over the world where society is organised according to libertarian
principles. As Reich put it:

> *"We have learned that instead of a jump into the realm of the
> Children of the Future, we can hope for no more than a steady advance,
> in which the healthy new overlaps the sick old structure, with the new
> slowly outgrowing the old."* [**Children of the Future**, pp. 38-39]

By means of freedom-based child rearing and education, along with other
methods of consciousness raising, as well as encouraging resistance to
the existing social order anarchists hope to prepare the psychological
foundation for a social paradigm shift, from authoritarian to
libertarian institutions and values. And indeed, a gradual cultural
evolution toward increasing freedom does seem to exist. For example, as
A.S. Neill suggested there is *"a slow trend to freedom, sexual and
otherwise. In my boyhood, a woman went bathing wearing stockings and a
long dress. Today, women show legs and bodies. Children are getting more
freedom with every generation. Today, only a few lunatics put cayenne
pepper on a baby's thumb to stop sucking. Today, only a few countries
beat their children in school."* [**Summerhill**, p. 115]

Most anarchists believe that we must practice what we preach and so the
anarchist revolution begins at home. As anarchists raise their own
children in capitalist society and/or are involved in the raising and
education of the children of other parents, we can practice in part
libertarian principles even before the revolution. As such, we think it
is important to discuss libertarian child rearing.

J.6.1 What are the main obstacles to raising free children?
-----------------------------------------------------------

The biggest obstacle is the training and character of most parents,
physicians, and educators. Individuals within a hierarchical society
create psychological walls/defences around themselves and these will
obviously have an effect both on the mental and physical state of the
individual and so their capacity for living a free life and experiencing
pleasure. Such parents then try (often unconsciously) to stifle the
life-energy in children. There are, for example, the child's natural
vocal expressions (shouting, screaming, bellowing, crying, etc.) and
natural body motility. As Reich noted:

> *"Small children go through a phase of development characterised by
> vigorous activity of the voice musculature. The joy the infant derives
> from loud noises (crying, shrieking, and forming a variety of sounds)
> is regarded by many parents as pathological aggressiveness. The
> children are accordingly admonished not to scream, to be 'still,' etc.
> The impulses of the voice apparatus are inhibited, its musculature
> becomes chronically contracted, and the child becomes quiet,
> 'well-brought-up,' and withdrawn. The effect of such mistreatment is
> soon manifested in eating disturbances, general apathy, pallor of the
> face, etc. Speech disturbances and retardation of speech development
> are presumably caused in this manner. In the adult we see the effects
> of such mistreatment in the form of spasms of the throat. The
> automatic constrictions of the glottis and the deep throat
> musculature, with subsequent inhibition of the aggressive impulses of
> the head and neck, seems to be particularly characteristic."*
> [**Children of the Future**, p. 128]

*"Clinical experience has taught us,"* Reich concluded, *"that small
children must be allowed to 'shout themselves out' when the shouting is
inspired by pleasure. This might be disagreeable to some parents, but
questions of education must be decided **exclusively in the interests of
the child,** not in those of the adults."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 128]

Besides deadening life energy in the body, such stifling also inhibits
the anxiety generated by the presence of anti-social, cruel, and
perverse impulses within the psyche -- for example, destructiveness,
sadism, greed, power hunger, brutality, etc. (impulses referred to by
Reich as *"secondary"* drives). In other words, this reduces our ability
to empathise with others and so the internal ethical guidelines we all
develop are blunted, making us more likely tp express such secondary,
anti-social, drives. So, ironically, these secondary drives result from
the **suppression of the primary drives** and the sensations of pleasure
associated with them. These secondary drives develop because the only
emotional expressions that can get through a person's defences are
distorted, harsh, and/or mechanical. In other words, compulsive morality
(i.e. acting according to externally imposed rules) becomes necessary to
control the secondary drives **which compulsion itself creates.** By
such processes, authoritarian child-rearing becomes self-justifying:

> *"Psychoanalysts have failed to distinguish between primary natural
> and secondary perverse, cruel drives, and they are continuously
> killing nature in the new-born while they try to extinguish the
> 'brutish little animal.' They are completely ignorant of the fact that
> it is **exactly this killing of the natural principle which creates
> the secondary perverse and cruel nature,** human nature so called, and
> that these artificial cultural creations in turn make compulsive
> moralism and brutal laws necessary."* [Reich, **Op. Cit.**, p. 17-18]

Moralism, however, can never get at the root of the problem of secondary
drives, but in fact only increases the pressure of crime and guilt. The
real solution is to let children develop what Reich calls **natural
self-regulation.** This can be done only by not subjecting them to
punishment, coercion, threats, moralistic lectures and admonitions,
withdrawal of love, etc. in an attempt to inhibit their spontaneous
expression of natural life-impulses. The systematic development of the
emphatic tendencies of the young infant is the best way to "socialise"
and restrict activities that are harmful to the others. As A.S. Neill
pointed out *"self-regulation implies a belief in the goodness of human
nature; a belief that there is not, and never was, original sin."*
[**Summerhill**, p. 103]

According to Neill, children who are given freedom from birth and not
forced to conform to parental expectations spontaneously learn how to
keep themselves clean and develop social qualities like courtesy, common
sense, an interest in learning, respect for the rights of others, and so
forth. However, once the child has been armoured through authoritarian
methods intended to **force** it to develop such qualities, it becomes
out of touch with its living core and therefore no longer able to
develop self-regulation. In this stage it becomes harder and harder for
the pro-social emotions to shape the developing mode of life of the new
member of society. At that point, when the secondary drives develop,
parental authoritarianism becomes a **necessity.**

This oppression produces an inability to tolerate freedom. The vast
majority of people develop this **automatically** from the way they are
raised and is what makes the whole subject of bringing up children of
crucial importance to anarchists. Reich concluded that if parents do not
suppress nature in the first place, then no anti-social drives will be
created and no authoritarianism will be required to suppress them:
*"**What you so desperately and vainly try to achieve by way of
compulsion and admonition is there in the new-born infant ready to live
and function. Let it grow as nature requires, and change our
institutions accordingly**."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 47] So in order to raise
psychologically healthy children, parents need to acquire
self-knowledge, particularly of how internal conflicts develop in family
relationships, and to free themselves as much as possible from neurotic
forms of behaviour. The difficulty of parents acquiring such
self-knowledge and sufficiently de-conditioning themselves is obviously
another obstacle to raising self-regulated children.

However, the greatest obstacle is the fact that twisting mechanisms set
in so very early in life, i.e. soon after birth. Hence it is important
for parents to obtain a thorough knowledge of what rigid suppressions
are and how they function, so that from the beginning they can prevent
(or at least decrease) them from forming in their children. Finally,
Reich cautioned that it is crucial to avoid any mixing of concepts:
*"One cannot mix a bit of self-regulation with a bit of moral demand.
Either we trust nature as basically decent and self-regulatory or we do
not, and then there is only one way, that of training by compulsion. It
is essential to grasp the fact that the two ways of upbringing do not go
together."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 46]

J.6.2. What are some examples of libertarian child-rearing methods?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

According to Reich, the problems of parenting a free child actually
begin before conception, with the need for a prospective mother to free
herself as much as possible from chronic muscular tensions. It has been
found in many studies that not only the physical health of the mother
can influence the foetus. Various psychological stresses influence the
chemical and hormonal environment, affecting the foetus.

Immediately after birth it is important for the mother to establish
contact with her child. This means, basically, constant loving attention
to the baby, expressed by plenty of holding, cuddling, playing, etc.,
and especially by breast feeding. By such *"orgonotic"* contact (to use
Reich's term), the mother is able to establish the initial emotional
bonding with the new born, and a non-verbal understanding of the child's
needs. This is only possible, however, if she is in touch with her own
emotional and cognitive internal processes: *"**Orgonotic contact is the
most essential experiential and emotional element in the
interrelationship between mother and child,** particularly prenatally
and during the first days and weeks of life. The future fate of the
child depends on it. It seems to be the core of the new-born infant's
emotional development."* [**Children of the Future**, p. 99] It is
important for the father to establish orgonotic contact as well.

Reich amaintained that the practice of bottle feeding is harmful,
particularly if it completely replaces breast feeding from the day of
birth, because it eliminates one of the most important forms of
establishing physical and emotional contact between mother and child.
This lack of contact can then contribute in later life to *"oral"* forms
of neurotic character structure or traits (see Chapter 9 of Alexander
Lowen's **Physical Dynamics of Character Structure**). Another harmful
practice in infant care is the compulsive-neurotic method of feeding
children on schedule, invented by Pirquet in Vienna, which was
devastatingly wrong and harmful to countless children. Frustration of
oral needs through this practice (which is fortunately less in vogue now
than it was fifty years ago), is guaranteed to produce neurotic
armouring in infants. As Reich put it: *"As long as parents, doctors,
and educators approach infants with false, unbending behaviour,
inflexible opinions, condescension, and officiousness, instead of with
orgonotic contact, infants will continue to be quiet, withdrawn,
apathetic, 'autistic,' 'peculiar,' and, later, 'little wild animals,'
whom the cultivated feel they have to 'tame.'"* [**Op. Cit.** p. 124]

Another harmful practice is allowing the baby to "cry itself out." Thus:
*"Parking a baby in a baby carriage in the garden, perhaps for hours at
a time, is a dangerous practice. No one can know what agonising feelings
of fear and loneliness a baby can experience on waking up suddenly to
find himself alone in a strange place. Those who have heard a baby's
screams on such occasions have some idea of the cruelty of this stupid
custom."* [Neill, **Summerhill**, p. 336] Indeed, in **The Physical
Dynamics of Character Structure**, Alexander Lowen has traced specific
neuroses, particularly depression, to this practice. Hospitals also have
been guilty of psychologically damaging sick infants by isolating them
from their mothers, a practice that has undoubtedly produced untold
numbers of neurotics and psychopaths.

Neill summed up the libertarian attitude toward the care of infants as
follows: *"**Self-regulation means the right of a baby to live freely
without outside authority in things psychic and somatic**. It means that
the baby feeds when it is hungry; that it becomes clean in habits only
when it wants to; that it is never stormed at nor spanked; that it is
always loved and protected."* Obviously self-regulation does not mean
leaving the baby alone when it heads toward a cliff or starts playing
with an electrical socket. Libertarians do not advocate a lack of common
sense. We recognise that adults must override an infant's will when it
is a question of protecting their physical safety: *"Only a fool in
charge of young children would allow unbarred bedroom windows or an
unprotected fire in the nursery. Yet, too often, young enthusiasts for
self-regulation come to my school as visitors, and exclaim at our lack
of freedom in locking poison in a lab closet, or our prohibition about
playing on the fire escape. The whole freedom movement is marred and
despised because so many advocates of freedom have not got their feet on
the ground."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 105 and p. 106]

Nevertheless, the libertarian position does not imply that a child
should be **punished** for getting into a dangerous situation. Nor is
the best thing to do in such a case to shout in alarm (unless that is
the only way to warn the child before it is too late), but simply to
remove the danger without any fuss: *"Unless a child is mentally
defective, he will soon discover what interests him. Left free from
excited cries and angry voices, he will be unbelievably sensible in his
dealing with material of all kinds."* [Neil, **Op. Cit.**, p. 108]
Provided, of course, that he or she has been allowed self-regulation
from the beginning, and thus has not developed any irrational, secondary
drives.

The way to raise a free child becomes clear when one considers how an
**un**free child is raised. Thus imagine the typical infant whose
upbringing A.S. Neill described:

> *"His natural functions were left alone during the diaper period. But
> when he began to crawl and perform on the floor, words like
> **naughty** and **dirty** began to float about the house, and a grim
> beginning was made in teaching him to be clean.*

> *"Before this, his hand had been taken away every time it touched his
> genitals; and he soon came to associate the genital prohibition with
> the acquired disgust about faeces. Thus, years later, when he became a
> travelling salesman, his story repertoire consisted of a balanced
> number of sex and toilet jokes.*

> *"Much of his training was conditioned by relatives and neighbours.
> Mother and father were most anxious to be correct -- to do the proper
> thing -- so that when relatives or next-door neighbours came, John had
> to show himself as a well-trained child. He had to say **Thank you**
> when Auntie gave him a piece of chocolate; and he had to be most
> careful about his table manners; and especially, he had to refrain
> from speaking when adults were speaking . . .*

> *"All his curiosity about the origins of life were met with clumsy
> lies, lies so effective that his curiosity about life and birth
> disappeared. The lies about life became combined with fears when at
> the age of five his mother found him having genital play with his
> sister of four and the girl next door. The severe spanking that
> followed (Father added to it when he came home from work) forever
> conveyed to John the lesson that sex is filthy and sinful, something
> one must not even think of."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 96-7]

Of course, parents' ways of imparting negative messages about sex are
not necessarily this severe, especially in our allegedly enlightened
age. However, it is not necessary for a child to be spanked or even
scolded or lectured in order to acquire a sex-negative attitude.
Children are very intuitive and will receive the message "sex is bad"
from subtle parental cues like facial expressions, tone of voice,
embarrassed silence, avoidance of certain topics, etc. Mere "toleration"
of sexual curiosity and play is far different in its psychological
effects from positive affirmation.

Along the same lines, to prevent the formation of sex-negative attitudes
means that nakedness should never be discouraged: *"The baby should see
its parents naked from the beginning. However, the child should be told
when he is ready to understand that some people don't like to see
children naked and that, in the presence of such people, he should wear
clothes."* Neill maintains that not only should parents never spank or
punish a child for genital play, but that spanking and other forms of
punishment should never be used in **any** circumstances, because they
instil fear, turning children into cowards and often leading to phobias.
*"Fear must be entirely eliminated -- fear of adults, fear of
punishment, fear of disapproval, fear of God. Only hate can flourish in
an atmosphere of fear."* Punishment also turns children into sadists:
*"The cruelty of many children springs from the cruelty that has been
practised on them by adults. You cannot be beaten without wishing to
beat someone else."* (*"Every beating makes a child sadistic in desire
or practice."* [Neil **Op. Cit.**, p. 229, p. 124, p. 269 and p. 271]
This is obviously an important consideration to anarchists, as sadistic
drives provide the psychological ground for militarism, war, police
brutality, and so on. Such drives are undoubtedly also part of the
desire to exercise hierarchical authority, with its possibilities for
using negative sanctions against subordinates as an outlet for sadistic
impulses.

Child beating is particularly cowardly because it is a way for adults to
vent their hatred, frustration, and sadism on those who are unable to
defend themselves. Such cruelty is, of course, always rationalised with
excuse like "it hurts me more than it does you," etc., or explained in
moral terms, like "I don't want my boy to be soft" or "I want him to
prepare him for a harsh world" or "I spank my children because my
parents spanked me, and it did me a hell of a lot of good." But despite
such rationalisations, the fact remains that punishment is always an act
of hate. To this hate the child responds in kind by hating the parents,
followed by fantasy, guilt, and repression. For example, the child may
fantasise the father's death, which immediately causes guilt, and so is
repressed. Often the hatred induced by punishment emerges in fantasies
that are seemingly remote from the parents, such as stories of giant
killing -- always popular with children because the giant represents the
father. Obviously, the sense of guilt produced by such fantasies is very
advantageous to organised religions that promise redemption from "sin."
It is surely no coincidence that such religions are enthusiastic
promoters of the sex-negative morality and disciplinarian child rearing
practices that keep supplying them with recruits.

What is worse, however, is that punishment actually **creates** "problem
children." This is so because the parent arouses more and more hatred
(and diminishing trust in other human beings) in the child with each
spanking, which is expressed in still worse behaviour, calling for more
spankings, and so on, in a vicious circle. In contrast, the
*"self-regulated child does not need any punishment,"* Neill argued,
*"and he does not go through this hate cycle. He is never punished and
he does not need to behave badly. He has no use for lying and for
breaking things. His body has never been called filthy or wicked. He has
not needed to rebel against authority or to fear his parents. Tantrums
he will usually have, but they will be short-lived and not tend toward
neurosis."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 166]

We could cite many further examples of how libertarian principles of
child-rearing can be applied in practice, but we must limit ourselves to
these few. The basic principles can be summed up as follows: Get rid of
authority, moralising, and the desire to "improve" and "civilise"
children. Allow them to be themselves, without pushing them around,
bribing, threatening, admonishing, lecturing, or otherwise forcing them
to do anything. Refrain from action unless the child, by expressing
their "freedom" restricts the freedom of others and **explain** what is
wrong about such actions and never mechanically punish.

This is, of course, a radical philosophy, which few parents are willing
to follow. It is quite amazing how people who call themselves
libertarians in political and economic matters draw the line when it
comes to their behaviour within the family -- as if such behaviour had
no wider social consequences!

J.6.3 If children have nothing to fear, how can they be good?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Obedience that is based on fear of punishment, this-worldly or
other-worldly, is not really goodness, it is merely cowardice. True
morality (i.e. respect for others and one-self) comes from inner
conviction based on experience, it cannot be imposed from without by
fear. Nor can it be inspired by hope of reward, such as praise or the
promise of heaven, which is simply bribery. If children are given as
much freedom as possible from the day of birth, if parents respect them
as individuals and give a positive example as well as not being forced
to conform to parental expectations, they will spontaneously learn the
basic principles of social behaviour, such as cleanliness, courtesy, and
so forth. But they must be allowed to develop them **at their own
speed,** at the natural stage of their growth, not when parents think
they should develop them. What is "natural" timing must be discovered by
observation, not by defining it a priori based on one's own
expectations.

Can a child really be taught to keep themselves clean without being
punished for getting dirty? According to many psychologists, it is not
only possible but **vitally important** for the child's mental health to
do so, since punishment will give the child a fixed and repressed
interest in their bodily functions. As Reich and Lowen have shown
various forms of compulsive and obsessive neuroses can be traced back to
the punishments used in toilet training. As Neill observed: *"When the
mother says **naughty** or **dirty** or even **tut tut**, the element of
right and wrong arises. The question becomes a **moral** one -- when it
should remain a **physical** one."* He suggested that the **wrong** way
to deal with a child who likes to play with faeces is to tell him he is
being dirty. The right way *"is to allow him to live out his interest in
excrement by providing him with mud or clay. In this way, he will
sublimate his interest without repression. He will live through his
interest; and in doing so, kill it."* [**Summerhill**, p. 174]

Similarly, sceptics will probably question how children can be induced
to eat a healthy diet without threats of punishment. The answer can be
discovered by a simple experiment: set out on the table all kinds of
foods, from sweets and ice cream to whole wheat bread, lettuce, sprouts,
and so on, and allow the child complete freedom to choose what is
desired or to eat nothing at all if he or she is not hungry. Parents
will find that the average child will begin choosing a balanced diet
after about a week, after the desire for prohibited or restricted foods
has been satisfied. This is an example of what can be called "trusting
nature." That the question of how to "train" a child to eat properly
should even be an issue says volumes about how little the concept of
freedom for children is accepted or even understood, in our society.
Unfortunately, the concept of "training" still holds the field in this
and most other areas.

The disciplinarian argument that that children must be **forced** to
respect possessions is also defective, because it always requires some
sacrifice of a child's play life (and childhood should be devoted to
play, not to "preparing for adulthood," because playing is what children
spontaneously do). The libertarian view is that a child should arrive at
a sense of value out of his or her own free choice. This means not
scolding or punishing them for breaking or damaging things. As they grow
out of the stage of preadolescent indifference to possessions, they
learn to respect it naturally.

"But shouldn't a child at least be punished for stealing?" it will be
asked. Once again, the answer lies in the idea of trusting nature. The
concept of "mine" and "yours" is adult, and children naturally develop
it as they become mature, but not before. This means that normal
children will "steal" -- though that is not how they regard it. They are
simply trying to satisfy their acquisitive impulses; or, if they are
with friends, their desire for adventure. In a society so thoroughly
steeping in the idea of respect for property as ours, it is no doubt
difficult for parents to resist societal pressure to punish children for
"stealing." The reward for such trust, however, will be a child who
grows into a healthy adolescent who respects the possessions of others,
not out of a cowardly fear of punishment but from his or her own
self-nature.

Most parents believe that, besides taking care of their child's physical
needs, the teaching of ethical/moral values is their main responsibility
and that without such teaching the child will grow up to be a "little
wild animal" who acts on every whim, with no consideration for others.
This idea arises mainly from the fact that most people in our society
believe, at least passively, that human beings are naturally bad and
that unless they are "trained" to be good they will be lazy, mean,
violent, or even murderous. This, of course, is essentially the idea of
"original sin" and because of its widespread acceptance, nearly all
adults believe that it is their job to "improve" children. Yet according
to libertarian psychologists there is no original sin. In fact, it would
be more accurate to say that there is "original virtue." Wilhelm Reich
found that externally imposed, compulsive morality actually **causes**
immoral behaviour by creating cruel and perverse *"secondary drives."*
Neill put it this way: *"I find that when I smash the moral instruction
a bad boy has received, he becomes a good boy."* [, p. 250]

Unconscious acceptance of some form of the idea of original sin is the
main recruiting tool of organised religions, as people who believe they
are born "sinners" feel a strong sense of guilt and need for redemption.
Parents to should eliminate any need for redemption, by telling the
child that he is born good, not born bad. This will help keep them from
falling under the influence of life-denying religions, which are
inimical to the growth of a healthy character structure. Citing
ethnological studies, Reich argued the following:

> *"Among those primitive peoples who lead satisfactory, unimpaired
> sexual lives, there is no sexual crime, no sexual perversion, no
> sexual brutality between man and woman; rape is unthinkable because it
> is unnecessary in their society. Their sexual activity flows in
> normal, well-ordered channels which would fill any cleric with
> indignation and fear . . . They love the human body and take pleasure
> in their sexuality. They do not understand why young men and women
> should not enjoy their sexuality. But when their lives are invaded by
> the ascetic, hypocritical morass and by the Church, which bring them
> 'culture' along with exploitation, alcohol, and syphilis, they begin
> to suffer the same wretchedness as ourselves. They begin to lead
> 'moral' lives, i.e. to suppress their sexuality, and from then on they
> decline more and more into a state of sexual distress, which is the
> result of sexual suppression. At the same time, they become sexually
> dangerous; murders of spouses, sexual diseases, and crimes of all
> sorts start to appear."* [**Children of the Future**, p. 193]

Such crimes in our society would be greatly reduced if libertarian child
rearing practices were widely followed. These are obviously important
considerations for anarchists, who are frequently asked to explain how
crime can be prevented in an anarchist society. The answer is that if
people are not suppressed during childhood there will be far less
anti-social behaviour, because the secondary-drive structure that leads
to it will not be created in the first place. In other words, the
solution to the so-called crime problem is not more police, more laws,
or a return to the disciplinarianism of "traditional family values," as
conservatives claim, but depends mainly on **getting rid** of such
values.

There are other problems as well with the moralism taught by organised
religions. One danger is making the child a hater: *"If a child is
taught that certain things are sinful, his love of life must be changed
to hate. When children are free, they never think of another child as
being a sinner."* [Neill, **Op. Cit.**, p. 245] From the idea that
certain people are sinners, it is a short step to the idea that certain
classes or races of people are more "sinful" than others, leading to
prejudice, discrimination, and persecution of minorities as an outlet
for repressed anger and sadistic drives -- drives that are created in
the first place by moralistic training during early childhood. Once
again, the relevance for anarchism is obvious.

A further danger of religious instruction is the development of a fear
of life: *"Religion to a child most always means only fear. God is a
mighty man with holes in his eyelids: He can see you wherever you are.
To a child, this often means that God can see what is being done under
the bedclothes. And to introduce fear into a child's life is the worst
of all crimes. Forever the child says nay to life; forever he is an
inferior; forever a coward."* [Neill, **Op. Cit.**, p. 246] People who
have been threatened with fear of an afterlife in hell can never be
entirely free of neurotic anxiety about security in **this** life. In
turn, such people become easy targets of ruling-class propaganda that
plays upon their material and emotional insecurity, e.g. the
rationalisation of imperialist wars, the Military-Industrial Complex,
increased state powers, and so on as necessary to "preserve jobs", for
security against external threats and so forth.

J.6.3 But how will a free child ever learn unselfishness?
---------------------------------------------------------

Another common objection to self-regulation is that children can only be
taught to be **"unselfish"** through punishment and admonition. Again,
however, such a view comes from a distrust of nature and is part of the
common attitude that nature is mere "raw material" to be shaped by human
beings according to their own wishes. The libertarian attitude is that
empathy for others develops at the proper time:

> *"To ask a child to be unselfish is wrong. Every child is an egoist
> and the world belongs to him. When he has an apple, his one wish is to
> eat that apple. The chief result of mother's encouraging him to share
> it with his little brother is to make him hate the little brother.
> Altruism comes later -- comes naturally -- **if the child is not
> taught to be unselfish.** It probably never comes at all if the child
> has been forced to be unselfish. By suppressing the child's
> selfishness, the mother is fixing that selfishness forever."* [Neill,
> **Summerhill**, pp. 250-251]

Unfulfilled wishes live on in the unconscious so children who are
pressured too hard -- "taught" -- to be unselfish will, while conforming
outwardly with parental demands, unconsciously repress part of their
real, selfish wishes, and these repressed infantile desires will make
the person selfish (and possibly neurotic) throughout life. Moreover,
telling children that what they want to do is "wrong" or "bad" is
equivalent to teaching them to hate themselves, and it is a well-known
principle of psychology that people who do not love themselves cannot
love others. Thus moral instruction, although it aims to develop
altruism and love for others, is actually self-defeating, having just
the opposite result. Moreover, such attempts to produce "unselfish"
children (and so adults) actually works **against** developing the
individuality of the child and they developing their own abilities (in
particular their ability of critical thought). As Erich Fromm put it:

> *"Not to be selfish implies not to do what one wishes, to give up
> one's own wishes for the sake of those in authority . . . Aside from
> its obvious implication, it means 'don't love yourself,' 'don't be
> yourself', but submit yourself to something more important than
> yourself, to an outside power or its internalisation, 'duty.' 'Don't
> be selfish' becomes one of the most powerful ideological tools in
> suppressing spontaneity and the free development of personality. Under
> the pressure of this slogan one is asked for every sacrifice and for
> complete submission: only those acts are 'unselfish' which do not
> serve the individual but somebody or something outside himself."*
> [**Man for Himself**, p. 127]

While such "unselfishness" is ideal for creating "model citizens" and
willing wage slaves, it is not conducive for creating anarchists or even
developing individuality. Little wonder Bakunin celebrated the urge to
rebel and saw it as the key to human progress! Fromm goes on to note
that selfishness and self-love, *"far from being identical, are actually
opposites"* and that *"selfish persons are incapable of loving others .
. . [or] loving themselves."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 131] Individuals who do
not love themselves, and so others, will be more willing to submit
themselves to hierarchy than those who do love themselves and are
concerned for their own, and others, welfare. Thus the contradictory
nature of capitalism, with its contradictory appeals to selfish and
unselfish behaviour, can be understood as being based upon lack of
self-love, a lack which is promoted in childhood and one which
libertarians should be aware of and combat.

Indeed, much of the urge to "teach children unselfishness" is actually
an expression of adults' will to power. Whenever parents feel the urge
to impose directives on their children, they would be wise to ask
themselves whether the impulse comes from their own power drive or their
own selfishness. For, since our culture strongly conditions us to seek
power over others, what could be more convenient than having a small,
weak person at hand who cannot resist one's will to power? Instead of
issuing directives, libertarians believe in letting social behaviour
develop naturally, which it will do after other people's opinions
becomes important **to the child.** As Neill pointed out:

> *"Everyone seeks the good opinion of his neighbours. Unless other
> forces push him into unsocial behaviour, a child will naturally want
> to do that which will cause him to be well-regarded, but this desire
> to please others develops at a certain stage in his growth. The
> attempt by parents and teachers to artificially accelerate this stage
> does the child irreparable damage."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 256]

Therefore, parents should allow children to be "selfish" and "ungiving",
free to follow their own childish interests throughout their childhood.
Every interpersonal conflict of interest should be grounds for a lesson
in dignity on one side and consideration on the other. Only by this
process can a child develop their individuality. By so doing they will
come to recognise the individuality of others and this is the first step
in developing ethical concepts (which rest upon mutual respect for
others and their individuality).

J.6.4 Isn't "libertarian child-rearing" just another name for spoiling the child?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No. This objection confuses the distinction between freedom and license.
To raise a child in freedom does not mean letting him or her walk all
over you or others; it does not mean never saying "no." It is true that
free children are not subjected to punishment, irrational authority, or
moralistic admonitions, but they are not "free" to violate the rights of
others. As Neill put it: *"in the disciplined home, the children have
**no** rights. In the spoiled home, they have **all** the rights. The
proper home is one in which children and adults have equal rights."* Or
again: *"To let a child have his own way, or do what he wants to **at
another's expense,** is bad for the child. It creates a spoiled child,
and the spoiled child is a bad citizen."* [**Summerhill**, p. 107 and
167]

There will inevitably be conflicts of will between parents and children,
and the healthy way to resolve them is discussion and coming to an
agreement. The unhealthy ways are either to resort to authoritarian
discipline or to spoil the child by allowing them to have all the social
rights. Libertarian psychologists argue that no harm is done to children
by insisting on one's individual rights, but that the harm comes from
moralism, i.e. when one introduces the concepts of right and wrong or
words like "naughty," "bad," or "dirty," which produce guilt.

Therefore it should not be thought that free children are free to "do as
they please." Freedom means doing what one likes so long as it does not
infringe on the freedom of others. Thus there is a big difference
between compelling a child to stop throwing stones at others and
compelling him or her to learn geometry. Throwing stones infringes on
others' rights, but learning geometry involves only the child. The same
goes for forcing children to eat with a fork instead of their fingers;
to say "please" and "thank you"; to tidy up their rooms, and so on. Bad
manners and untidiness may be annoying to adults, but they are not a
violation of adults' rights. One could, of course, define an adult
"right" to be free of annoyance from **anything** one's child does, but
this would simply be a license for authoritarianism, emptying the
concept of children's rights of all content.

As mentioned, giving children freedom does not mean allowing them to
endanger themselves physically. For example, a sick child should not be
asked to decide whether he wants to go outdoors or take his prescribed
medicine, nor a run-down and overtired child whether she wants to go to
bed. But the imposition of such forms of necessary authority is
compatible with the idea that children should be given as much
responsibility as they can handle at their particular age. Only in this
way can they develop self-assurance. And, again, it is important for
parents to examine their own motives when deciding how much
responsibility to give their child. Parents who insist on choosing their
children's clothes for them, for example, are generally worried that the
child might select clothes that would reflect badly on their parents'
social standing.

As for those who equate "discipline" in the home with "obedience," the
latter is usually required of a child to satisfy the adults' desire for
power. Self-regulation means that there are no power games being played
with children, no loud voice saying "You'll do it because I say so, or
else!" But, although this irrational, power-seeking kind of authority is
absent in the libertarian home, there still remains what can be called a
kind of "authority," namely adult protection, care, and responsibility,
as well as the insistence on one's own rights. As Neill observed: *"Such
authority sometimes demands obedience but at other times gives
obedience. Thus I can say to my daughter, 'You can't bring that mud and
water into our parlour.' That's no more than her saying to me, 'Get out
of my room, Daddy. I don't want you here now,' a wish that I, of course,
obey without a word."* [**Op. Cit.**, p. 156]. So there will still be
"discipline" in the libertarian home, but it will be of the kind that
protects the individual rights of each family member.

Raising children in freedom also does not imply giving them a lot of
toys, money, and so on. Reich's followers have argued that children
should not be given everything they ask for and that it is better to
give them too little than too much. Under constant bombardment by
commercial advertising campaigns, parents today generally tend to give
their children far too much, with the result that the children stop
appreciating gifts and rarely value any of their possessions. This same
applies to money, which, if given in excess, can be detrimental to
children's' creativity and play life. If children are not given too many
toys, they will derive creative joy out of making their own toys out of
whatever free materials are at hand -- a joy of which they are robbed by
overindulgence. Psychologists point out that parents who give too many
presents are often trying to compensate for giving too little love.

There is less danger in rewarding children than there is in punishing
them, but rewards can still undermine a child's morale. This is because,
firstly, rewards are superfluous and in fact often **decrease**
motivation and creativity, as several psychological studies have shown
(see [section I.4.11](secI4.html#seci411)). Creative people work for the
pleasure of creating; monetary interests are not central (or necessary)
to the creative process. Secondly, rewards send the wrong message,
namely, that doing the deed for which the reward is offered is not worth
doing for its own sake and the pleasure associated with productive,
creative activity. Thirdly, rewards tend to reinforce the worst aspects
of the competitive system, leading to the attitude that money is the
only thing which can motivate people to do the work that needs doing in
society.

These are just a few of the considerations that enter into the
distinction between spoiling children and raising them in freedom. In
reality, it is the punishment and fear of a disciplinarian home that
**spoils** children in the most literal sense, by destroying their
childhood happiness and creating warped personalities. As adults, the
victims of disciplinarianism will generally be burdened with one or more
anti-social secondary drives such as sadism, destructive urges, greed,
sexual perversions, etc., as well as repressed rage and fear. The
presence of such impulses just below the surface of consciousness causes
anxiety, which is automatically defended against by psychological walls
which leave the person stiff, frustrated, bitter and burdened with
feelings of inner emptiness. In such a condition people easily fall
victim to the capitalist gospel of super-consumption, which promises
that money will enable them to fill the inner void by purchasing
commodities -- a promise that, of course, is hollow.

The neurotically enclosed person also tends to look for scapegoats on
whom to blame his or her frustration and anxiety and against whom
repressed rage can be vented. Reactionary politicians know very well how
to direct such impulses against minorities or "hostile nations" with
propaganda designed to serve the interests of the ruling elite. Most
importantly, however, the respect for authority combined with sadistic
impulses which is acquired from a disciplinarian upbringing typically
produces a submissive/authoritarian personality -- a man or woman who
blindly follows the orders of "superiors" while at the same time
desiring to exercise authority on "subordinates," whether in the family,
the state bureaucracy, or the company. Ervin Staub's **Roots of Evil**
includes interviews of imprisoned SS men, who, in the course of
extensive interviews (meant to determine how ostensibly "normal" people
could perform acts of untold ruthlessness and violence) revealed that
they overwhelmingly came from authoritarian, disciplinarian homes.

In this way, the "traditional" (e.g., authoritarian, disciplinarian,
patriarchal) family is the necessary foundation for authoritarian
civilisation, reproducing it and its attendant social evils from
generation to generation.

J.6.5 What is the anarchist position on teenage sexual liberation?
------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the biggest problems of adolescence is sexual suppression by
parents and society in general. The teenage years are the time when
sexual energy is at its height. Why, then, the absurd demand that
teenagers "wait until marriage," or at least until leaving home, before
becoming sexually active? Why are there laws in "advanced" countries
like the United States that allow a 19-year-old "boy" who makes love
with his 17-year-old girlfriend, with her full consent, to be
**arrested** by the girl's parents (!) for "statutory rape"?

To answer such questions, let us recall that the ruling class is not
interested in encouraging mass tendencies toward liberty, independence
and pleasure not derived from commodities but instead supports whatever
contributes to mass submissiveness, docility, dependence, helplessness,
and respect for authority -- traits that perpetuate the hierarchies on
which ruling-class power and privileges depend.

As sex is one of the most intense forms of pleasure and one of the most
prominent contributors for intimacy and bonding with people emotionally,
repression of sexuality is the most powerful means of psychologically
crippling people and giving them a submissive/authoritarian character
structure (as well as alienating people from each other). As Reich
observed, such a character is composed of a mixture of *"sexual
impotence, helplessness, a need for attachments, a nostalgia for a
leader, fear of authority, timidity, and mysticism"* and *"people
structured in this manner are incapable of democracy. All attempts to
build up or maintain genuine democratically directed organisations come
to grief when they encounter these character structures. They form the
psychological soil of the masses in which dictatorial strivings and
bureaucratic tendencies of democratically elected leaders can develop."*
Sexual suppression *"produces the authority-fearing, life-fearing
vassal, and thus constantly creates new possibilities whereby a handful
of men in power can rule the masses."* [**The Sexual Revolution**, p.
82]

No doubt most members of the ruling elite are not fully conscious that
their own power and privileges depend on the mass perpetuation of
sex-negative attitudes. Nevertheless, they unconsciously sense it.
Sexual freedom is the most basic and powerful kind, and every
conservative or reactionary instinctively shudders at the thought of the
"social chaos" it would unleash -- that is, the rebellious,
authority-defying type of character it would nourish. This is why
"family values," and "religion" (i.e. discipline and compulsive sexual
morality) are the mainstays of the conservative/reactionary agenda. Thus
it is crucially important for anarchists to address every aspect of
sexual suppression in society. This means affirming the right of
adolescents to an unrestricted sex life.

There are numerous arguments for teenage sexual liberation. For example,
many teen suicides could be prevented by removing the restrictions on
adolescent sexuality. This becomes clear from ethnological studies of
sexually unrepressive tribal peoples:

> *"All reports, whether by missionaries or scholars, with or without
> the proper indignation about the 'moral depravity' of 'savages,' state
> that the puberty rites of adolescents lead them immediately into a
> sexual life; that some of these primitive societies lay great emphasis
> on sexual pleasure; that the puberty rite is an important social
> event; that some primitive peoples not only do not hinder the sexual
> life of adolescents but encourage it is every way, as, for instance,
> by arranging for community houses in which the adolescents settle at
> the start of puberty in order to be able to enjoy sexual intercourse.
> Even in those primitive societies in which the institution of strict
> monogamous marriage exists, adolescents are given complete freedom to
> enjoy sexual intercourse from the beginning of puberty to marriage.
> None of these reports contains any indication of sexual misery or
> suicide by adolescents suffering from unrequited love (although the
> latter does of course occur). The contradiction between sexual
> maturity and the absence of genital sexual gratification is
> non-existent."* [Reich, **Op. Cit.**, p. 85]

Teenage sexual repression is also closely connected with crime. If there
are teenagers in a neighbourhood who have no place to pursue intimate
sexual relationships, they will do it in dark corners, in cars or vans,
etc., always on the alert and anxious lest someone discover them. Under
such conditions, full gratification is impossible, leading to a build-up
of tension and frustration. Thus they feel unsatisfied, disturb each
other, become jealous and angry, get into fights, turn to drugs as a
substitute for a satisfying sex life, vandalise property to let off
"steam" (repressed rage), or even murder someone. As Reich noted,
*"juvenile delinquency is the visible expression of the subterranean
sexual crisis in the lives of children and adolescents. And it may be
predicted that no society will ever succeed in solving this problem, the
problem of juvenile psychopathology, unless that society can muster the
courage and acquire the knowledge to regulate the sexual life of its
children and adolescents in a sex-affirmative manner."* [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 271]

For these reasons, it is clear that a solution to the "gang problem"
also depends on adolescent sexual liberation. We are not suggesting, of
course, that gangs themselves suppress sexual activity. Indeed, one of
their main attractions to teens is undoubtedly the hope of more
opportunities for sex as a gang member. However, gangs' typical
obsessiveness with the promiscuous, pornographic, sadistic, and other
"dark" aspects of sex shows that by the time children reach gang age
they have already developed unhealthy secondary drives due to the
generally sex-negative and repressive environment in which they have
grown up. The expression of such drives is **not** what anarchists mean
by "sexual freedom." Rather, anarchist proposals for teenage liberation
are based on the premise that a libertarian childhood is the necessary
condition for a **healthy** sexual freedom in adolescence.

Applying these insights to our own society, it is clear that teenagers
should have ample access to a private room where they can be undisturbed
with their sexual partners. Parents should also encourage the knowledge
and use of contraceptives and safe sex in general as well as respect for
the other person involved in the relationship. This does not mean
encouraging promiscuity or sex for the sake of it. Rather, it means
encouraging teenagers to know their own minds and desires, refusing to
be pressured by anyone into anything. As can be seen from experience of
this anarchist activist during the 1930s:

> *"One time, a companero from the Juventudes [libertarian youth
> organisation] came over to me and said, 'You, who say you're so
> liberated. You're not so liberated.' (I'm telling you this so youll
> see the mentality of these men.) 'Because if I ask you to give me a
> kiss, you wouldn't.*

> *"I just stood there staring at him, and thinking to myself, 'How do I
> get out of this one?" And then I said to him, 'Listen, when I want to
> go to bed with a guy, I'm the one that has to choose him. I don't go
> to bed with just anyone. You don't interest me as a man. I don't feel
> anything for you... Why should you want me to 'liberate myself,' as
> you put it, by going to bed with you? That's no liberation for me.
> That's just making love simply for the sake of making love.' 'No,' I
> said to him, 'love is something that has to be like eating: if you're
> hungry, you eat, and if you want to go to bed with a guy, then...
> Besides, I'm going to tell you something else . . . Your mouth doesn't
> appeal to me... And I don't like to make love with a guy without
> kissing him.'*

> *"He was left speechless! But I did it with a dual purpose in mind...
> because I wanted to show him that that's not the way to educate
> companeros... That's what the struggle of women was like in Spain --
> even with men from our own group -- and I'm not even talking about
> what it was like with other guys."* [quoted by Martha A. Ackelsberg,
> **Free Women of Spain**, pp. 116-7]

So respecting yourself and others, it must be stressed, is essential. As
Maurice Brinton pointed out, attempts at sexual liberation will
encounter two kinds of responses from established society -- direct
opposition and attempts at recuperation. The second response takes the
form of *"first alienating and reifying sexuality, and then of
frenetically exploiting this empty shell for commercial ends. As modern
youth breaks out of the dual stranglehold of repressive traditional
morality and of the authoritarian patriarchal family it encounters a
projected image of free sexuality which is in fact a manipulatory
distortion of it."* This can be seen from the use of sex in advertising
to the successful development of sex into a major consumer industry.
However, such a development is the opposite of the healthy sexuality
desired by anarchists. This is because *"sex is presented as something
to be consumed. But the sexual instinct differs from certain other
instincts"* as it can be satisfied only by *"another human being,
capable of thinking, acting, suffering. The alienation of sexuality
under the conditions of modern capitalism is very much part of the
general alienating process, in which people are converted into objects
(in this case, objects of sexual consumption) and relationships are
drained of human content. Undiscriminating, compulsive sexual activity,
is not sexual freedom -- although it may sometimes be a preparation for
it (which repressive morality can never be). The illusion that alienated
sex is sexual freedom constitutes yet another obstacle on the road to
total emancipation. Sexual freedom implies a realisation and
understanding of the autonomy of others."* [*"The Irrational in
Politics"*, pp. 257-92, **For Workers' Power**, p. 277]

Therefore, anarchists see teenage sexual liberation as a means of
developing free individuals **as well as** reducing the evil effects of
sexual repression (which, we must note, also helps dehumanise
individuals by encouraging the objectification of others, and in a
patriarchal society particularly of women).

J.6.6 But isn't this concern with sexual liberation just a distraction from revolution?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It would be insulting to teenagers to suggest that sexual freedom is, or
should be, their **only** concern. Many teens have a well-developed
social conscience and are keenly interested in problems of economic
exploitation, poverty, social breakdown, environmental degradation, and
the like. The same can be said of people of any age!

It is essential for anarchists to guard against the attitude typically
found in Marxist-Leninist parties that spontaneous discussions about
sexual problems are a "diversion from the class struggle." Such an
attitude is economistic (not to mention covertly ascetic), because it is
based on the premise that economic class must be the focus of all
revolutionary efforts toward social change. No doubt transforming the
economy is important, but without mass sexual liberation no working
class revolution be complete as there will not be enough people around
with the character structures necessary to create a **lasting**
self-managed society and economy (i.e., people who are capable of
accepting freedom with responsibility). Instead, the attempt to force
the creation of such a system without preparing the necessary
psychological soil for its growth will lead to a reversion to some new
form of hierarchy and exploitation. Equally, society would be "free" in
name only if repressive social morals existed and people were not able
to express themselves as they so desire.

Moreover, for many people breaking free from the sexual suppression that
threatens to cripple them psychologically is a major issue in their
lives. For this reason, few of them are likely to be attracted to the
anarchist "freedom" movement if its exponents limit themselves to dry
discussions of surplus value, alienated labour, and so forth. Instead,
addressing sexual questions and problems must be integrated into a
multi-faceted attack on the total system of domination. People should
feel confident that anarchists are on the side of sexual pleasure and
are not revolutionary ascetics demanding self-denial for the "sake of
the revolution." Rather, it should be stressed that the capacity for
full sexual enjoyment is the an essential part of the revolution.
Indeed, *"incessant questioning and challenge to authority on the
subject of sex and of the compulsive family can only complement the
questioning and challenge to authority in other areas (for instance on
the subject of who is to dominate the work process -- or the purpose of
work itself). Both challenges stress the autonomy of individuals and
their domination over important aspects of their lives. Both expose the
alienated concepts which pass for rationality and which govern so much
of our thinking and behaviour. The task of the conscious revolutionary
is to make both challenges explicit, to point out their deeply
subversive content, and to explain their inter-relation."* [Maurice
Brinton, *"The Irrational in Politics"*, pp. 257-92, **For Workers'
Power**, p. 278]

We noted previously that in pre-patriarchal society, which rests on a
communistic/communal social order, children have complete sexual freedom
and that the idea of childhood asceticism develops as such societies
turn toward patriarchy in the economic and social structure (see
[section B.1.5](secB1.html#secb15)). This sea-change in social attitudes
toward sexuality allows the authority-oriented character structure to
develop instead of the formerly non-authoritarian ones. Ethnological
research has shown that in pre-patriarchal societies the general nature
of work life in the community corresponds with the free development of
children and adolescents -- that is, there are no rules coercing
children and adolescents into specific forms of sexual life, and this
creates the psychological basis for voluntary integration into the
community and voluntary discipline in all forms of collective activity.
This supports the premise that widespread sex-positive attitudes are a
necessary condition of a viable libertarian socialism.

Psychology also clearly shows that every impediment to free expression
of children by parents, teachers, or administrative authorities must be
stopped. As anarchists, our preferred way of doing so is by direct
action. Thus we should encourage all to feel that they have every chance
of building their own personal lives. This will certainly not be an
obstacle to or a distraction from their involvement in the anarchist
movement. On the contrary, if they can gradually solve the problems
facing their private lives, they will work on other social projects with
greatly increased pleasure and concentration.

Besides engaging in direct action, anarchists can also support legal
protection free expression and sexuality (repeal of the insane statutory
rape laws and equal rights for gays, for example), just as they support
legislation that protects workers' right to strike, family leave, and so
forth. However, as Reich observed, *"under no circumstances will the new
order of sexual life be established by the decree of a central
authority."* [**The Sexual Revolution**, p. 279] That was a Leninist
illusion. Rather, it will be established from the bottom up, by the
gradual process of ever more widespread dissemination of knowledge about
the adverse personal and social effects of sexual repression, and the
benefits of libertarian child-rearing and educational methods.

A society in which people are capable of sexual happiness will be one
where they prefer to *"make love, not war,"* and so will provide the
best guarantee for the general security. Then the anarchist project of
restructuring the economic and political systems will proceed
spontaneously, based on a spirit of joy rather than hatred and revenge.
Only then can it be defended against reactionary threats, because the
majority will be on the side of freedom and capable of using it
responsibly, rather than unconsciously longing for an authoritarian
father-figure to tell them what to do.

Therefore, concern and action upon sexual liberation, libertarian child
rearing and libertarian education are **key** parts of social struggle
and change. In no way can they be considered as "distractions" from
"important" political and economic issues as some "serious"
revolutionaries like to claim. As Martha A. Ackelsberg notes in relation
to the practical work done by the ***Mujeres Libres*** group during the
Spanish Revolution:

> *"Respecting children and educating them well was vitally important to
> the process of revolutionary change. Ignorance made people
> particularly vulnerable to oppression and suffering. More importantly,
> education prepared people for social life. Authoritarian schools (or
> families), based upon fear, prepared people to be submissive to an
> authoritarian government [or within a capitalist workplace]. Different
> schools and families would be necessary to prepare people to live in a
> society without domination."* [**Free Women of Spain**, p. 133]

The personal **is** political and there is little point in producing a
free economy if the people in it are not free to lead a full and
pleasurable life! As such, the issue of sexual freedom is as important
as economic and social freedom for anarchists. This can be seen when
Emma Goldman recounted meeting Kropotkin who praised a paper she was
involved with but proclaimed *"it would do more if it would not waste so
much space discussing sex."* She disagreed and a heated argument ensured
about *"the place of the sex problem in anarchist propaganda."* Finally,
she remarked *"All right, dear comrade, when I have reached your age,
the sex question may no longer be of importance to me. But it is now,
and it is a tremendous factor for thousands, millions even, of young
people."* This, Goldman recalled, made Kropotkin stop short with *"an
amused smile lighting up his kindly face. 'Fancy, I didn't think of
that,' he replied. 'Perhaps you are right, after all.' He beamed
affectionately upon me, with a humorous twinkle in his eye."* [**Living
My Life**, vol. 1, p. 253]
