An Anarchist FAQ: Introduction to Volume 1
==========================================

As many anarchists have noted, our ideal must be one of the most
misunderstood and misrepresented political theories on the planet. "An
Anarchist FAQ" (AFAQ) aims to change this by presenting the basics of
anarchist theory and history, refuting the most common distortions and
nonsense about it and providing anarchists with a resource they can use
to aid their arguments and struggles for freedom. This is important, as
much of the ground covered in AFAQ was provoked by having to critique
other theories and refute attacks on anarchism.

Anarchism has changed over the years and will continue to evolve and
change as circumstances do likewise and new struggles are fought and
(hopefully) won. It is not some fixed ideology, but rather a means of
understanding an evolving world and to change it in libertarian
directions. As such, AFAQ seeks to place specific aspects of anarchism
into their historical context. For example, certain aspects of
Proudhon’s ideas can only be understood by remembering that he lived at
a time when the vast majority of working people were peasants and
artisans. Many commentators (particularly Marxist ones) seem to forget
this (and that he supported co-operatives for large-scale industry).
Much the same can be said of Bakunin, Tucker and so on. I hope AFAQ will
help anarchism continue to develop to meet new circumstances by
summarising what has gone before so that we can build on it.

We also seek to draw out what anarchists have in common while not
denying their differences. After all, individualist-anarchist Benjamin
Tucker would have agreed with communist-anarchist Peter Kropotkin when
he stated that anarchism was the *"no government form of socialism."*
While some anarchists seem to take more time in critiquing and attacking
their comrades over (ultimately) usually minor differences than fighting
oppression, I personally think that this activity while, at times,
essential is hardly the most fruitful use of our limited resources --
particularly when it is about possible future developments (whether it
is on the economic nature of a free society or our attitude to a
currently non-existing syndicalist union!). So we have discussed the
differences between anarchist schools of thought as well as within them,
but we have tried to build bridges by stressing where they agree rather
than create walls.

Needless to say, not all anarchists will agree with what is in AFAQ (it
is, after all, as we have always stressed "An Anarchist FAQ", not "The
Anarchist FAQ" as some comrades flatteringly call it). From my
experience, most anarchists agree with most of it even if they have
quibbles about certain aspects of it. I know that comrades do point
others to it (I once saw a Marxist complain that anarchists always
suggested he read AFAQ, so I explained to him that this was what having
a "Frequency Asked Questions" was all about). So AFAQ is only a guide,
you need to discover anarchism for yourself and develop and apply it in
your own way. Hopefully AFAQ will help that process by presenting an
overview of anarchism and indicating what it is, what it is not and
where to find out more.

Some may object to the length of many of the answers and that is a valid
point. However, some questions and issues cannot be dealt with quickly
and be considered as remotely convincing. For example, simply stating
that anarchists think that capitalism is exploitative and that claims
otherwise are wrong may be both correct and short but it hardly a
convincing reply to someone aware of the various defences of profit,
interest and rent invented by capitalist economists. Similarly, stating
that Marxist ideology helped destroy the Russian Revolution is, again,
both correct and short but it would never convince a Leninist who
stresses the impact of civil war on Bolshevik practice. Then there is
the issue of sources. We have tried to let anarchists speak for
themselves on most issues and that can take space. Some of the evidence
we use is from books and articles the general reader may not have easy
access so we have tried to present full quotes to show that our use is
correct (the number of times I’ve tracked down references only to
discover they did not say what was suggested is, sadly, quite numerous).

Moreover, refuting distortions and inventions about anarchism can be
lengthy simply because of the necessity of providing supporting
evidence. Time and again, the same mistakes and straw man arguments are
regurgitated by those unwilling or unable to look at the source material
(Marxists are particularly bad at this, simply repeating *ad nauseum*
the assertions of Marx and Engels as if they were accurate). Assumptions
are piled onto assumptions, assertions repeated as if they were factual.
AFAQ seeks to address these and present evidence to refute them once and
for all. Simply saying that some statement is false may be correct, but
hardly convincing unless you already know a lot about the subject. So I
hope that readers will understand and find even the longest answers
interesting and informative (one of the advantages of a FAQ format is
that people can simply go to the sections they are interested in and
skip others).

This volume covers what anarchism is, where it comes from, what it has
done, what it is against (and why) as well as what anarchism is not
(i.e., showing why "anarcho"-capitalism is not a form of anarchism).

The latter may come as a surprise to most. Few anarchists, never mind
the general population, have heard of that specific ideology (it is US
based, in the main) and those who have heard of it may wonder why we
bothered given its obvious non-anarchist nature. Sadly, we need to cover
this ground simply because some academics insist in listing it alongside
genuine forms of anarchism and that needs to be exposed for the nonsense
it is. Few serious thinkers would list fascism along side socialism,
regardless of whether its supporters call their ideology "National
Socialism" or "National Syndicalism" (unsurprisingly,
right-"libertarians" do precisely that). No one took the Soviet bloc
states seriously when they described themselves as "peoples'
democracies" nor considered their governments democratic. Anarchism
seems to be excluded from such common-sense and so we find academics
discussing "anarcho"-capitalists along side anarchism simply, I suspect,
because they ***call*** themselves "anarchists." That almost all
anarchists reject their claims to being anarchists does not seem to be a
sufficient warning about taking such statements at face value! For
obvious reasons, we have not wasted space in explaining why another US
based ideology, "National Anarchism", is not anarchism. While some
individual anarchists were racist, the notion that anarchism has
anything in common with those who aim for racially pure nationalist
communities is ridiculous. Even academics have not fallen for
***that***, although for almost all genuine anarchists
"anarcho"-capitalism makes as little sense as "anarcho"-nationalism.

Then there is the history of AFAQ. As indicated in the original
introduction, AFAQ was prompted by battles with "anarcho"-capitalists
on-line in the early 1990s. However, while AFAQ may have started as a
reply to the "anarcho"-capitalists it is no longer that. It would be a
mistake to think that they are more significant than they actually are
or that many anarchists bother with them (most, I am sure, have never
heard of it). I did consider whether it was wiser to simply exclude
section F from the book but, in the end, I decided it should remain.
Partly, for the reasons above and partly because it does serve another,
more useful, purpose. Neo-liberalism is based, in many ways, on
right-"libertarian" dogmas so critiquing those helps our struggle
against "actually existing" capitalism and the current attacks by the
ruling class.

I do not wish anarchism to go the same way that "libertarian" has gone
in the US (and, to a lesser extent, in the UK). Between the 1890s and
1970s, libertarian was simply a pseudonym for anarchist or similar
socialist theories. However, the American free-market right appropriated
the label in the 1970s and now it means supporters of minimal state (or
private-state) capitalism. Such is the power having ideas that bolster
the wealthy! The change in "libertarian" is such that some people talk
about "libertarian anarchism" -- as if you can have an "authoritarian
anarchism"! That these people include "anarcho"-capitalists simply shows
how ignorant of anarchism they actually are and how alien the ideology
is to our movement (I've seen quite a few of them proclaim anarchism is
simply a "new" form of Marxism, which shows their grasp of the subject).
Equally bizarrely, these self-proclaimed "libertarian anarchists" are
also those who most fervently defend the **authoritarian** social
relationships inherent within capitalism! In other words, if
"authoritarian anarchists" ***could*** exist then the "libertarian
anarchists" would be them!

As AFAQ explains, being opposed to the state is a necessary, but not
sufficient, condition for being an anarchist. Not only is this clear
from the works of anarchist thinkers and anarchism as a social movement,
but also from the nature of the idea itself. To be an anarchist you must
also be a socialist (i.e. opposed to capitalist property and the
exploitation of labour). It is no coincidence that Godwin and Proudhon
independently analysed private property from a libertarian perspective
and drew similar conclusions or that Kropotkin and Tucker considered
themselves socialists. To deny this critique is to deny anarchism as a
movement and as a socio-political theory never mind its history and the
aims of anarchists across the years.

Furthermore, as AFAQ stresses, to be a ***consistent*** anarchist you
must recognise that freedom is more than simply the ability to change
masters. Anarchism means "no authority" (an-archy) and to support social
relationships marked by authority (hier-***archy***) produces a
self-contradictory mess (such as supporting forms of domination, such as
wage labour, which are essentially identical to those produced by the
state – and, sometimes, admitted as such!). Anarchism is, fundamentally,
a theory of organisation based on individuals associating together
without restricting, and so denying and limiting, their freedom and
individuality. This means that a consistent anarchism is rooted in free
association within a context of self-management, decentralisation and
"bottom-up" decision-making (i.e., it is rooted in political, economic
and social equality). While it is possible to be an anarchist while
opposing exploitation but not all forms of hierarchical social
relationships, it is hardly logical nor a convincing position.

AFAQ also seeks to go into subjects anarchists have, traditionally, been
weak on, such as economics (which is ironic, as Proudhon made his name
by his economic critiques). In this sense, it is a resource for
anarchists both in terms of our own history and ideas but also on
subjects which we inevitably come across in our struggles (hopefully,
the critiques we provide of capitalism, neo-liberalism and so forth will
also be useful to other radicals). We have tried to indicate the quoted
source is an anarchist or libertarian. If in doubt, please look at the
bibliography on the webpage. This breaks references down into
libertarian (anarchist and non-anarchist) thinkers (or sympathetic
accounts of anarchism) and non-libertarians (which, needless to say,
includes right-"libertarians"). It should go without saying that quoting
an expert on one subject does not mean anarchists subscribe to their
opinions on other matters. Thus if we quote, say, a Keynesian or
post-Keynesian economist on how capitalism works it does not imply we
support their specific political recommendations.

Some have criticised AFAQ for not including some of the more recent
developments within anarchism, which is fair enough. I have asked on
numerous occasions for such critics to contribute a section on these
and, of course, for referenced corrections for any mistakes others think
we have done. Nothing has been forthcoming and we have usually
discovered mistakes ourselves and corrected them (although a steady flow
of emails pointing out typos has come our way). We have always been a
small collective and we cannot do everything. This also explains why
important social events like, say, the turn of the century Argentinean
revolt against neo-liberalism is not discussed in [section
A.5](secA5.html) (this is a wonderful example of anarchist ideas being
spontaneously applied in practice during a mass revolt). Suffice to say,
anarchistic tendencies, ideas and practices develop all the time and
anarchism is growing in influence but if we continually added to AFAQ to
reflect this then it would never have become ready for publication! As
it is, we have excluded most of the appendices from the book version
(these remain available on the website along with a lengthy links page).

I would like to thank everybody who has helped and contributed (directly
and indirectly, knowingly and unknowingly) to AFAQ. As for authorship,
AFAQ started as a collective effort and remained so for many years. I
have been the only person involved from the start and have done the bulk
of the work on it. Moreover, the task of getting it ready and revised
for publication has fallen to me. I have enjoyed it, in the main. This
explains why the book has my name on it rather than a collective. I feel
I have earned that right. As such, I claim responsibility for any typos
and examples of bad grammar that remain. I have substantially revised
AFAQ for publication and while I have tried to find them all, I am sure
I have failed (particularly in sections that were effectively
rewritten). I hope these do not detract from the book too much.

Finally, on a personal note I would like to dedicate this book to my
partner and two lovely children. They are a constant source of
inspiration, love, support and hope (not to mention patience!). If this
work makes the world we live in better for them then it has been more
than worthwhile. For, when it comes down to it, anarchism is simply
about making the world a freer and better place. If we forget that, then
we forget what makes us anarchists in the first place.

Iain McKay

[An Anarchist FAQ](http://www.anarchistfaq.org/)

A Summation
===========

"No question, the word anarchy freaks people. Yet anarchy -- rule by no
one -- has always struck me as the same as democracy carried to its
logical and reasonable conclusions. Of course those who rule -- bosses
and politicians, capital and the state -- cannot imagine that people
could rule themselves, for to admit that people can live without
authority and rulers pulls out the whole underpinnings of their
ideology. Once you admit that people can -- and do, today, in many
spheres of their lives -- run things easier, better and more fairly than
the corporation and the government can, there's no justification for the
boss and the premier. I think most of us realise and understand that, in
our guts, but schools, culture, the police, all the authoritarian
apparatuses, tell us we need bosses, we need to be controlled 'for our
own good.' It's not for our own good – it's for the good of the boss,
plain and simple."

"Anarchism is a demand for real freedom and real autonomy"

"But I also remain convinced that something like an anarchist future, a
world of no bosses or politicians, one in which people, all people, can
live full and meaningful lives, is possible and desirable. We see
glimpses of it all around us in our day-to-day lives, as people organise
much of their lives without depending on someone to tell them what to
do. We see it in that spirit of revolt -- a spirit that is often twisted
by anger and despair, but nonetheless shows us that people have not
given up. We see it in the political activism, the social lives, the
demands for decency and respect and autonomy people put forward, the
desire to be individuals while still being part of a community.

"No, I don't think bowling leagues are the anarchist utopia, but they,
like much of our lives outside of the workplace, are organised without
hierarchy and oppression; the most meaningful, truly human parts of our
lives already work best when organised on anarchist principles. Yet I
also believe that in its function as critique and as a vision of the
future -- perhaps the only one that doesn't end in our extinction as a
species, or, as Orwell put it, as a jackboot smashing a human face,
forever -- anarchism is not only desirable but possible and necessary."

Mark Leier: **The Case for Anarchy**
